AN INTRODUCTIONTOTHE MODERN CLASSIFICATIONOFINSECTS;rOJTNDEn ONTHE NATURAL HABITS AND CORRESPONDING ORGANISATIONOFTHE DIFFERENT FAMILIES.By J. O. WESTWOOD, F.L.S.HON. MEM. LIT. HIST. SOC. QUEBEC ; MEM. SOC. Ces. NAT. MOSCOW ; Physic. SOC. LUND ;SOC. ROY. Science. LILLE ; SOC. HIST. NAT. MAURITIUS ; SOC. CUVIER. PARIS ;Plain. SOC. EDINBURGH ; LIT. PHIL. NAT. HIST. SOC. BELFAST, RICHMOND, SHEFFIELD ;MEM. SOC. ENTO.MOL. DE FRANCE ; SECRETARY Went. SOC. LONDON, ETC.Y.VK^\x\c\, formica more, congerunt tantum et utuntur: rationales, arancarum more,telasexse confident: apis hero ratio media est, quae material exfloribushorti et agri elicit ;sed tamen earn propria facilitate vertit et divert." — Bacon, Nov. Org. lib. i. aph. 95.IN TWO VOLUMES.VOL. II.LONDON:Hangman, ORME, BROWN, GREEN, AND LONGMANS.Paternoster-row1 840. ^^'x . ^7. 6^t^. ^^^,1^^^^^ 'nPrinted hy A. SpoTiiswOODiNew-Street-Square.CONTENTSTHE SECOND VOLUME.HymenopteraPage- 1SpHEGIDjEPage- 203TlIRIPIDiE- 5ScOLIIDjE- 209NEUROPTERA- 5MuTILLIDjE- 213Termitid^PsOCIDiE- 11- 17Scales (Philopona K.)FORMICID^.- 217- 217PerfidyEphemera- 20- 24D'lplopterygaEl'MENID.E- 236- 239LiBELLULIDjE- 35Vespid.e- 244MYRMELEONIDiEHEMEROBIIDiE- 41- 46MelliferaAndrenid.e- 252- 263S1ALID.E- 49Apidje- 267Panorpid^- 52Social Bees- 278RAPHIDIIDyE- 55STREPSIPTERA- 287MAxNTISPIDTETRICHOPTERA- 58- 60Stylopid/eLEPIDOPTERA- 306- 306PuRYGANEIDiEHYMENOPTERATerebrantiaPhijt\j)haga- 72- 72- 88- 89Classification of OrderRhopaloceraPaPILIONIDjEHELICONIIDiE- 324- 330- 347- 351TeNTHREDINIDjE- 90Nymphalid^- 353Groceries- 114Erycinidte- 357EntomophagaCVNIPIDiE- 122- 125Lyc^nidteHesperus- 358- 360Evaniid/e- 133Heterocera- 361ICHNEUMONID^- 136Sphingid^- 364ChALCIDIDvE- 154Uraniid^- 369PROCTOTRUPIDiE- 167ANTHROCERIDiE- 371•Chrysidid^- 174^^GERIIDiE- 373Aculeata- 180Hepialid.e- 375PrcBdones- 184BOMBYCID.E- 379Tnsectivora- 185Arctiid^- 384-CrABRONIDjE- 190LiTHOSIID.E- 390Larrid.eBembecid.^- 200- 201N0CTU1D;EGEOflIETRID.E- 391■ 395AVCONTENTS.PagePagePVRALIDiE- 398APIIANIPTERA- 489ToRTRICIDjE- 401PULICID^- 489YpONOMEUTIDiE- 404Litera- 495TlNEID^- 409Nemocera- 506Alucitid^e- 413CULICIDTE- 507Hemiptera- 414TlPULID^- 513Crimea- 419Brachocera- 529ClCADID^- 420Stratiomid.^- 531FULGORIDiE- 427Beside- 533Cercopid^- 431Ccenomyid^- 535Diner- 434TaBANIDjB- 538PsYLLIDiE- 435BOMBYLIID^- 542Aphid.5:- 437Anthracite- 543Aleyrodid/e- 442ACROCERID^- 545Monomera- 444Empire- 546CoCCIDiE- 444Tachydromiid^- 547Neuroptera- 450Hybotid^- 548Hydrocorisa- 457ASILID^- 548NoTOXECTIDiE- 458MYDASIDiE- 549Nepid^- 459Therewith- 550Aurocorisa- 462Leptid^- 551Galgulid^- 463DOLICHOPID^- 552ACANTHIID^- 465SCENOPINIDJE- 553HYDROMETRIDiE- 467Syrphid.e- 556Reduviid^- 470CONOPSID^- 560CiMICIDiE- 474MusciD^- 561TiNGIDiE- 477Bestride- 575Capsid^- 479Pupipara- 580Lyg^idte- 480HiPPOBOSCIDiE- 581COREIDJE- 482Nycteribiid^e- 586SCUTELLER1D.E- 485ALPHABETICAL INDEXTOTHE FAMILIES.//rz-* *^ /T-^-^-^/^-j-*.1^Acanthiidae, ii. 465.Achetida;, i. 439.Acroceridas, ii. 545.^geriidre, ii. 373.Agathidiidae, i. 130.Aleyrodidae, ii. 442.Alucitid;e, ii. 413.Andrenidtt, ii. 263.Anoplognathida?, i. 215.Anthracite!, ii. 543.Anthroceridae, ii. 371.Aphidte, ii. 437.Aphodiida^, i. 207.Apida;, ii. 267.Arctiida, ii. 384.Asilidas, ii. 548.Attelabidic, i. 333.Bembecida;, ii. 201.Bridal, ii. 533.Blapsida?, i. 320.Blattida?, i. 414.Bombycida;, ii. 379.Bombyliidas, ii. 542.Bostrichida', i. 277.Bruchidaj, i. 326.Buprestis, i. 226.Byrrhidje, i. 178.Csenomyidfe, ii. 535.Cantharides, i. 295.Capias, ii. 479.Arabia, i. 57.Cassidida;, i. 376.Cebrionida?, i. 243.Ceranibycida;, i. 362.Cercopidje, ii. 431.Cetoniidae, i. 221 .Chalcididffi, ii. 154.Chrysididce, ii. 174.Chrysomelidae, i. 385.Cicadida-, ii, 420.Cicindelidw, i. 47.Cimicidae, ii. 474.Cistelidae, i. 309.Clerical, i. 261.Coccida;, ii. 444.Coccinellidze, i. 395.Conopsidas, ii. 560.Corsica;, ii. 482.CrabronidaR, ii. I 90.Criteria;, i. 372.Cilicia?, ii. 507.Curculionida;, i. 338.CynipidtE, ii. 125.Cyphonida;, i. 246.Dermestidas, i. 155.Diaperidje, i. 314.Dolichopidae, ii. 552.Dynastidffi, i. 210.Dyticid£e, i. 'd5.Elaterida;, i. 235.Empire, ii. 546.Endomychida-, i. 393.Engine, i. 143.Ephemeridte, ii. 24.Erotylidse, i. 391.Erycinidc-e, ii. 357.Eucncmida, i. 232.Eumenides, ii. 239.Evaniida, ii. 133.Forficulida;, i. 398.FormicidfE, ii. 217.Florida?, ii. 427.GalerucidsB, i. 381.Galgulidte, ii. 463.Geometridae, ii. 395.Geotrupidae, i. 201.Glaphyridaj, i. 220.Gryllida;, i. 450.Gyrinidae, i. 105,Heliconiidje, ii. 351.Helophoridee, i. 120.A 3Helopidae, i. 311.Hemerobiidje, ii. 46.Hepialida;, ii. 375.Hesperides, ii. 360.Heterocerida?, i. 113.HippoboscidfB, ii. 581.Historia;, i. 181.Horiidai, i. 291.Hybotida;, ii. 548.Hydrometridas, ii, 467.Hydrophobia;, i. 122.Ichneumonida;, ii. 136.Lagriida?, i. 289.Lampyrida?, i. 246.Larridas, ii. 200.Leonidas, ii. 551.Lepturidaj, i. 369.LibellulidjB, ii. 35.Lithosiidce, ii. 390.Locustidffi, i. 456.Lucanidae, i. 185.Lycaenidae, ii. 358.Lygjeidae, ii. 480.Lymexylonidae, i. 273.Mantidae, i. 424.Mantispidje, ii. 58.Melandryidas, i. 305.Melolonthida?, i. 216.Melyrida?, i. 258.Mordellidae, i. 292.Muscidfe, ii. 561.Mutillida;, ii. 213.Mycetophagidae, i. 152.Mydasidae, ii. 549.MyrmeleonidEB, ii. 41.Nepidae, ii. 459.Nitidulidfe, i. 140.Noctuidae, ii. 391.Notonectida;, ii. 458.Notoxidse, i. 286.Nycteribiidae, ii. 585.INDEX TO THE FAMILIES.Nympbalitlae, ii. 358.(Edemeridae, i. 304.CEstridse, ii. 575.Panorpida;, ii. 52.Papilionida?, ii. 347.Parnidae, i. 115.Paussidae, i. 150.Perfidy, ii. 20.Phasmidffi, i. 430.Phryganeidse, ii. 60.Pimeliidffi, i. 323.Prionid;E, i. 359.Proctotrupidje, ii, 167.Psocid«, ii. 17.Psyllidie, ii. 435.Ptinidfe, i. 268.Pulicidae, ii. 489.Pyramids?, ii. 398.PyrochroidEB, i. 287.RaphidiidK, ii. 55.Reduviidse, ii. 470.Rutelidfe, i. 213.Salpingidae, i. 304.Scaphidiidae, i. 134.Scarabaeus, i. 203.Scenopinidae, ii. 553.Scoliidae, ii. 209.ScolytidEB, i. 350.Scutelleridae, ii. 485.Scydmasnida;, i. 279.Sialidae, ii. 49.Sulphide, i. 135.Sphseridiidffi, i. 1 28.SphegidcB, ii. 203.Sphingid», ii. 364.Staphylinidse, i. 162.Stratiomida;, ii. 531.Stylopida?, ii. 306.Syrphidse, ii. 556.Tabanidae, ii. 538.Tachydrotniidw, ii. 547.Telephoridai, i. 255.Tenebrionidae, i. 316.Tenthredinidas, ii. 90.Termitida, ii. 11.Therevidae, ii. 550.Thripidee, ii. 1.Tineidae, ii. 409.Tingidse, ii. 477.Tipulidffi, ii. 513.Tortrieidae, ii. 401 .Trogidae, i. 208.Uraniidae, ii. 369.Uroceridae, ii. 114.Vespidffi, ii. 244.Ypononieutidas, ii. 40^.ERRATA ET ADDENDA,VOL. I.Page 1. line 13. for "regarded Mr. MacLeay" read "regarded by Mr. MacLeay."10. line 1. dele" upper lip."21. note *, The name Dermaptera was first used by De Geer himself forthe mandibulated Hemiptera, which Olivier subsequently,named Orthoptera. Leach improperly retained the lattername, and separated the Forficulidse therefrom, for whichwith equal impropriety, he retained the name of Dermaptera.Retzius, in his commentary on De Geer, confused thesenames, by giving the mandibulated Hemiptera under the nameof Hemiptera, and a portion of the haustellated ones (Cimex,&c. ) under that of Dermaptera. The latter name oughtcertainly to supersede Olivier's name, Orthoptera..'51. line 1. add; Hope. The Coleopterist's Manual. Parts 1, 2, 3. London,8vo. 1837 — 1840.line 10. add : Stephens. Manual of British Cleopatra. London, 1 vol.Svo. 1839.Spry and Shuckard. British Colfeoptera delineated : inparts, Svo. 1839 —Shuckard, Elements of British Entomology. Part 1.,1839.47. Messrs. Kirby and Spence, in a subsequent edition of their introduction,give the name Entrenching instead of Eupodina.86. See Entomol. Mag. vol. i. p. 92. for an account of the habits ofPriscus.95. line 9. for '* Zool. Journey'' read " Zool. Misc."114. line 24. for " Helerocerus" read " Heterocerus. "151. line 12. Mr. Miners has communicated to me a species of Chapters, capturedin the neighbourhood of Rio Janeiro, forming a distinctsubgenus.162. note *, add: Erichson. Genera et Species Staphylinorum. Svo. 1839.192. note*, add: 5'c^nuVft's Review of German Aphodii in Germar'sZeitschr.f. d. Entomol. No. 3.196. M. V. Audouin has communicated to me an instance of the destructionof the harvey of Melolontha vulgaris by Gordii.235. note *, add : Germar. Distribution of Elaterida?, in his Zeitschr. f. d.„ • Entomol. No. 2.332. line 35. for " exo" read " exotic."333. line 18. for "Jiff. 40. ^^.''read "40. 23."336. line 5. M. Huber has published an extended memoir on the habits ofAttelabus in the Memoirs of the Academy of Geneva, vol. viii.part 2.346. line 28. for " this disease" read " curing this disease."VHl ERRATA ET ADDENDA.Page 407. Since the publication of the sheets relative to the Orthoptera,two works especially devoted to that order have been published; namely, the second part of the second volume of Burmeister'sHandhuch der Entomologie, 1838, and Histoire Naturelledes Insectes OrtJiopteres, 1839, by M. Serville. In theseworks numerous new genera are proposed, chiefly foundedupon exotic species, under distinct names. Burmeister hassubsequently reviewed their synonymy in the third part ofGermar's Zeitschrift fur d. Entomologie.428. note *, line 2. for " Lattice " read » Mantis."451. Jig. 55. 16. The short transverse lines at the tips of the antennas indicatethe extremities of these organs to have been cut off.VOL. II.Page 5. add as note : * Bibliogr. Refer, to the Neuroptera.Say, in Goodman's Western Quarterly Reporter, vol. 2.Svo. 1823. (13 sp. Europe. collected in the Expeditionto the Rocky Mountains.) — Ditto, Descriptions of newNorth American Neuroptera (not yet published. Seehis Life).Burmeister. Hand. d. Entomologie, vol. ii. part 2. p. 2.(Neuroptera) 1839.Stephens, Curtis, Latreille, Sc.15. M. Lacordaire has published some original observations on thedifferent kinds of individuals composing the species of Termsin his Introduction to the Natural History of Insects.17. line 18. I have recently discovered an apterous species of this family,possessing more than twenty-five joints in the antenna;, and3-jointed tarsi.25. note *, The existence of the anomalous character of an additional pair ofeyes, placed on pillars, is not confined to the males of a singlespecies, or even subgenus of Ephemeral. I have this day(May 14. 1840) taken both sexes of the two winged species,figured by Mr. Stephens under the name of Cloeon iterum,and find that the males possess this character, and are, in colour,quite unlike the females. Neither Leach nor Stephenshave noticed the sexual characters of Cloeon. The speciesfigured by Reaumur, possessing two similar additional pedunculatedeyes (torn. iv. pi. 19. fig. 3.), evidently belongs, fromhis accurate description of the very minute hind wings, to mysubgenus Brachyphlebia. Burmeister ( //owrffc. vol. ii. p. 798.)gives E. bioculata L., as the male of E. litera L.45. Mr. Swainsonon has published a figure of the larva of AesculapiusMacLeayanus Guild, in his volume on the Habits and Instinctsof Animals, p. 29. It differs from my fg. 63. 20. andfrom Building's description, in having only nine filamentousprocesses on each side..51. Dr, Auckland has described a remarkable fossil insect, of whichERRATA ET ADDENDA. IXa wing only has been discovered, under the name of Hemoro-besides wigan tens (Proceeds. Gaol. 5'oc. June 6. 1838); it havingappeared to me to possess greater affinities with the wing ofHemerobius than any other existing insects.Page 72. line 35. for "apud" read " Apud."74. line 4. Say (Boston Journ. of Nat. Hist. vol. i. no. 4.) describes a sectionof Lyrops with only one ocellus.76. note *, The Baron de Roman has had the kindness to send me a copyof a memoir on the variations in the nervures of the Hymenopterouswings, recently published by him privately, and illustratedby numerous figures.82. line 10. and 22. for "cuckoo flies" read " ichneumon flies."84. et passim, for " Bethyllus " read " Bethylus."88. The valuable classification of the Hymenoptera, published byMr. Haliday, reached me too late to be noticed in the text.It is partially noticed in the Generic Synopsis.114. line 18. for " Siricidae " read " Uroceridae. "119. and 121. Saint Fargeau, in his Hist. Nat. Hymenopt. p. 5. notes 1, 2,and 3., has re stated his opinion of the parasitic nature ofUrocerus and Xiphydria. The German entomologists, whohave such ample opportunities for studying the habits of theseinsects, describe them as Xylophagous, and the structure oftheir jaws confirms such statement.123. line 13. for " top" read "tip."line 33. I have used the name of Entomophaga instead of Latreille's ,which is inapplicable to the majority of the species.125. note *, add : Hartig. Revision of the fam. Cynipidae (divided into twenty-oneGenera) in Germar's Zeitschrift, f. d. Entomol. No. 3.127. line 20. for " 73. c." read " 73. 22. c."143. line 8. M. Wesmael [Ann. Sac. Ent. de France, 1837, pt. 3.) describesthe habits of a Bracon, which attacks Scotus. I took oneof the species of this genus in the Pare de Belle Vue, nearParis, on felled trees infested by Scolyti, and which M. Audouinalso informed me was its parasite.145. line 25. Moses Harris states that " on a moderate computation," theremight be 20,000 minute Ichneumonss foimd by him in a singlechrysalis of a goat moth (Aurelian, pi. 23.).146. line 23. his, for " its " read " their."M. Schiodte has figured some Ichneumonidae in Guerin's Magazinede Zoologie, which exhibit similar peculiarities in the modeof exclusion of the eggs.148. line 36. for " both at the top and bottom" read " either at the top orbottom."164. line 34. My monograph on Leucospis has been published in the secondpart of Germar's Zeitschrift, f. d. Entomologist.169. Mr. Curtis, in his dissections of the ovipositor of Prototypes,noticed, in addition to the parts figured by me fig. 78. ^ ), anelongated membranous plate. I had also noticed this in severalof the females of this genus which I had dissected, butX Errata ET ADDENDA.concluded it was some extraneous matter or the lining of theother parts.Page 171. line 17. for " an inch " read " a line."173. line 17. for J' Diapria," read " Diapria),".174. note*, add: Klu(/, in Proceed. Roy. Acad. Berlin, 10 Jan., 1839 (andin Annals of Natural History).184. line 24. after Scales add (Philopona Kirhy, F. B. Amer')line 26. after Diploptera add (Diplopteryga K., F. B. Amer.)207. line 9. and following.' S. S. Saunders, Esq. has transmitted to hiscousin W. W. Saunders, Esq., from Albania, the mud nestsmade by Pelopaeus spirited ; and Mr. Doubleday mentionsthat the American species of that genus are well known in theUnited States under the name of " mud dabs," from their nestsresembling a patch of mud.212. line 34. Jig. 84. 1 1. represents the labium of Sapyga punctata.216. line 1. Mr. Shuckard has published annals of Nat. Hist. May, 1840)the'commencement of a monograph on the family (as he termsit) Dorylidaj, in which he describes' two new genera and numerousspecies ; and has endeavoured to prove, 1 . that theseinsects are more nearly allied to the Mutillidae, and are consequentlynot furnished with neuters ; 2. that they are parasites ;and 3. that my] genus Typhlopone fig. 86. 17 — 20.) is thefemale of the genus Lepidus. I propose to make some remarkson this memoir, not coinciding with several of these'opinions.233. line 31. Mr. Swainsonon, unacquainted with these observations, has publishedan account of the habits of a Brazilian species of Amazonant, which makes slaves of the neuters of other species, butwhich it carries off in the perfect neuter state, and not whilstlarvae or pupae. ( On the Habits and Instincts of Animals,p. 334.)234. line 9. Mr. Swainsonon, in like manner, unacquainted with these observations,has detailed, as a new fact, the circumstance of the antsof Brazil milking the Membranes of that region in consequenceof the absence of the Aphides. (Habits of Animals,p. 338.)241. line 24. and 240. note *. M. Dufour's memoir has been published in theAnnates des Sci. Nat. for Jan. 1839, accompanied by supplementalobservations by M. Audouin. In these memoirsfour distinct species are stated to form curved tubes at themonths of their burrows in the sand. M. Audouin (like Mr.Shuckard), following M. Wesmael, considers the O. maria,whose history is detailed by Reaumur (Mdm. 6. pi. 26. f. 2.),as identical with Oplomerus spinipes. The O. rubicon L.D. is closely allied to the O. levies of Shk.253. note *, add : Herrick Schaffer on the European Nomades in Germar'sZeitschr. f. d. Entomol. tom. ii. pt. 1.*Jardine's Naturalist's Library, Volume on Bees, containingfigures and descriptions of some new exotic species bymyself.ERRATA ET ADDENDA. XIPage 257. note *, line 4. for "fig. 89. 19." read " 89. g."347. line 12. for " Heterocera" read " Rhopalocera. "line 20. for " Thysanumorpha " read " Thysanuromorpha. "368. line 8. See also Norman, in Rev. Zool. Soc. Cuvierrr. Aug. 1838.437. line 10. Mr. Hoy has given (iiw«. Trans, vol. ii. p. 354.) an account ofthe production of Chermes grains (which is evidently identicalwith Livia Juncorum) from Junius articulates $ of Linneeus,by whom it was supposed to be a viviparous variety.441. line 1. for "species agreeing" read " species nearly agreeing. "2. for " Lachnus hangers " read " Eriosoma langer."4, 5. dele " which Mr. Haliday has conjectured is identical withPhylloxera."445. line 2. for " Pseudoccus " read " Pseudococcus."535. line 16. Mr. Gosse, in the Canadian Natural, London, 1840, p. 199.,has described and figured the pupa and imago of an Americanspecies of Coenomyia, which he had observed amongst thegrass, extricating itself from the pupa, which " is large, andthe hind segments have rings of spines ; its colour is chestnut-brown,and it much resembles that of a large moth. I have nodoubt it is subterraneous in the pupa state." I have followedLatreille, the founder of this genus, in writing the name Ca:-nomyla.MODERN CLASSIFICATIONOFINSECTS.Order Hymenoptera Haliday*(Genus Thrips Lii.)Char. Wings 4, alike, long, narrow, membranous, neither folded norreticulated, with long ciliee, laid horizontally along the back whenat rest.Mouth with two setiform mandibles ; two triangular flat palpi-serous(but not galeated) maxillae, and a palpigerous labium.Tarsi, with two joints, vesicles at the tip.Pupa active, semi-complete.The insects of this order {Jig- 51. i. Phla^othrips coriacea HaL?)Fig. 51.are of a very minute size, rarely exceeding a line in length ; the bodyis long, linear, and depressed ; the head (Jig. 51. 2. upper side) isBlBLIOGR. RbFKB. to THE ThYSANOPTERA. (ThRIFID.E. )Haliday, in Entomol. Mag. vol. iii. and iv.Schrank. Beitrage zur Naturgesch. 1776. Leipz.Passerini, in Atti dell Acad. GeorgofilL t. xii. *Vassals Eandi, in Mem. Acad. Turin, torn. xvi. p. 76.Hedger. ?Linnceus, Fabrics, De Geer, Geoffroy, Latreille.VOL. II. B2 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.oblong, narrower than thorax, without any district neck ; the eyesare large, coarsely granulated, and occupy its anterior lateral angles,besides which, there are ordinarily three ocelli between the eyes, andbehind the antennae ; the underside of the head {^fig- 57. 3.) is prolongedinto a kind of conical beak, which extends beneath the prosternum; the antennae (fig. 57. 7. and 57. 15. T. fasciata) are longerthan the head, filiform, and apparently varying in the number of jointsfrom five to nine, in consequence of the terminal joints being more oi*less firmly soldered together ; they are inserted in front of the head.The parts of the mouth, although constructed in the mandibulated andpalpigerous form, unite into a short conical sucker, which does not extendbeyond the anterior corse. The clypeus and labrum occupy theanterior part, the latter being linear-subconical, beneath the base ofwhich arise a pair of horny setiform mandibles (Jig. 57. 4.), of whichthe base is dilated into a flattened plate in the species I have dissected.(Mr. Haliday described them as having a bulbous base, and, bytheir junction towards the tip, as forming a 2-valved syphon.) Themaxillae (Jig. 57. 3. and 57. 13. T. fasciata) are flat, elongate triangular,and pointed at the tip, without any apparent articulation, andwith a 2 or 3-jointed palpus, arising on the outer edge near themiddle ; there is no appearance of an outer lobe or galea. Thelabium (^g. 57. 6.) is sub membranaceous, and more or less attenuatedin front; in some species the mentum is very distinct, and thelabium is extended in front, between, and of equal length with, thepalpi* ; but in T. fasciata (Jtg. 57. 14.) I could not perceive it to beprolonged beyond the base of those organs; the labial palpi are veryshort, and 2 or 3-jointed.De Geer was the first author who noticed the existence of palpi inthese insects. Latreille, also, described the maxillary pair, but regardedthe labial palpi as articulated laciniae. He, moreover, overlookedthe mandibles which were first observed by Strauss, who communicatedthe discovery to Latreille [Fam. Nat. p. 416.), who,however, seems to have been inclined to doubt their right to such atitle, although admitting that, if they were really mandibles, theywould form a very peculiar family in the order Orthoptera; although" Nostri vagina (including the maxilla; and labium), submembranacea adbasin lata et utrinque uni-palpigera (scil. the maxillary palpi), alice profound tri-fide; laciniis Neque longus, media acute ; external (scil. the labial palpi), suhli-nefarious triarticulatis ; palpi (maxillary), brevissimi filiformes," &c. Latr. Gen.3. 171.Hymenoptera. THRIPID^E. 3*' Ensemble de leur organisation " appeared more allied to theHomoptera than the Orthoptera.*The figures given above are the first which have yet been publishedof the parts of the mouth in detail of these curious insects.The prothorax is large, depressed, and more or less narrowed infront, its hind part being broader than the head ; the resound metathoraxare large, flat, and closely soldered together, the former beingoften the shorter, and transverse ; the mess-scutellum is not a conspicuouspiece ; the four wings are nearly alike, the anterior pairfig. 57. 11.) being rather larger than the posterior fig. 51. 12.) ; theyare ordinarily narrow, membranous, and without nerves, crossing andresting horizontally upon the back, and furnished with long and delicateciliee, extending all round the wings. In some species, however,Mr. Haliday describes the fore-wings as transformed into broadestelytra, ciliated only behind, and with longitudinal and transverse nerves.In some species the wings are wanting, at least in the males ; the abdomenis terminated either by a long attenuated joint or by a 4-valvedborer in the female ; the legs are short, the anterior pair having the femorasometimes much incrassated, with a tooth near the inner extremityfig. 51. 8.) ; the tibiae are simple, the tarsi 2-jointed, terminated bya vesicle f without ungues ; the base of the anterior tarsi is, in somespecies, armed with a tooth, at least in the males ; the middle fig.57. 9.) and posterior pair of legs fig. 51. 10.) are simple. My figures,51. 1 — 12., are taken from the largest species of the order which Ihave seen, and of which I captured a considerable number, creepingunder and upon the bark of felled trees, at Sevres, in July, 1837. Itappears to be nearly allied to Phlaeothrips coriacea Hal.The eggs of Phlaeothrips statices Hal. " are shaped like those ofCulex, being cylindric, rounded at one end, and crowned with a knob atthe other." The larva fig. 51. 16., from De Geer) is equally active withthe imago inhabiting the same situations, and differing in smaller size,softer body, distinct thoracic segments ; " the mouth is almost alike,the antennae and legs shorter ; there are no simple eyes, and the coifregarded as Mandibulata (although they are certainly not Dacnostomatous),they will possess the greatest affinity with those Biomorphotic insects which haveequal sized unfolded wings, and which will be found amongst the earlier families ofNeuroptera, especially the Termitidae.f De Geer observes, that, when the animal presses this vesicle on the surface uponwhich it walks, its diameter is increased, and it sometimes appears concave, the concavitybeing in proportion to the pressure, which made him suspect that it acted likea cupping-glass.B 24 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.pound eyes are replaced by conglomerate eyes ; the pupa fig. 57. 17.,from De Geer) resembles the perfect insect, but the articulation ofthe limbs is obscured by a film, and the wings enclosed in short fixedsheaths. The antennae are turned back on the head, and the insect,though it moves about, is much more sluggish than in the otherstates." (Haliday, ii'rt^. J/f/<7. 15. p. 440.) The larvae are generallymuch paler coloured than the imago, being in some species blood red,whilst the imago is black ; in others, pale yellow.These insects are found upon various plants, sometimes swarming inimmense profusion in various kinds of flowers, especially the large whitehedge-convolvulus ; they are very agile, and often leap to a considerabledistance when disturbed. They feed upon the juices of plants, andare often extremely injurious, especially in hot-houses and vine-houses; the leaves upon which they reside being marked all overwith small decayed patches. They also, especially, infest melons, cucumbers,kidney beans, &c. Various plans for their extirpation aregiven in the Gardener s Magazine, and in Major's work on the insectswhich infest fruit trees.One species, to which Mr. Haliday has applied the specific name ofThrips cere alium, infests the wheat, sometimes to a mischievousextent. This species was observed by Mr. Kirby, between theinternal valve of the corolla and the grain, and taking its station inthe furrow of the seed, in the bottom of which it seems to fix itsrostrum, and by depriving it of its moisture, occasions it to shrink up,and become what the farmers call punched. One sex of this species isapterous ; the larva is yellow and very nimble, and the pupa whitish,with black eyes, and very slow and sluggish. linn. Trans, vol. iii,p. 247.)According to Vassals Eandi (quoted by Mr. Haliday), this speciesalso gnaws the stems above the knots, and causes the abortion of theear. In the year 1805, one third of the wheat crop in Piedmontis said to have been destroyed by this minute insect ; and in the sameyear the wheat crops in England suffered materially from a similarcause.Another species is very injurious to the olive tree in the territoryof Pietro Santa in Tuscany, fixing itself on the under side of theleaves. As early as the month of April, four or five eggs are depositedon each bud; and, as the generations of the insect succeedfrom spring to the end of autumn, the number of insects becomesinconceivable. (Passerini, " Aucune notice soprano specie d'InsettoHymenoptera. — THRlPIDiE. Odannoso ali Olive," «S:c. in Atti dell' Accad. de Georgqfili, t. xii. andGuerin, Bullet. Zool. p. 12.)In Hill's Decade of Curious Insects, 1773, an insect is describedunder the name of Alicia pallida (the straw-coloured Chilli), whichis evidently a species of Thrips, of which great numbers are assertedto have been discharged by " a studious gentleman, vei-y subject tothe headach," whilst sneezing.The relations of this order are very difficult : the nature of themetamorphoses would unite it with the Orthoptera or Hemiptera,whilst the structure of the wings and mouth remove it from boththose orders ; the mouth, indeed, seems to be of a character almostintermediate between the Mandibulata sand the Haustellata ; thesetiform mandibles are very like those of the Hemiptera, whilst thegeneral disposition of the other parts of the mouth are more likethose of a real mandibulated insect. It appears doubtful to me, however,whether the action, even of the maxillas, can be transverse, orwhether the insect can be said to bite its food.The order comprises but a single family, Thripid^ Leach, thespecies of which are far more numerous than has been generally supposed,as may be learned from Mr. Haliday's valuable memoir, publishedin the Entomological Magazi7te,^o. 15. I have also seen someplates containing magnified figures of various species of the family byM. Hedger ; but I am not aware whether they are yet published.Order NEUROPTERA Linnaeus.Char. Wings four, generally large, equal sized, membranaceous,with numerous areolets, posterior pair ordinarily not folded.Mouth with transversely moveable jaws.Abdomen of the females unarmed with a pungent multivalve ovipositor.Scapulae and para pleural parallel and oblique." Kirby.Pupa various, in some quiescent, with the limbs folded over thebreast ; in others active, and more or less resembling the perfectinsect ; larva with six articulated legs.The insects of this order, established by Linnaeus, differ from thoseof the preceding orders in the membranaceous structure of their fournaked wings, which, together with the masticatory trophi, will sufficientlyseparate them from the whole of the haustellated division.B 36 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.From the equally manipulated Hymenoptera, they are removed bythe equal size of their wings, by their non-possession of a pungent sting,or multivalve ovipositor, and by their niaxillEe and labium not unitingto form a tubular apparatus. From the Trichoptera, which are stillassociated with them by the continental entomologists, they are separatedby the collar-like neck, pilose, branching-nerved wings, elongatedcoxae, and obsolete trophi, which characterise the latter named order.This order comprises several well-known families of insects, namely,the beautiful dragon flies, the May flies, lace-winged flies, white ants,and ant-lion flies ; and derives its name from the Greeks nvpov, anerve, and-n-rtpov, a wing ; in allusion to the beautiful net-work withwhich their wings are ornamented, forming a very numerous series ofcells or areolets, far exceeding in number the cells in the wings of anyother insect. The order is one of comparatively small extent, beingfar inferior in point of number of species to many of the other orders;but the characters, which distinguish even the few families of which itis composed, are far more discordant than those of any of the rest,there being scarcely a leading characteristic of the order which doesnot meet with an exception ; thus, in some genera, the posterior wingsare either larger or smaller than the anterior, sometimes, as in certaingenera, as Cloeon, they entirely disappear ; in others, as the femaleBoreus, and one of the species of Atropos, the wings are entirely obsolete; again, in the male Boreus, they are not membranaceous butleathery. The structure of the mouth is very varied ; in Libellula itassumes an anomalous appearance; and in Ephemera the jaws are entirelyobsolete. The transformations are also equally varied ; indeed,Mr. MacLeay states that the essential character of the order isvaried, the larvae undergoing either an incomplete (Corydalina), object(Myrmeleonina), sub semi complete (Libellulina), or semi complete metamorphosis(Termitina). Myrmeleon, however, most certainly hasan incomplete pupa ; whilst the transformations of the LibellulidEe andEphemeridse, which (according to Latreille, as quoted by MacLeay),compose the stirps Libellulina, although peculiar and very unlike'eachother, appear to me to enter into the semi complete species of transformation.It is to be regretted that Mr. MacLeay has given no definitionof the term sub semi complete, which he proposed for this stirps.As to the transformations of the Panorpidae, it will be seen, from myaccount of that family, that the theories which Mr. MacLeay entertainedrespecting it (shore, Ent. p. iSS.) are completely fallacious.NEUROPTERA,The body is generally long and slender, of a soft, or but slightly scalyconsistence ; the head is not generally immersed in the prothoraciccavity, the prothorax being mostly collar-shaped, and forming withthe other thoracic segments a portion of the body, well distinguishedfrom the abdomen, which is, however, ordinarily sessile ; the ocelli,two or three in number, are generally present.There is also a great dissimilarity in the habits and economy ofthese insects, although the majority are predaceous. In their larva statetheir abodes are very diversified, some larva residing in the water,others in damp earth, others living exposed upon plants, others againconcealing themselves under a cloak of excrement, or in a pitfall offine sand, whilst a few reside in colonies of immense extent. Theseinsects are of an intermediate size, none exceeding our largest dragonfliesin size, and none equalling in minuteness the minims of theHymenoptera or Cleopatra,Various insects of this order have afforded to Carus, Bowerbank,Tyrrel, and others, materials for the discovery and observation of thecirculation of the blood in insects,Linnaeus, whose character of the order was simply "Alee 4, nurse,venus reticulated : Cauda saepius aliquo sexes adminiculo instruct, in-armis"(St/sf. Nat. t. ii. p. 901.), introduced into it the followinggenera, Libellula, Ephemera, Phryganea (or the advice flies), Heme-robins,Myrmeleon, Panorpa, and Raphidia ; the winged individuals ofthe genus Termes being introduced into the genus Hemerobius, whilstthe apterous individuals were placed amongst the apterous insects.Fabricius remedied this error by taking in Termes amongst the otherNeuroptera ; which name, however, he altered to Synistata, but addedthereto the spring-tailed insects (Thysanura Latr.). He also raisedthe genus Libellula into a distinct order (or class), Sonata.Latreille adopted the order as left by Linnaeus, with the addition ofTermes; but Mr. Kirby separated Phryganea from the Neuroptera,and formed it into a distinct order under the name Trichoptera, inwhich he has been followed by English entomologists. MacLeay, however,further united the Perlidae with the Trichoptera, in consequenceof having evidently misunderstood Latreille's sections given in theGenera Crust, et Ins. t. iii. p. 209. and 212.*, and dividing Latreille'sMr. MacLeay says that the Perlariae of Latreille's Gen. Crust, &c., or thePhryganeida; of Lamarck, is evidently a natural group, whose larvae (admirably describedby Aristotle under the name of Xylopthori) are aquatic, and live in tubesor sheaths made by themselves ; and he then insists that the larvae, metamorphoses,B 48 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.little group Megalopteres into two, keeping Corydalis (CorydalihaMaclean) in the order Neuroptera, and giving Megaloptera Latreille,as a distinct and osculant group between that order and the Trichop-tera: Boreus being also removed from the Neuroptera, and forming adistinct osculant group between it and the Orthoptera. It is scarcelypossible to conceive a more unnatural mode of treating this order.More recently M. Brulle, in his Entomology of the Morea, has endeavouredto construct another distribution of these insects, which hedivides into four orders, namely : —1st, The Dictyoptera*, comprising Libellula, Ephemera, and Perla.2nd, The Isoptera, consisting of the single genus Termes.3rd, The Trichoptera, consisting of the single genus Phryganea.4th, The Neuroptera, containing the remainder of the Linnaeangenera. The genera Raphidia, Mantispapa, and Psocus being removedto the order Orthoptera.In rejecting these views, both of Brulle and MacLeay, I am influencedby the evident diversity which exists amongst these insects,whereby groups, most nearly related to each other, would be removedfar apart were we to adopt them ; thus ex. gr. Perla is clearly morenearly related to some of the genera left by Brulle in his restrictedorder Neuroptera than it is to Ephemera. It is for the same reasonthat lam not fully convinced of the propriety of keeping Phryganeaas a distinct order, although I have thought it better to follow thesteps of Kirby, Stephens, and MacLeay, respecting its separation,rather than unite it with the rest of the Neuroptera into one order asLatreille and Pictet have done.Regarding then the Neuroptera as an order distinct from the Tri-chapter,which is to be restricted to Phryganea, we find it relatedof course, on the one hand, to the Trichoptera, whilst, on the other, itclosely approximates to the Orthoptera. The curious genus Mantispapa,antenna, mouths, and wings of Perla and Phryganea, all manifest their close affinity,(^HorcB Ent. p. 430.) Now Latreille has nowhere given Phryganea as portion ofthe Perlariaj, as Mr. MacLeay clearly thought he had done ; for had he studied thetabular distribution given in a preceding page of the " Genera," he would have seenthat Latreille had not the slightest idea of uniting the Persia; and Phryganeidasinto one group ; whilst, had he known the larva and metamorphoses of Perla, hewould have found that they were as unlike those of Phryganea, as are the mouthsand wings of the two genera.Leach had previously used this name for the genus Blatta; its application, therefore,to other insects was not warranted.NEUROPTERA. 9alternately placed by Latreille amongst the Orthoptera and Neuroptera,has been supposed by MacLeay to constitute a passage betweenthe two orders ; but from what I have already advanced concerning it(Vol. I. p. 412. note f), I am but little inclined to adopt this relationbeyond one of analogy ; if, indeed, the pupa of Mantispapa were ascertainedto be active and semi complete, there might be better groundsfor this relation. In like manner Mr. MacLeay has considered thePanorpideous genus Boreus as a connecting link between the twoorders ; influenced, indeed, not by the real characters of the insect,but apparently by Panzer having called it a Gryllus, and by the insufficientobservation of early authors. There exist, however, nearerpoints of relation between the two orders than those pointed out byMacLeay ; thus the genus Termes, in the structure of the mouth, andespecially thegaleated maxillae and labium, is almost identical with theOrthoptera. The same may also be said of the Perlidse, which havealso the posterior wings longitudinally folded, and the extremity of thebody terminated by articulated filaments ; their pupa state is alsoactive, and the larva resembles the imago.Various plans have been suggested for the classification of this order.Latreille, in his various works, has adopted an arrangement foundedupon the natural habits of these insects, commencing with those " vivantde rapine," at the head of which the Libellulae are pre-eminent,followed by Ephemera, which, although destitute of organs of nutritionin the perfect state, is predaceous whilst a larva, and is closely alliedto Agrion in the antennae, form of head, size of eyes, &c. Theseare followed by other predaceous tribes, which are succeeded by theomnivorous white ants, and this series is closely followed by the Phry-ganeae. The peculiarities of these insects in the preparatory statesconfident I'etablissement et la suite des families qui remplissentcet ordre." (Latr. Cons. Gen.^.lS.) In the Regne Annal (vol. v.p. 234.) we, however, find a more precise sketch of this proposed arrangement: —1. Insectes carcasses, demi-metamorphose, larves antiques.2. Insectes carcasses, metamorphose complete, larves terrestresou antiques.3. Insectes carcasses, ou omnivores, terrestres, demi-metamorphose.[4. Insectes herbivorous, metamorphose complete, larves antiques,se constraint des domiciles portatifs." Phryganea.]In the genera Crustaceorum, the arrangement of the families of10 Model CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.which the order is composed, founded upon these considerations, wasas follows : —Tribe 1. Subulicornes (having very short subulate antennae), composedof (a) the mandibulated Libellulae ; and (b) the mandibulatedEphemera.Tribe 2. Filicornes (having long, multi-articulate antennae), composedof (a) the following mandibulated types, Panorpa, Myrmeleon,Hemerobius, Salis, Corydalis (all with 5-jointed tarsi), Termes andRaphidia (with 4-jointed tarsi), Psocus (with 2 or 3-jointed tarsi), andPerla (with 3-jointed tarsi), and of (b) the single manipulated genusPhryganea.In the Regne Animal the same arrangement of the families is preserved; but] they are divided into three primary tribes : — 1. Subu-licornes (as above) ; 2. Planipennes ; and, 3. Plicipennes, the secondof which comprises all the mandibulated silicon species ; and the Pli-cipennes, the manipulated Phryganea ; the Planipennes being composedof the five following, families, Panorpates, Myi-meleonides,Hemerobines, Terminates, and Pervades.To this arrangement M. Pictet and Mr. Newman (who have bothparticularly studied this order of insects) object, on the ground thatthe section Planipennes is of too heterogeneous a nature ; and theformer author {{Mem, Salis) accordingly proposes the adoption of sixfamilies in the order (including the Phryganea), namely : 1. Subu-licornes Za^?-. ; 2. Planipennes (Hemerobius and Myrmeleon); 3. Pa-narrates; 4. Terminates ; 5. Pervades ; 6. Phryganides." If wethus^ however,separate the Latreillian Planipennes into four groups, it appearsto me to be equally necessary to raise the two divisions of the Subu-licornes to a like rank, which indeed Mr. Newman has done sent.Mag. No. 18. p. 237-); but it does not appear to me that a sufficientequality has been maintained in the construction of the naturalfamilies.Taking the transformations as the ground of the distribution of theorder, it appears to me to form two primary divisions : —1. Those with an active pupa, undergoing a metamorphosis which, forwant of a better name, we may, with MacLeay, term subsemicomplete;in all which there is a greater dissimilarity between the larva andimago states than exists in the insects typical of the monomorphous,semi complete metamorphosis (Gryllus, &c.) Here belong the Psocidajand Termitidse, which have terrestrial larvae, and the LibellulidaeNEUROPTERA. 11EphemeridEe, and Perlidse, which are aquatic in their preparatorystates. I term the species of this division Biomorphotic insects.2. Those which have quiescent incomplete pupte, which, however,acquire the power of locomotion shortly before the assumption of theperfect state. This division (Subnecromorphotica) comprises the familiesMyrmeleonidae, Hemerobiida^, Sialidse, Panorpidae, Raphidiidse andMantispidae.* Other arrangements might be adopted by consideringother characters as of primary importance. The succession of the familiesproposed by Pictet appears the most natural of any hitherto published.The families, 1. Termitidae ; 2. Psocidae ; and, 3. Perlidae, havethe greatest relation to the Orthoptera ; to these succeed the 4th familyEphemeral, and the 5th Libellulidae ; the 6th family Myrmeleonidae,in the general form of the body and wings, appears to be the nearestto the Libellulidae; to these succeed, 7th, the Hemerobiidae ; 8th, theSialidae ; 9th, the Panorpidae ; 10th, the Raphidiidae ; and, II th, theMantispidae, which last also manifest a near relation to the Orthoptera.The family Termitid^ t is composed of the various species ofexotic insects, known under the name of white ants, placed by Linnaeusin the order Altera, on account of the apterous condition ofThis arrangement nearly corresponds with that suggested by Latreille in hisHist. Nat. Gen. Ins. torn. xiii. p. 100., as more natural than that adopted in thebody of his work.t BiBLioGR. Refer, to the Termitidae.Fabricius, J. C. Nahere bes tim mung des Geschlechts des meissen Arisen, inBench. der Berl. Ges. Nature. fr. b. i. 1775.Koenig. Nature. weirs. Ames. in ditto, b. iv. 1 775.Smeathman. Some Account of the Termites in Phil. Trans, vol. Lxxi. 1781.Ditto. Separate. Lond. 1781. 8vo. — Ditto. Transll. by Rigaud. Paris, 1786.Swartz, in Vetensk. Acad, nya Handll. 1792.Spartan. Voy. 4to the Cape of Good Hope, 2 vols. Lond. 4to. 1785.Latreille. Decouverte de Nids de Termes, in Mag. Encycl. 1797, and Bull. Soc.Phil. t. i. 1798. — Ditto, Hist. Nat. Insectes, vol. xiii.Kali, in Schemed. Acad. Abhandl. 16. st. and Fuessl. N. Ent. Mag. 3 band.Bench. der Berl. Nat. Gesellsch. 1 band (on the Queen of the White Ants).Kollar. Brazilians Vorzuglich lasting Insecten. Wien. 1832. — Ditto, in Isis ofOpen, 1833. (T. flavipes).De Geer. Memoires, vols. iii. and vii.Betty. Delect. An, art. Basilisk.12 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.some of the individuals, whilst he regarded the winged ones as belongingto the neuropterous genus Hemerobius.M. Brulle proposes to form these insects into a distinct order inhis work on the insects of the Morea, named Isoptera ; whilstMr. Kirby regards them as forming, together with the ants, towhich they are allied in so many points in their economy, a passagebetween the orders Neuroptera and Hymenoptera.These insects live in communities of countless numbers, of whichthe majority are apterous. The males and females are however,winged, and are distinguished from the other Neuroptera by thefollowing characters. The body is oblong, depressed, and of nearlyequal breadth throughout (fig. 58. i. represents a large BrazilianFig. 58.species) ; the head is of moderate size, horizontal, and rounded behindi^jig' 58.2. front of head) ; the eyes lateral, prominent, and subglobose ;the ocelli, two in number, more or less distinct, placed between theeyes, the third ocellus being sub obsolete ; the antennae short, withabout twenty submoniliform joints, the basal joint being the largestfig' 58. 9.) ; the clypeus and labrum are distinct fig. 58. 2.), thelatter produced over the mandibles, and sub triangular in form, with thesides rounded. The mandibles fig. 58. 3.) are horny, flattened, andtriangular in form, with several teeth on the inner edge ; the maxillaefig. 58. 4. under, 58. 5. upper side of the maxillse) are flat, horny,and terminated by two strong hooked teeth, and defended by a verybroad external lobe or galea fig. 58. 4. 5. x .) ; the maxillary palpi arerather longer than the maxillse, filiform, and 5-jointed ; the labiumfig. 58. 6. beneath, 7. laterally) is very perfect in its formation, beingof large size, and occupying the greater portion of the under surfaceof the head; the mentum is coriaceous, transverse, with the fore mar-neuroptera.— TERMITIDiE. 13gin rounded ; the labium itself is divided at the apex into four nearly-equalconical lobes ; and the labial palpi are filiform and 3-jointed.Within the mouth, attached to the inner base of the labrum, arisesa large coriaceous lobe fig. 58. 7. o. and 58. 8. detached), somewhatemarginate in front, and which is the lingua, here as full' developed asin the saltatorial Orthoptera and Libellulidae.The three thoracic segments are distinct ; the prothorax of moderatesize, shield-like, and either transversely quadrate or semicircular,with the anterior margin straight, and the posterior rounded ; theresound meta-thorax are of nearly equal size ; the wings are nearlytwice as long as the body, narrow, and of equal size, they are not sohyaline as in the majority of the insects of this order; the costal andsubcostal nerves are very robust, but all the other nerves are butslightly visible ; when at rest they are carried flat upon the back ; thelegs are rather short, slender, and simple ; the tibiae are cylindrical,with two or three spurs; the tarsi (y?^. 58. 10.) are 4-jointed, thethree basal joints being very short and hairy beneath ; the abdomenis flattened, with transverse segments, and terminated at the sides bytwo minute conical 2-jointed styles (^g.58. ll. The figures 58. l — ll.are taken from the large Brazilian species figured.)With the exception of two or three small species of this family (T.lucifugus Rossi, T. flavicollis Fab., and T. flavipes Kollar in Isis, 1833),these insects are chiefly confined to the tropics, where the immensenumbers of which their communities consist, together with their devastatingpowers, render them the most absolute pests of mankind. Theyattack furniture, wood-work, and merchandise of every kind ; and theirinstinctive powers are so great, that every particle of furniture in ahouse may be destroyed without their presence being even suspected,as they form their burrows under ground, and make their places ofexit immediately beneath the legs of tables, he, of which they completelyeat away the interior, leaving only a thin outer shell, whichcrumbles to dust on being moved. The nests of these insects are ofa very large size, and varied in form according to the species. Thatof T. fatale Z^V^^^. (Bellicosus >S'/«ea<A/?j-) is sometimes not less thanten or twelve feet high, of a conical form, with numerous conicalturrets on its sides ; it is formed of clay, and, being soon coated withgrass, looks like a haycock. The strength of these nests is so greatthat, when raised to little more than half their height, it is the practicefor the wild bulls to mount upon them as sentinels, whilst the rest of the14< MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.herd is feeding ; and Smeathman and four of his companions mountedon the top of one of them to obtain a view of any vessel which mightcome in sight. The nests of T. atrox and mortal are cylindricalpillars, three quarters of a yard high, with a projecting roof; whilstT. destructor Fahr. (T. arbour Smeafhm.) constructs its nests ofdifferent sizes, amongst the branches of trees, seventy or eighty feethigh. T. virum appears, from the observations of Smeathman, to residein holes in the ground. T. lucifugus makes its lodgements inthe trunks of pines and oaks, in which they form a number of irregularburrows. Dr. Burmeister showed me a colony of T. flavipes at Berlin,which he kept in a flat earthenware jar filled with rotten debris, andcovered with damp pieces of wood, in which the insects burrowed.The societies of these insects consist, according to Latreille (who investigatedthe economy of T. lucifugus, which he discovered at Bordeaux),of five kinds of individuals, namely : 1. sales, and, 2. Females,closely resembling each other externally, and agreeing with thecharacters given above ; 3. Individuals, described by Smeathman andFabricius as pupa, but called neuters by Latreille and Kirby, andsoldiers by Smeathman fig' 58. 14. T. fiavipes), having a soft, elongate,oval body, destitute of wings, and a head of gigantic size, armedwith long and powerful sickle-shaped jaws, in which the under, as wellas the upper, side of the head is horny, with the maxillse and labrumvery minute, and the palpi long and slender. My Jig. 58. 15. representsthe under side of the head of T. flavipes in which the upperlip is long and entire ; but in another species, from Fernando Po, inmy collection, it is very deeply notched (^^.58.16.); the eyes appearentirely wanting ; the parts of the mouth of these members have notbeen previously described. These individuals are much less numerousthan the workers, being in the proportion of 1 to 100. Theyare employed as sentinels and soldiers, making their appearance whenthe nest is invaded, attacking the intruders, and inciting the labourersto work. 4. Apterous individuals, called larvae by Latreille, Kirby,&c., and workers by Smeathman, very much resembling the wingedindividuals, but with the head larger and rounded ; the eyes and ocelliwanting; the mandibles not larger than in the winged individuals;the thorax, with the three segments, distinct and wingless {Jig- 58. 12.T. flavipes) ; these are considerably smaller than the so-called neuters,and are the most numerous and most active portion of the community;they are the workers and architects of the nest ; they collect food,NEUROPTERA. — TERMITID^. ISform covered ways, guard the males and females, and take care of theeggs and young : and, 5. Pupae, first observed by Latreille, and describedby him as resembling the workers, but having four white tubercleson the back of the resound meta-thorax, in the shape ofrudimental wings. In a small African species from Fernando Po, ofwhich the nest is in the museum of the Rev. F. W. Hope, the pupaei^fig. 58. 13.) are furnished with 4-wing tubercles extending beyondthe body, with large lateral eyes. These individuals bear a great resemblanceto some of the perfect Cercopidse ; no other figures havehitherto been given of these insects in this state. Latreille foundthese pupae in the nests of T. lucifugus in the spring ; and in themonth of June following, the winged individuals make their appearancein prodigious numbers, swarming during the evening andnight ; the latter shortly afterwards pair, and after impregnation, thefemales (as in the ants, with which these insects possess a very greatanalogy), lose their wings, which easily fall off* ; they are then madeprisoners by the workers, in order to become the founders of freshcolonies, and conducted into the interior of the nest, where the bodyof the female becomes swollen to an enormous size, exceeding by20,000 or 30,000 times the bulk of one of the workers, when she commenceslaying her eggs ; the amazing number of 80,000 being dischargedin the course of twenty-four hours. From these circumstances,Latreille hist. Nat. Ins. vol. xiii. p. 65.^ was led to believe that thefourth kind of individuals, or the workers of Smeathman, are larvae ;that the fifth kind are pupae ; that the soldiers are a peculiar orderwhich never acquire wings, and are not capable of reproduction, beingthus analogous to the neuters of the bees and ants ; and that thosespecimens which are met with, without wings, in the nest, after theperiod of pairing, are females which have pulled off their wings, andhave survived the process of opposition.The nature of these various kinds of individuals, however, requiresa more minute investigation than it has yet received. Burmeister wellobserves, that there is no other instance in the whole animal world inwhich the undeveloped young labour for the old ; and is thence inducedto doubt that the workers are really larvae, to which may beadded the circumstance that these so-called larvae still retain theirThe account given by Mr. Davis of insects, like Nemourae, lighting in swarmsupon a ship at anchor off Bahia in Brazil, and biting off their wings, appears to relateto a small species of Termes. (Ent. Mag. No. 24.)16 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.form when the winged individuals appear. Kirby indeed suggests,that as these insects belong to an order whose metamorphosis is semi-complete,the office of working for the society may devolve upon thelarvae {{Introdd. vol. ii. p. 30.) ; and Latreille endeavours to account forthe circumstance that, at the time of the winged individuals coupling,a great number of specimens remain in the nest under the form oflarvae, by supposing that these ' ne doivent subir leur dernier metamorphoseque I'annee suivante ; " making them to be two years in arrivingat perfection, which is, however, but a mere supposition. Asto the large headed individuals, their right to the name of neuters hasbeen doubted by Huber. {Notiv. 06.?. vol. ii. p. ^^i. note *.) Kirbysays that in all respects they bear a stronger analogy to the larvae thanto the perfect insects, and after all may possibly turn out to be larvae,perhaps of the males {{Introdd. vol. ii. p. 34. note*) ; and Burmeisterobserves that he does not see why these neuters should be merely defenders,as the neuters amongst all other social insects are the trueworkers (^^Manual of Ent. Transll. p. 533.). As to the individualswhich have lost their wings, Burmeister, who dissected one of them,did not find the least trace of external or internal genitalia, and isthence induced to believe that they are real neuters. I cannot, however,adopt this opinion, nor the hypothesis which he has foundedthereon, as I am inclined to think that his investigation of the internalanatomy of the individual was not sufficiently precise, and that thisspecimen was a male or female which had lost its wings in theusual way. Moreover, his hypothesis does not account for the existenceof the large headed individuals. On the other hand, I wouldeven venture to suggest, from a knowledge of the modifications towhich some individuals of the Orthoptera, Hemiptera, and Hymenopteraare subject, that these large headed individuals, as well asthe so-called larvae, remain permanently apterous, without alteringtheir form *, being like the wingless specimens of Velia currentretarded in their transformations, their development stopping shortbefore their arrival at maturity, and thereby some individuals gainingan enlarged head in order to compensate for their ultimate want ofwings ; and that the real larvae of the comparatively saw specimens,which ultimately become winged, are as yet unknownThe want of rudimental wing-cases and the structure of the head and mouth ofthe soldiers seem to me to prove this completely, at least as regards these individuals.f The larvae and neuters of Termes Viariim are described by Smeatlmian as possessingeyes.NEUROPTERA. PSOCID^. 17The reader who would learn more ample particulars relative tothe natural history of these insects, their various duties, the internaleconomy of the nest, and their wonderful instincts, must consultSmeathman's Memoir above referred to, Kirby' and Spence's Introduction,vols. i. and ii., and Latreille's Hist. Nat. vol. iii., as well asmy article Termitidae in the Brit. Cyclop, of Nat. Hist. The speciesof this family are evidently more numerous than has been supposed,but they require a more rigorous investigation than has hithertobeen given to them. Some exotic species fig. 60. 16.), having 3-jointedtarsi, wings not longer than the body, and the anterior legs dilated(60. 18. 17. maxilla), compose the genus Embia Latr. They seem morenearly related to the Perlidae. They form the subject of my monograph,published in the Linnaean Trans, vol. xvii.The family Psocid^ * Leach, comprises a rather numerous seriesof minute insects, at once distinguished by the almost obsolete labialpalpi ; the 2 or 3-jointed tarsi ; the smaller size of the posteriorwings, which are not folded, and by the slenderness of the antennae,which are long and setaceous, composed of about thirteen joints ; thefirst of which is the largest, the third the longest, and the remaindergradually diminishing in length ; the upper lip is large ; the mandibles(Jig. 59. 2. 3.) horny, trigonate, with a tooth near the tip inside,and another (much stronger in one jaw than the other), nearthe base inside ; the maxilla (Jg. 59. 4.) are elongated, fleshy atthe tip, and armed with a long, slender, curved, horny process, arisingfrom the base, and longer than the maxillae ; the maxillary palpiare-disjointed ; the labial apparatus {Jg. 59. 5.) is large ; the mentumis a large leathery plate, reaching to the base of the head beneath;the labium sub quadrate, with a deep, longitudinal, central impression ;the sides are rather rounded, and the middle, in front, produced intoBiBLioGR. Refer, to the Psocid.e.Latreille, in Bull. Soc. Philomat. an. 3. Nos. 4] . and 42. — Ditto, in Coquebert.Illustrtr. Iconogr. Ins. tab. 2.Phil. Trans. 1693, Allen; 1701, Derham ; 1724, Backhouse'( Atropospulsatorium. )Nitzsch., in Germar, Mag. Ent. vol. iv. (Anatomy Atropos piilsator. )Carpenter, in Mag. Nat. Hist. No. 10.Stephens, Curtis, Patricius.VOL. II. CMODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Fig. 59.two lobes, at the side of which two small rounded lobes are attached;the labial palpi have been described by Latreille and Curtis as wanting,but they appear to me to be represented by the last-mentioned pairof lobes ; the eyes are of moderate size, semiglobose, lateral, andprominent ; the ocelli are three in number, and placed in a trianglebetween the eyes (Jiff. 59. 6.) ; the body is short, gibbose, ovate, andsoft ; the prothorax is very short ; the resound meta-thorax largerand deeply impressed ; the wings are hyaline, deflexed, with conspicuousveins ; the anterior larger than the posterior, with a largestigma, and a few irregular, longitudinal, and transverse nerves ; theyare often variegated and coloured ; the lower wings are not folded ;and the veins are differently arranged to those of the anterior pair;the abdomen is short, ovate, and convex, the ovipositor, which existsin the females, enclosed in two valves, not being exserted ; the legsare long and slender ; the tarsi 2 or 3-jointed.These minute insects frequent the trunks of trees, palings, old walls,stones covered with lichens, old books, &c., for the purpose of feeding,either upon the still more minute animalcule, which inhabit thosesituations, or, more probably, upon the decaying vegetable matterto be there met with. They are extremely active, and when approachedthey endeavour to hide themselves by running to the oppositeside of the trunk of the tree, or other object on which theyare stationed. The perfect insects are produced towards the endof the summer, when they sometimes appear in great numbers. Thelarvas and pupae are equally active with the imago, from which theformer differ in being apterous, whilst the pupoe have rudimentalwings.Latreille published a monograph of these insects in Coqueberit'sNEUROPTERA. PSOClDiE. ~ 19Iconography; and more recently Curtis, and especially Stephens, havedescribed many additional species, proposing various divisions foundedupon the variation of the nerves of the wings. It appears to me,however, that a more minute structural investigation of these insectsis required, as I am inclined to think they vary materially inthe sexes. In the month of July, I have observed on the trunksof apple trees a species which I believe to be P. 4-maculatus Latr.;the smaller specimens, having the wings veined as in Jig. 59. 8., andthe tarsi, distinctly 3-jointed fig. 59. 9.), were produced from pupae{Jig.59.\o), which had four long wing covers, 2-jointed tarsi (Jig.59. 12.), and 13-jointed antennas fig. 59. ii); the females, as I presumethem to be of the same species {Jig^ 59. l.), were larger, withthe veins differently arranged, and with 2-jointed tarsi fig. 59. 7.). Ifound in company With these insects a number of specimens in thestate represented mjig. 59. 13., and which, from their large size andthe markings of the head, destitute of ocelli, I presume are the pupaeof the females, although the small size of the rude mental wing-cases,and of the resound meta-thorax fig. 59. 14. thoracic segments laterally),together with the 3-jointed tarsi fig. 59. 15.), might lead tothe opinion that these individuals will never acquire wings ; the structureof their mouths also agrees with that of the females. If my supposition,as to the specific identity of all these individuals, be correct,the genus Ccecilius of Curtis must be rejected, being founded upon asexual character.M. V. Audouin has communicated to me an observation made byhim, in which a female winged Psocus was seen to weave a web overits eggs, which it had deposited in the impressed parts of leaves formedby the veins of the leaf. Likewise that, in another species, the eggs,eight in number, were arranged on a leaf in an irregular circle, withthe tips all pointing to the centre of the circle. In the month ofAugust, I have found amongst old papers specimens of a minutespecies in the state agreeing with Jig. 59. 13., having four minuterudimental wing-cases, but with 2-jointed tarsi. These insects Ipresume to be fully developed females of the insufficiently' characterisedAtropos fatidicum ; with them I found many specimens stillsmaller, with a more slender body, and with only two rather shortrudimental wing-cases fig. 59. 18.), as well as a single specimen fig.59. 16.) agreeing with the latter, except that the two wings werelarger ; the nerves more distinct ; the tarsi only 2-jointed fig. 59. 17.) ;c 220 MODERN Classification OF INSECTS.tins I presume to be the male, and the preceding the male pupa ofthe same insect, which, from a consideration of its characters, I haveseparated as a distinct genus, named after Lachesis, one of the Fates.The Atropos pulsatorius {^fig. 59. 19.) is a minute, almost colourlessinsect, found in great numbers in ill-preserved collections of insects,plants, old books, &c., to which it is very injurious, by eating all themore minute portions; the different shape of the head, and proportionof the thoracic segments destitute of wings, united with its Jointedtarsi (fig. 59. 2i.), and thickened hind legs, well distinguishes it fromPsocus. Latreille, however, throws out a hint that it may be thelarva of Psocus abdominal Fah. (pedicularius Latr. Hist. Nat. Ins.vol. xiii, p. 71. and 73.), which scarcely appears to me to be possible ;although, from what I have noticed above, as to the variations occurringin Psocus, it is impossible to assert that such is not the case.I have noticed that they are killed in a very short time, when shut upin a box with camphor. This species is commonly called the death-watch,from its habit of making a slight tapping noise like the tickingof a watch, somewhat similar to that made by the species of Anobium.There are several papers in the early volumes of the PhilosophicalTransactions, above referred to, upon this subject.The genus Coniopteryx, placed by Curtis and Stephens in thisfamily, evidently belongs to the Hemerobiidae.The family Perfidy * Leach, is of small extent, comprising butfew species of moderate size (Jig.GO.l. P. marginal), distinguishedby the large size of the posterior pair of wings, which are folded, the3-jointed tarsi, the existence of labial palpi, and the ordinarily rudimentalstate of the mandibles, and membrane-coriaceous structure ofBiBLioGR. Refer, to the Perliu^e.Pictet. Mem. sur les Larves des Memoires, Ann. Sc. Nat. August, 1832. — Ditto.on Perla, in ditto, January, 1833. — Ditto, in Mem. Soc. Physiq. et d'Hist. Nat.Geneve, vol. vii. (new Nemourae. )Newman, m Entomological Magazine, vol. i. p. 415. (Isogenus. ) Vol. iii. p. 500.(Chloroperla). Vol. v. p. 175. (Pteronareys and other North American species).Vol. vi. p. 401. Likewise a monograph of the caudated species about to bepublished.Suckow, in Zeitschr. Organise Phys. t. ii. No. 3. March, 1828.Lucas, in Ann, Sc. Nat. December, 1832, t. xxvii.Westwood, in Griff. An. Kingd. (Eusthenia.)Stephens, Olivier (Enc. Methh.) Curtis, &c.NEUROPTERA. — Perfidy.Fiy. 60.the other parts of the mouth. The body is oblong, depressed, and ofequal breadth throughout, the head (^^.60. 3. under side) being flat, asbroad or broader than the prothorax, which is large, flat, and quadrate;the eyes prominent, semiglobose, and lateral; the ocelli three, in a triangle,between the eyes ; the antennae nearly as long as the body, andmulti articulate ; the basal joint being largest, and the third and followingexceedingly short ; the upper lip is transverse, and very short ; the mandiblesin Perla are small, flat, and membranous {^fig- 60. 4.). In a beautifulAustralian species, they are horny and toothed fig. 60. 15.), whenceI have formed this insect into a distinct genus, Eusthenia spectaclesWestiv. ( Griffith, An. Kingdom ; in Nemoura they are also horny, andarmed with several teeth ; the maxillae are widely apart, with a long-basalarticulation, and two short and slender terminal lobes ; the maxillarypalpi are slender, and 5-jointed fig. 60. 5.) ; the mentum fig.60.6.) is large, covering the greater part of the under side of thehead ; the labium is smaller and quadrate, deeply slit down the middle ;the lingua (overlooked by Curtis) being well developed, not slit, andoccupying its internal face ; the labial palpi are 3-jointed ; the threethoracic segments are nearly equally developed ; the abdomen issessile, soft, depressed, of equal breadth, 9-jointed, and in the largespecies furnished with two long and slender articulated filaments ; thewings are longer than the abdomen, upon which they are horizontallyextended at rest, the posterior pair being the largest, and folded ; thelegs are of moderate length, compressed, and simple ; the tibial spursvery short ; the third or terminal joint of the tarsi is larger than thetwo preceding united in Perla fig. 60. 7.) ; but in Nemoura the jointsare of equal length. There is a very great diversity in the sexes ofthe typical genus Perla, the males being much smaller than the females,with very short wings (Curtis and Lucas, in Ann. Sc. Nat,c 322 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Dec. 1832 ; Jiff. 60. 2. P. cephalotes c? *) ; the latter circumstancealso occurs in Nemoui-a trifasciata Pictet. These insects frequentdamp marshy situations, and the borders of lakes and rivers, restingupon stones, palings, and plants, growing close to the water's edge ;they are sluggish in their movements, and the larger species arewell known to the angler as an excellent bait for trout ; Perla bicau-data appearing in April, being called the Stone-fly; Chloroperla viridisin May, termed the Yellow Sally ; and a species of Nemoura in September,called the Willow-fly. (ronald's Fhjfishers Entomology')Curtis gives the name of Willow-fly to Chloroperla viridis.In their preparatory states, these insects reside in the water : thefemale, according to Scopoli {Ent.Carn. p. 705.), Suckow, and Curtis,carries a globular bundle of little black shining eggs at the apex of theabdomen, enclosed in a valve or bag ; such is also the case with theEphemerae. In the works of Geoffroy, Olivier, Fabricius, Latreille,&c., the transformations of these insects are described as being similarto those of the PhrygancEe ; namely, having a cased larva, and an inactivepupa ; and Mr. MacLeay, misled by this statement, has unitedthe Perlidse in the same order with the Phryganese, with which,indeed, they agree in the large size of the posterior folded wings, andthe weak structure of the mouth. The error originated with Reaumur,who reared a small bicaudated Perla in a vessel, in which " M. CrabbeNollet avait mis ou cru savoir mis que nos reigns a fourreaux dontEnvelope est une espfece de ruban vert roule," or a cased larva ofone of the Phryganeae. (memoires, torn. iii. p. 178. pi. 13. f. 12. andpi. l^. f. 8. 9. and 10.) It is evident, from a reference to Latreille'sHist. Nat. vol. xiii. p. 47., that his statements relative to the transformationsof this group are derived from the memoir of Reaumur abovereferred to, and the history given by Geoffroy (Hist. Abregee des Ins.torn. ii. p. 230.) ; but Geoffi"oy himself informs us in p. 233., that thehistory which he gives of the genus is that of " la perle jaune," aninsect only two lines long, and which evidently does not belong to thefamily.These statements, however, at least so far as the present family isconcerned, are incorrect ; the larvae of the Perlidas being naked, notIn a beautiful species from Van Dieman's Land, which I have received fromMr. R. H. Lewis, the females are occasionally furnished with only short wings.One thus constructed, in the collection of the Rev. Few. Hope, has a bundle of eggsstill abashed to the extremity of the abdomen. (Eusthenia diversions TF. )Neural-TERA Perfidy. 23enclosed in a case, and in general form resembling the imago, exceptin wanting wings ; whilst the pupa is active, having a still greater resemblanceto the imago, possessing the four rudimental wing-cases.In a memoir published by Goeze in Der Natarforschei; st. iii. solong ago as 1774, a figure of the pupa of Pera bicaudata was given,answering to this description ; and specimens of the pupae are preservedin the Linnaean collection. I likewise possess several fig. GO. 8.),as well as the exuviae cast on the insect's arrival at the perfect state, andwhich are found attached to plants, &c., in the vicinity of the waterin which the larvae and pupae have resided. Dr. Suckow has also (inamemoir written with the view to prove that the Semblis [Perla] bi-cantata,and Semblis [Salis] lutaria belonged to different genera, as,indeed, they had long been considered by Latreille, and published inthe Zeitschrift fur die Organise Physic) described the Perla bi-cantatain its various states. More recently Mr. Newman has givena sketch of the larva of P. bicaudata {Ent. Mag. vol. i. pi. 3. f. 10) ;and M. Pictet has published two memoirs, detailing the history ofvarious species of Perla and Nemoura, agreeing with the charactergiven above. These larvae prefer the most rapid parts of streams :they crawl about slowly, preferring to remain stationary under stones ;they are carnivorous ; they shed their skins several times (at least, inNemoura) ; and they generally crawl out of the water when about toassume the perfect state. M. Pictet has described these larvae indetail ; it will, however, be sufficient to notice that, unlike the imago,the mandibles in the larvae of Perla i^Jig. 60. 9.) are robust and toothed,as well as the maxillae (fig. 60. 10.) ; the eyes are prominent and lateral,and in the place of ocelli I observe three black dots between theeyes, which M. Pictet has not described. The tarsi in the pupae of Perla(jig. 60. 11.) appear to me to be composed of three joints, the two basalones being very minute, the first almost hidden from view ; in thelarvae of Nemoura the tarsi are 2-jointed. M. Pictet has describedtwo singular modifications in the respiratory organs of these insects.In the larvae of the large species composing the genus Perla, as restrictedin my Generic Synopsis, each of the three thoracic segmentsis furnished with a pair of tufts of short external filaments, each tuftbeing composed of three distinct pencils, each having a distinctorigin fig. 60. 12.).In the Perla vires cens Pictet (evidently a Chloroperla JVcwm.), andin Perla nigra Pictet (which will probably form a different subgenus,c 424 Modern CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.intermediate between Isogenus and Nemoura), the larvae are destituteof these external organs of respiration.In Nemoura cinerea Pictet, Oliv., the under surface of the prothoraxis furnished with six elongated filamentous sacs fig. 60. 14.), similar tothe sacs observed on the abdomen of the larvae of Phryganeae. Theseorgans do not exist in the five other species of the genus, of which M.Pictet has described the larvae, thus proving the slight importance ofthese modifications of the respiratory apparatus in the Annulosa. Therudiments of the wing-cases are perceived in the enlarged posterior anglesof the mess and metathorax of the larva, and the pupa state is only to beknown by the increased size of these wing-cases, which "se developmentpeu-a-peu dans la nymphe." In the genus Perla, as now restricted, thesewing-cases are much less distinct than in the P. microcephala Pict.(which is, I apprehend, an Isogenus*), Chloroperlae (P.virescens Pict),P. nigra, and the Nemoura; ; in all which the wing-cases in the pupae aredetached, and considerably elongated fig. 60. 13.). The resemblancebetween the larvae of the smaller species of caudated Perlidae, and theNemoura is so complete, that M. Pictet could not discover anycharacter constant pour les distinguer," although in the perfect statethe latter are destitute of the pair of anal filaments which exist in theirlarvae. A species of this family, Semblis viridis (Chloroperla ?) hasbeen made one of the subjects of Dr. Carus's observations on the circulationof the blood in insects. (See Spence, in Mag. Nat. Hist. Jan.1830, p. 49. and Carus, Enldeck. einfach. Herzen bench. Blutkreis, S^-c.)The family Ephemera * Leach, comprises the well-known tribeof insects, ordinarily known under the name of May-flies, distinguished• M. Pictet informs me that he considers the Isogenus Nubecula Newmm. to bethePerla bicaudata Linn. ; but this is doubtful, as the Linnaean' description is toovague, and the Linnaean collection affords no decisive information.BiBLioG. Refer, to the Ephemera.Cautious. Opusculum de Hemerobio. 4to. Amsterd. 1634.Swanimerdam. Historic vat het haft (Ephem.) Amsterd. 1675. — Ditto, in Bookof Nature, pi. 13, 14, 15.De Geer. Obs. sur les Ephem. in Mem. Acad. Sc. Paris, torn. ii. Sav. Etr.Sch'dffer. Das fligende Uferaas. 4to. Regent. 1757, and in Abh. von. Ins. 3 b.Williamson, on Ephemeron Leukon, in Trans. Soc. I'iiilndelphia, vol. v. 1802.Collins, in Phil. Trans. 1746. (Eph. vulgata. )Neuroptera. — EPHEMERIDiE.by the minute size of the antennae ; the unequal size of the wings ; themembranous and almost obsolete mouth ; and the elongated articulatedsetae at the extremity of the body. The body is long, slender,and soft (fig. 61. l. Ephem. vulgata $ , with the tails cut partly off) ;the head small, transverse-originate ; the eyes large, nearly oval, andlateral, in the males of some species very large, and meeting on thecrown of the head *; the ocelli are three in number, and placed in atriangle between the eyes ; the anterior ocellus being often small, andthe two lateral ones placed on peduncles fig. 61. 16. head of Baetis) :the antennas are small, and 3-jointed ; the two basal joints thick; thethird forming a long slender seta : the clypeus in some species(Baetis, Jig. 61. 16.) is large, fleshy, and shutting over the mouth withCurtis, in Taylor's Philos. Mag. 1834. — Ditto, Brit. Ent.Grander. Lib. Banks, sub Ephemera.Stephens, Savigny (Egypt), Fahricius, §-c.The males of Ephemera bicculata L., in addition to the ordinary eyes, have thehead furnished with two short, thick, erect pillars, on the top of which another pair oflarge eyes are fixed. Mr. Curtis doubts whether this insect has four wings ; andthe figure given by De Geer, vol. ii. tab. 18. f. 9., represents an insect with only twowings, although it has its head represented with pillared eyes. GeoflTroy's figure,vol. ii. tab. 13. f. 4., has four wings, two anal setce, and two very large eyes. Theinsects which appear to me to accord with the Linnaean description, have four wings ;but the posterior pair are very minute, with only two longitudinal nerves. Thenerves of the anterior wings are exceedingly delicate ; and between each pair of thelongitudinal nerves, at the tip of the wing, there are two very short nerves unconnectedwith any transverse nerve. These characters will be«sufl1cient for the formationof this species into a separate genus, which may be named Brachyphlebia.It is perhaps equivalent to Stephens's section a of Baetis. The Linneean specimensare destroyed.26 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.a thickened rib half way down the centre, and slit through the frontalhalf. As the life of these insects ordinarily extends but for a few-hours,the parts of the mouth are almost obsolete, being minute, fleshy,and filled with fluid, so that their structure is not easily discernible.Latreille describes them doubtingly, as consisting of four short multi-articulatepalpi, more slender at the tip. Mr. Curtis having examinedliving specimens, says that the parts of the mouth seem to consist oftwo large inarticulate? palpi, with two compressed elongated sublinearlobes between them (maxillas, Jig.6\. 2.), and a dilated labrum withtwo large divaricating fin-like lobes (palpi ? Jig. 61. 3.). Reaumur'sfigure of the under side of the head (tom. vi. pi. 43. f. 1 1.), representsa space " ou detroit etre la bouche et d'ou on ne fait sortir queenebessie, au dessous on voit quatre languages charles, dirges vers lapartie posterior ; " and Savigny has represented the parts of themouth of a Baetis, in the great work on Egypt ; but it is impossiblesatisfactorily to make out their analogies. The thorax is oval andconvex ; the prothorax small, narrowed in front, the mesothoraxlarge ; the abdomen is elongate, narrow, of nine segments in bothsexes, the terminal segments being longest, and gradually narrowed ;it is furnished at the apex, in both sexes, with two or threelong, slender, multi articulated filaments* ( Jig. 61. 4. S .), and inthe males with four, two short setaceous articulated appendages, andtwo shorter straight ones, which are sometimes not exserted f ; thewings are of unequal size, the anterior being much larger than theposterior, and elongate-originate, considerably reticulated; at rest theyare generally carried erect ; the posterior pair are wanting in somespecies (Cloeon, Ephemera litera Linn). The legs are slender andsimple ; the anterior pair, in the males being porrected, and greatlyelongated, with the tibiae and tarsi appearing soldered together ; thebasal tarsal pointing very minute ; the tarsi are 5-jointed, simple, andterminated in the fore legs of the males by two oval pulvilli ; in thefour posterior legs the tarsi are short, 5-jointed ; the basal joint (inthe males of E. vulgata), being shortest, and soldered to the tibia (soLatreille (hist. Nat. Ins. vol. xiii. p. 80.) states that the males differ from thefemales in having the middle anal filament very short, whereas it is as long as theothers in the females. This is the case in a species observed Reaumur; but in thetrue Ephemera?, the middle seta is nearly, but not quite, as long as the lateral ones■j- In Eph. vulgata (? , they have been overlooked by Curtis, but the extremitiesare distinctly exserted in my specimens. I have seen no species with three of theseshort appendages as described by Latreille, Gen. Cr. vol. iii. p. 184.NEUROPTERA. — EPHEMERIDiE. 27as to make the tarsi appear 4-j()Iiited, as, indeed, they have been describedby some authors), and terminated by a large oval pulvillus,and a single broad notched claw.Dr. Leach formed these insects, in his MSS. (quoted by Stephens,Syst Cat. p. 305.), into a separate order, named Anisoptera, from theunequal size of the wings.Cuvier, followed by Dumeril, united them together with the Phry-ganese, into a distinct section of the order, termed Magnates, from therudimental structure of the mouth, destitute of jaws ; whilst Brulleunited them with Libellula and Termes into a separate order, whichhe named Dictyoptera.These insects have obtained their name Ephemera, from the GreeklEi(pt]f.iepoc, diurnal, in allusion to the extremely short space of time*which they occupy as perfect insects. Their elegant flight in swarms(composed, as in the gnats, almost entirely of male insects) in fineafternoons, over or near water, alternately rising and falling, must haveattracted the attention of the most incurious: in this operation the upwardflight is produced by the repeated action of the wings ; but indescending, the wings are widely extended, as well as the tails. Afew hours previously, they had been the inhabitants of the water, fromwhich, in the pupa state, they had crawled to the surface, where theycast off their pupa skin, appearing at first sight to be fully developed,with the wings extended to their full size (which state is termed byMr. Curtis the pseudimago) ; they then make their way, flying withdifficulty, to the shore, where they affix themselves to the trunks oftrees, stems of rushes, walls, or even upon persons standing upon thebank, when they again cast off a very delicate pellicle, in whichthey had been entirely encased, and which remains, unchanged inform,attached to the objects on which they had stationed themselves :the skin, however, in which the wings had been enclosed, shrivels andcurls up into a mass, hanging down at the sides of the thorax ; afterthis process, the wings, disengaged from the outer covering, assume abrighter appearance, and the tails grow to twice their previous length.De Gee kept Ephemera respecting alive for eight days ; and Mr. Steplieiismentions having kept specimens of Clocon iterum alive above three weeks. Hadthese individuals, however, been at large, and capable of pursuing their natural habits,I doubt not that their existence would have been as short as that of their companions.Dr. Franklin's beautiful address, supposed to have been delivered by an " ancientEphemera," which had lived four hundred and twenty minutes, is one of the mostprofound lessons to humanity ever published.28 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.In some specimens which I have reared, I have invariably found thatthe casting off of this pellicle takes place during the night. In somespecies, the operation of shedding this pellicle takes place immediatelyafter flight, and is so quickly performed, that the whole operationdoes not exceed three minutes; immediately after which the insectagain takes wing. (Davis, in Ent. Mag. vol. ii. p. 322.) I have observedin one instance, at least, that the insect remained in the pseudimagostate upwards of twenty-four hours. In consequence of this peculiarity,these insects have been described as undergoing a quadruplemetamorphosis.* After coupling has taken place, the females deposittheir eggs in a mass, and which they drop into the water. This beingthe only operation which the perfect insects are able to perform, theydie as soon as it is accomplished.Notwithstanding the dangers to which the eggs, larvae, and pupaeare constantly exposed, from the attacks of fishes and predaceousaquatic insects, the number of specimens which arrive at the asserts of the species which he observed, that the males only undergothis second moulting. I can affirm that in E. vulgata both sexes are subject to it.This power of flight by the insect, previous to attaining its final form, is perfectlyanomalous; and if we were to adopt the opinion expressed by Mr. Newman {Ent.Mag. vol. iii. p. 19.), that the pseudimago state of the May fly is analogous to thepupa of the bee, or the chrysalis of the butterfly, it would necessarily follow that thestate in which rudimental wing-covers are developed, preceding the pseudimago stateof the former, is analogous to the last stage of the Zarya of the latter insects. ButMr. Newman has shown that he is aware of the fact, not only that the dragon fly,on becoming a perfect insect, quits a double skin, the interior of which is analogousto the external pellicle of the pseudimago, but also that butterflies, moths, andgnats, " which do not retain the skin of the previous state, on entering the quiescentstate, retain two distinct coverings ; " the interior being a soft pellicle, which musthave been observed by all who have paid any attention to the rearing of Lepidoptera.But Mr. Newman further contends that the pupa of a bee or beetle is enveloped inonly a single skin; whilst the flesh fly, &c. (or the insects which undergo the truecoarctate metamorphosis, that is, " on assuming the quiescent state they retain thelast cuticle of the previous state") cast off two skins on becoming perfect insects. Now,both those assumptions are contrary to fact as well as to analogy, since it is certainthat the beetles, after quitting the pupa skin, are at first enveloped in a thin pellicle, likethe May-fly, and which I doubt not is general, and to be found in the bee, as well asthe beetle, if sufficient careful researches were made for it; whilst, at the same time, wearewarranted in considering that the real pupa of the flesh fly is likewise inclosed in asimilar membrane, so that the latter insect, on arriving at the perfect state, casts three,and not two, skins ; namely, the hardened ultimate larva skin, the real pupa skin, andthe pellicle analogous to the pseudimago skin of the May fly, which, from itsfirmer consistence is retained longer by the last-mentioned insect, If this be a correctview of the real nature of the pseudimago state, there will be no grounds forrejecting the Linnaean definitions of metamorphosis.NEUROPTERA. EPHEMERIDiE. 29feet State is sometimes so immense, that the swarms of one specieswith white wings (E. albigenses) has been compared to a fall of snow;whilst, in some parts of Europe where they abound, it is the customto collect their dead bodies into heaps, and use them for manure.The fishes at such time eagerly wait for them ; and so great are thenumbers which fall into the water, that the fishermen call themmanna.* They are well known to the angler as excellent baits fortrout, f They are also a favourite food of the smaller dragon flies.If, however, the life of these insects in their perfect state is so short,it is of much greater duration in the preparatory states, extendingat least, in some species, to two or three years. During this period,they are inhabitants of the water, in which they ordinarily hidethemselves, during the day, in the earth, under stones, or in horizontalburrows, divided internally into two canals, each having a separateopening externally, and uniting internally at the extremity, so thatthe insect can crawl in at one hole and out of the other, withoutbeing obliged to make the awkward turn it would have to do, ifin a straight hole: these burrows are formed in the earth of thesides of the stream, or standing water, and which circulates freely inthem. It is affirmed by some authors, that the larva feeds uponthe mud at the sides of its retreat (hist. of Insects, p. 106.). Swimmerswho dissected these larvae, always found mud within the stomachand the great and small intestines. It is most probable, therefore,that when the larva has assimilated the decaying vegetable mattertherein contained, the earthy particles are discharged. The larvae beara considerable resemblance to the imago in their general form, butare easily distinguished by their long multi articulate antennae ; thewant of ocelli ; the presence, in some species, of two corneous appendagesin front of the head, considered as mandibles, and moreI must refer to Kirby and Spence's Introduction for various particulars relativeto the almost incredible appearance of the swarms of these insects upon certainoccasions.f Out of forty-four species of insects given by Mr. Ronald in his Fly Fisher's Entomology,eighteen belong to the present family. Amongst the smaller species, the pseud-imagoand imago are known under different names. The various kinds of duns are all inthe pseudimago state, the name evidently applying to their duller colour. The greendrake is the pseudimago, and the grey drake the imago of E. vulgata 9 . See furtherSir H. Davy's Salmon, and the late editions of Isaac Walton. The females, filledwith eggs, are most eagerly seized by the fish ; the males, inflated with air, offer thembut little nourishment, and are called bastard May flies by the Oxfordshire fishermen.It is rarely that the females are found "i the swarms hovering on thewater.30 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.particularly by the possession of a row of thin plates on each sideof the abdomen, ordinarily united in pairs by their bases, and whichare a species of external false branchiae or gills, in which the tracheaare extended, and ramify ; thus serving as organs of respiration,as well as assisting in locomotion by their constant undulatory motion: the abdomen in the larva is terminated by three setae, whichis the case, not only in those species which have three filamentsin the imago, but also in those with only two tails. I have observedthat these seta; acquire a greater length at each moulting.Those species which reside in burrows seldom quit their retreats ;whilst the smaller species, which live at large in the water, are muchmore active, and have the body of a firmer consistence than theothers. The pupa differs only from the larva in having the rudimentalwing-covers more conspicuous at the sides of the resoundmeta-thorax.The investigation of the preparatory stages of the different speciesof these insects, will be sufficient to prove the necessity of theirseparation into even more genera than have hitherto been proposedfor them. The pupae of several species are represented by DeGeer and some other authors : the larvae, however, are not figured,but we may consider them as similar in character to the pupae, fromwhich they differ only in the absence of rudimental wing-covers. Inthe species to which the generic name has been restricted by recentauthors (E, vulgata, tl-c), the pupa (my Jig. 61. 5., and De Geer,tom.xxi. tab. 16.), is distinguished by a transverse-quadrate prothoraxas broad as the head, a very gibbous mess-thorax, a head of rathersmall size, with two short horns in front, and two long, acute, slightlyrecurved mandibles, originating at the sides of the mouth, and beingas long as the head fig. 61.6. head sideways). Considering the rudimentalnature of the mouth of the imago, it is surprising that noone has hitherto described the real structure of the mouth, in thepreparatory states. Reaumur has attempted it, but his figures areso rude and insufficient, that no idea can be gleaned as to theirtrue structure ; Swammerdam, also, passes them over described.In the pupa of E. vulgata, the upper lip is of moderate size, withthe anterior angles rounded off, and ciliated ; it is flat, and quitemembranous {fg.Gl.l.) ; the mandibles (^^.61.8.) are horny, armedwith several teeth within, near the base fig. 61. 9.), which is dilatedinto a flattened molars plate ; whilst the upper angle of the mandibleNeUROPTERA. — EPHEMEUID^, 31is produced into the long curved horn above described. The maxillae(^^.61.10.) are small, membranous, curved, pointed at the tip,and internally setose ; the maxillary palpi do not extend beyond thefront of the head ; they are-disjointed, the basal joint being veryshort; the lower lip (fig. 61.il.) is very large and membranous, coveringthe underside of the mouth; it is quadrille (^^. 61. 12.),and furnished within with a broad tongue fig' 61. 13.), of whichthe anterior angles are produced and pilose ; the labial palpi arebroad and 3-jointed ; the antennae are about twice the length of thehead, multi articulate, and ciliated ; the eyes are large and rounded;the legs are short, broad, and very much compressed ; the tarsi2-jointed, with a terminal hook fig. 61.14.) ; the abdomen is 9-jointed,the terminal segments being the longest : of these segments, thesix basal ones are furnished on each side with a pair of elongatedrather narrow gills, the edges of which are furnished with long, narrowfilaments fig 61.15.), through each of which an air-tube extendsto the tip ; the air-tubes from each contiguous pair of filamentsuniting near the base, and then running to the large tube which traversesthe centre of each gill. Each of these pairs of gills are unitedtogether at the base, so that in the whole the insect has twenty-fourgills. The insect, of which the history is figured by Schiiffer {Abhandl.vol. iii. pi. 1.), appears to be an Ephemera, with four wings, and threetails, the larva of which forms burrows in the earth ; but it is impossible,from his figures, to ascertain either the species or the real charactersof the preparatory states.In a small species figured by De Geer {Mtm. tom. ii. tab. 17.f. 11 — 16), having four wings and three tails, the eyes of the malebeing very large and much elevated, and which is regarded as theE. respecting (which Mr. Stephens introduces into his second sectionof the genus Ephemera), the head of the pupa is unarmed ; the antenna;longer ; the legs and anal setae longer and more slender ; theseven basal abdominal segments are furnished on each side with a pairof oval, flat, membranous gills, each terminating in a long point, andnot provided with long marginal filaments fig. 61. 19.). The insectfigured by Rose {Ins. Belust. tom.ii. tab. 12. f. 1, 2.) is evidently identical,in the structure of the pupa and imago, with these figures of DeGeer. This and the allied species may, perhaps, from the considerationof the variation of their preparatory states, be advantageouslyseparated as a distinct genus, to which the name of Leptophlebia may32 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.be applied, In allusion to the delicacy of the veins of the wings, whichare moreover destitute of the numerous transverse veins near the posteriorbase of the fore wing, so conspicuous In E. vulgata.The pupa of another species, belonging to the genus Baetis, Isfigured by De Geer (vol. li. t. 18. f. 1 — 4.), and Is remarkable for thebroad flat head, with short antennae, and large eyes ; the prothorax isvery broad and flat; the legs short, with the femora greatly dilatedand compressed ; and the seven basal abdominal segments furnishedon each side with a broadly oval gill, terminating In a point ; the sixbasal ones on each side being further furnished with numerous longfloating filaments, representing the other gill (^^r. 61.18.) ; the tailsare very long, and not fringed. My specimens (Jiff.GL 17.) have thehead and prothorax considerably broader than they are figured by DeGeer, but In all other respects they correspond : In one of these whichI dissected, I found the labium very large, completely covering theother parts of the mouth ; the mandibles being small, but furnishedat the base with a molars plate, as In the pupa of E. vulgata.Messrs. Goring and Pritchard (Nat. Hist. Obf. for Microscope, 1829,pi. 1.) have figured the pupa of a species which they named E. marginal;but their figure of the Imago represents it as 2-winged and2-tailed, thus belonging to the genus Cloeon. The head of the pupa(Jiff. 61. 20.) Is small, scarcely more than half the breadth of themes; the antennae as long as the body, about 24-joInted; the terminaljoints being gradually elongated ; the legs long and slender, with2-jointed tarsi ; the five basal abdominal segments furnished on eachside with a pair of flattened membranous gills, each being very short(especially the basal one In each pair), the posterior one In each pairbeing of an elongated oval transverse form : the sixth abdominal segmenthas on each side a single larger gill ; the three apical setae arelong, multlartlculate, and finely setose ; the central setae (as the periodfor assuming the perfect state approaches) becomes more transparent; whereas the two exterior ones exhibit the two tails ofthe perfect insect Inclosed in them. This pupa feeds on minuteaquatic larvae, as well as on vegetables ; the rapidity of Its motions isastonishing, employing the six double paddle-like gills as oars, and forthe purpose of balancing Itself, and the posterior pair as paddles ;it likewise possesses the power of leaping or springing in the water toa considerable distance. I have observed these pupae to possess thepower of darting both forwards and backwards with equal rapidity.This Insect In Its earlier larva state (in which the thoracic and basalNEUROPTERA. — EPHEMERIDiE. 33abdominal segments are "of equal size) has formed the subject of avaluable paper upon the circulation of the blood, by Mr. Bowerbank.{Ent. Mag. vol. i. p. 239.)The larvae and pupa figured by Rose (Ins. Belust. torn. ii. tab. 12.f. 3, 4.) seem, at least so far as they can be determined from thefigures, to be similarly constructed to the pupa figured by Goring andPritchard; the head being of moderate size, and the anal filamentsdeeply fringed; but the imago (fig. 6.) is represented as possessingfour wings and two tails : so that either the genus Baetis, as even nowrestricted, must comprise several distinct types, or Rose must haveerred in giving four wings to his imago.The species which afforded Swammerdam materials for his admirablehistory of the Ephemera, abounds to an astonishing extent inthe rivers of Holland and Germany, and makes its appearance regularly,in swarms, at the mouths of the Rhine, Meuse,Wael, Leek, andSel, during three succeeding days, about the feast of Olophius andSt. John. It is considerably larger than E. vulgata, with four wingsand two long hairy tails ; and has been named E. Swammerdiana byLatreille, in honour of its historian. It clearly belongs, however, to adistinct genus ; its larva burrowing in the ground, with short broadlegs, and its head cornuted (see tab. xiv.) : the first abdominal segmentis not furnished with gills, but each of the six succeeding segmentshas a pair on each side ; the posterior in each pair being verysmall, and termed by Swammerdam rowing fins. The male pupadiffers from the female in the larger size of the head, and especiallyof the eyes.Reaumur (Memoires, tom. vi. Mem. xii. tab. 42 — 44.) has givennumerous details of a large species, which in several material respectsdiffers from any of the foregoing ; it has four wings, and three tails,which in the female are of equal length, but in the male the centralone is not half the length of the abdomen : the abdomen of the maleis armed at its extremity beneath with a pair of straight appendagesof considerable length, in addition to the pair of articulated forceps ;the resound meta-thoracic spiracles are of large size ; the femaledeposits her eggs in two long oval masses. The larva burrows inground at the sides of the rivers, and has short broad legs, the mandiblesare greatly elongated, curved, and armed along the under surfacewith two rows of small points, and an apparently articulated hook atthe tip ; and the gills are of an elongated kidney shape, narrowedVOL. II. D34 modern CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.towards the extremity with broad short cihae, and a large air-tuberunning down the centre of each ; the two plates on each side of thesegment are of nearly equal size. Reaumur has also represented(pi. 45.) another pupa, with simple head and long legs, and in whichthe gills form a large and broad plate, which is ordinarily folded so asto appear like two narrow plates. He has not described the imago ofthis species. In the following plate, he has figured two other kinds ofpupae, in one of which (whose imago is not given) the mandibles arevery broad, porrected, and dentated, and the gills formed as in thepupa of E. vulgata. The other species appears to be a Cloeon likeGoring and Pritchard's figure, but the gills of the pupa are representedlike those of E. vulsjata.The family LiBELLULioiE *, comprises an 'extensive and beautifulgroup of large-sized insects, well known under the common names ofBiBLIOGR. Refer. TO THE LlBELLULID^.Bartram. On the Dragon Fly of Pennsylvania, in Phil. Trans, vol. xlvi. 1750.Mailer. Enim. ac Descr. Libelll. Agi-i Friedrich. Nov. Act. Nat. Cur. torn. iii.1767.Vater Linden. Agriones Bononienses Descr. 4to. Bonnie;, 1820. — Dit4to, MidasBoon. Descr. 4to. Bon. 1820. — Dit4to, Monogr. Libelll. Europ Specie. 8vo.Brun. 1825. — Ditto, Notice sur une Empreinte d'Insecte.Hansemann, in Wiedemann, Zool. Mag. 2 band. (Europ. Agriones.)Van der Hoeven, in Ann. Sc. Nat. 1825. (Duration of Wings).Guerin. Mag. Zool. No. 15. (Agrion fulgipennis).Biulle, in Ann. Soc. Ent. France, 1833. (Mouth of Libels). — Ditto, in Expel.Silent, de Morea.Newman, in Entomological Magazine, vol. iv. and v.Rathke. De Libellularum Partibus Genitalibus. 4to. Regiment. 1 832.Fonscolomhe, in Ann. Soc. Ent. de France, 1837, 1838.Charpentier. Hora; EntomologicalLeach. Zoological Miscellany (Petalura).Latreille. Hist. Gen. Crust, et Ins. vol. xiii.Kirhy, in Linn. Trans, vol. xiv. (Agrion Brightwellii.)Harris. Exposition of English Insects.Eversmann. Libelll. Volga. Bull. Moscow, p. 239.De Sells Lonffchamps. Catal. des Lepidopt., and Tableau des Libelled. de la Belgique.Liege, 1837.Drurij, Savi(/ny (Egypt), Olivier (Enc. Meth.), Fabricius, Perth.t M. Charpentier has shown me a thick folio volume of drawings of the differentspecies of this family, of which he is preparing a monograph.NEUROPTERA. — LIBELLULIDiE.Fig. 62.horse singers and dragon flies, the first of which is founded upon avulgar error ; the second is more fancifully correct, as the insects, bothin their appearance and voracious habits, are certainly more entitledto the name of dragons than that of " demoiselles," as they are calledby the French. The body is very much elongated, narrow, and nearlylinear ; the head large, semiglobose, or transverse-subtrigonate ; thethorax thick and deep ; and the abdomen long, with inarticulate apicalappendages (fig. 62. i. Libellula Scotia) ; the antennae are short, andvery slender, with from five to eight joints, of which the two basalones are the thickest; the terminal ones being subulate (fig. 62. 7.);the eyes are very large, uniting on the top of the head (fig. 62. 2.head of L. depressa ; the figures 62. 2. to 13. represent details of thisspecies). The upper facets are of a larger size than the lower ; Mr.Ashton has communicated a memoir upon this structure of the eyes,in these and some other insects, to the Entomological Society. Theocelli are three, the two lateral ones placed at the sides, and the anteriorone in front of a vesicle on the forehead. The mouth is welldescribed by Latreille, as being <' larvatum," or masked ; the lips (especiallythe lower one) being of a large size, and the palpi not elongatedbeyond the mouth (^ Jig. 62. 2.) ; the upper lip is transverse, withthe angles rounded off; the mandibles fig. 62. 3.) are horny, very thickand powerful, and multidentate ; the maxillas (Jig 62. 4.) are moreelongated, dilated in the centre, armed with strong terminal teeth, anddestitute of an external lobe, the place of which is supplied by the maxillarypalpus, which is short, thick, and hirsute, apparently only shortlyarticulated at the base, and terminated by an acuminate point; the lowerlip fig. 62. 5.) is singularly constructed (the true labium, xx, arising iniEshna,from a distinctive( ^^. 62.14.x, which is obsolete in Libellula),D 236 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS-andconsisting of three lobes, of which the centre one is deeply cleft inAgrion * (fig. 62. 15.), but entire in ^^Lshna and Libellula xx ; the twolateral lobes are flat and horns, with an articulation at the base, andof a very large size in Libellula (fig. 62. 5.), meeting and slightlycrossing each other in front of the middle lobe ; at the inner anteriorangle of these lateral lobes is a small horny pointy accompanied, in7Eshna( ^<7. 62. 14.) and Agrion (fig. 62.15.), by a short inarticulateappendages Within the mouth, the lingua (^^. 62.6.), or the palatumof Latreille, appears distinctly of a large size, leathery, vesicular, andvillose. The prothorax is reduced to a very short and small piece ;whilst the resound metathorax (not the mesothorax alone, as statedby Latreille, Gen. Cr., vol. iii. p. LSO.), are large, sub cylindrical, verticallycompressed, and oblique ; the wings are large, of equal size,and exceedingly closely reticulated ; the anal angle of the posteriorpair being often acuminated in the males. Van der Hoeven has publisheda short note relative to the distinctions existing in the durationof the wings of i^shna, Libellula, and Linden, consisting of a smalltriangular space inclosed by strong nerves near the base of the forewings. A careful comparative examination of the nerves of the differentspecies will clearly prove its existence, not only in the forewings, but also in the posterior wings, of all the Libellulides, with thisdifference, that in the posterior wings, a supplemental piece, formingthe anal angle, is added, so that the cells, analogous to those of the analangle of the fore wings, are pushed out of place. When at rest, theyare either horizontally extended or carried erect over the abdomen ;the legs are short, slender, and armed with numerous slender spines ;the tarsi are 3-jointed, the basal joint being the smallest fig. 62. 8.) ;the abdomen is long, and either lanceolate-depressed, or subcylindrical,armed at its extremity with folioles or hooked appendages, variable inform,both in the sexes and species. In the males, the organs of geythis name I here move especially mean L. virgo, which is the true type ofAgrion Fab. ; although Leach injudiciously formed it into the genus Calepteryx,retaining Agrion for ether insects.t The singular construction of the labium renders the analogical investigation ofits parts very difficult : we may regard these three lobes as forming a trilobed ligula,in which case, however, the horny point at the internal angle of the lateral piecesmust be regarded as appendages, and not as palpi, as Latreille regarded them ( Gen,Crust., vol. iii. p. 1 80. ), because the labial palpi never arise from the extremity of thelateral loI)es of the ligula. In such case, perhaps the outer part of the maxilla wouldrather represent the galea, the palpi being obsolete. On the other hand, we may,with M. Brulle ann. Soc. Ent. de France, tom. ii. p. 343,), regard the outer lobesas enormously dilated labial palpi.NEUROPTERA. LIBELLULIU-T^ 37negation have been ordinarily described as of very complicated structure,and as occupying the under surface of the base of the abdomen.They have been described in detail by De Geer, Reaumur, and especiallyby Rathke. Burmeister, however (^ManualofEntomol.^^.llS.^,asserts that these organs are only those of excitement, and that thereal male organs are placed within the ninth * abdominal segment, inan aperture closed by two valves on the ventral surface of this segmentfig. 62.9.).These insects are distributed over all parts of the globe ; few, however,exceed in beauty or size the inhabitants of our own country ; apeculiarity common to other aquatic tribes.The elegant appearance of these insects on the wing ; their variedcolours, in some, of a rich blue (the beautiful blue damsel-flies" ofMoore); their delicate gauze-like wings, and their rapid flight, musthave attracted the attention of every one. During the hottest daysof summer they are to be observed darting backwards and forwards inthe air, especially in the neighbourhood, or over standing water, wherethey find an ample supply of food in the myriads of insects which arethere generated. The admirable adaptation of the form of the variousparts of the body, namely, the powerful structure of the mouth, largesize of the eyes and wings, and length of the rudder-like abdomen, hasbeen happily treated by Mr. Newman {Ent. Mag., volsci. p.67.). Thereis considerable diversity in the colours of the sexes of some of theseinsects, the males having the abdomen of a lead blue, whilst the femalesare rich yellow-brown. In some of the Agrionides, the males, whichfly over the water in swarms, are of a rich blue, with black wings,whilst the females are fine green, with colourless wings. (See alsoSchelver in Weidemann's Arch. ZooL, st. 2.) The partiality of theseinsects for various colours is noticed by Mr. Patterson {Ent. Trans ,vol. i. p. 82. app.).These insects live in the perfect state a considerable period. Inthe summer of 1833, I noticed, during several weeks, a solitaryspecimen of Ana formosa hawking over a small pond on WandsworthCommon ; and, from the rarity of the species, I have no doubtthat it was the same insect. Mr. Ingall has mentioned to me an instancein which a specimen, destitute of a head, and of which theIt is in the eighth, and not the ninth, abdominal segment that these valvesare placed. Burmeistcr's mistake has evidently originated in the apparent articulationof the basal segment.D 338 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.abdomen was suspended only by a small portion of membrane, flew to aconsiderable distance after a pin had been passed through the thoraxfor six hours.The pairing of these insects is effected in a singular manner ; themale seizing the neck of the female by means of the hooks at theextremity of the body, and thus for a time the two insects fly about inahne, at length, however, the female curves the body, sothat theunder side of its extremity is brought into contact with the organsplaced at the base of the abdomen of the male. Burmeister, however,asserts that these proceedings are but preliminary, and that copulationtakes place in the ordinary manner (and see Drury, vol. i. p. lit.2d edition).The female, after impregnation, deposits her eggs in the water, intowhich she intrudes the extremity of the abdomen so as to attachthem to the stalks of plants, 8cc. ; sometimes even, according to an accountwith which I have been favoured by Mr. Patterson, the femaleAgriones descend to a considerable depth below the surface. (SeeEnt. Trans., vol. i. p. 82. app.) I have observed these females, in theact of oviposition, beat their tails upon the surface of the water withrapid succession, until the eggs form a mass like a bunch of grapes.In their preparatory states, these insects reside in the water, andhave to a certain extent a resemblance with the imago. The body ismore or less elongated, according to its form in the perfect state i^jig'62. 10. pupa of L. depressa, fig. 62. 16. pupa of Agrion virgo) ; theeyes are of moderate size; the ocelli wanting; the antennae filiform(not setaceous, as in the imago), and 7-jointed fig. 62. x^.^fig. 62. 18.antenna, andy?. 62. 19. tarsus of pupa of Agrion virgo) ; the parts ofthe mouth are not dissimilar to those of the perfect insect *, with theexception of the lower lip, which is formed into a remarkable mask-likeelongated appendage, which completely shuts in the mouth, towhich, when unemployed, it is closely applied (as fig. 62. 10.) ; onextending it, however (as in fig. 62. ll. wndifig. 62. 12., seen from beneath),it is found to consist of, 1st, a basal piece (or cards) by which itis united to the under side of the head; 2ndly, an elongated piece dilatedin front, and concave beneath, so as to close upon the former ;In the pupa of L. depressa fig. 6% 10.), the labrum is transverse, with thelateral angles rounded off; the mandibles triangular, horny, with several small apicalteeth ; the maxillae are slender, with five acute apical teeth, and an inarticulatepalpus, of equal length with the maxillary lobe ; and the tongue distinct, as in theimago. The mandibles and maxilla; are much more strongly toothed in the pupaof the ^shna.NEUROPTERA. — LIBELLULID7E, 39and Sadly, a pair of transversely triangular pieces, toothed along the innermargin, and articulated at the outer angles of the preceding piece, soas to he capable of being widely opened. The use of this curious instrument,of which the insect has the power of opening and closing thevarious parts with the greatest facility, is to seize its prey, whichconsists of other aquatic insects, and even of small fishes (if/ay. Nat.Hist, No. 28.), which are immediately brought within reach of thejaws. The parts of which this organ is composed are analogous intheir general structure of the different groups, to those composing thelower lip of the imago ; thus, in Agrion virgo (^Jjg. 62. 15. labium ofimago, Jig. 62. 17. labium of pupa), the central piece is deeply notched,and the lateral pieces are terminated by four acute spines.* (See Brute,in Ann. Soc. Ent. de France, tom. ii. p. 343.) The basal part, bywhich this organ is attached to the head, appears to represent thementum, the following more elongated piece, the labium (ligula), andthe two terminal parts, the labial palpi. The sides of the resoundmeta-thorax are soldered together, and dilated into a large lateral plate.The mode of respiration in these insects during their preparatorystates is singular. The abdomen is terminated, in the larger species,with five corneous plate-like appendages of unequal size, and conicalform, three being much larger than the others, which the insect hasthe power of separating or bringing into contact, so as to form a pyramidaltail. On opening these pieces, a valve, previously closed bythree membranous plates, is opened, and a quantity of water passesinto the body, when they are closed ; shortly afterwards, however, thewater, from which the insect has extracted the oxygen by the assistanceof various internal organs communicating with the tracheae, isdischarged with considerable force to the distance of two or threeinches, by the action of an inclosed organ, which Reaumur calls " letampon." This discharge has the effect of giving a progressive motionto the body.In the ^shnas the pupa has the middle plate at the extremity of thebody truncated, and armed with two minute points. A memoir bySuckow, on the respiration in iEshna grandis, is noticed in the BulletinSci. Nat., June, 1829.In the genus Agrion (L. Puella), the mask of the larva "has a single projectionon the upper edge of the mentum ; In Lester a double projection exists ; and in (L. virgo) it has a triangular excision at the tip, terminating In two points.stephen's Brit. Ent.,\o\, vl. p. 78.)D 440 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.In the Agrionides the abdomen of the larvae and pupte are terminatedby three narrow elongated plates fig. 62. 19The preparatory states of these insects last for ten or eleven months ;during which, according to Latreille, the skin is cast several times (butDrury states that he had not observed this shedding of the skin).When nearly arrived at the period for assuming the perfect state, thewing-cases become detached from each other, and exhibit traces ofthe mesh-like appearance of the inclosed wings. The pupa creeps upthe stem of some aquatic plant or stone, when about to assume theimago state ; after a few hours remaining in this situation, it attachesitself as firmly as possible to the spot by means of its ungues, thebead being uppermost ; the skin of the thorax then slits, and the inclosedpupa gi-actually disengages itself, throwing its head backwards ;which position it retains for a considerable period, being retained inits situation by the terminal rings of the abdomen, which remain stillwithin the pupa skin ; it then gains an erect position, draws out theremainder of the abdomen, and remains stationary for an hour or two,until its pendant wings have assumed their full size and consistence.Rose has given figures of various species of Libellulte, i^shnte, andAgriones, in their different states {Ins. Belust., vol. ii. ; Ins, Aq.,tab. 2 — 11.) ; De Geer also (vol. ii.) ; Reaumur (memoires, vol. vi.) ;Lyonnet (Men. Posts., pi. 1 8.) ; Guerin (Icon. H. An. Insectes) ;Frisch (vol. i. pt. 8. pi. 8.); Svvammerdam (tab. 12.); and Drury(vol. L), have given figures and descriptions of the preparatory statesof various species of dragon flies.Fabricius formed these insects into a distinct class (order), namedSonata.Dr. Leach has divided them into two families ; but it appears tometo be more natural to consider them constituting one family, correspondingwith the Linneean genus, divisible into two sublimities.The exotic species do not offer any material peculiarities, if we exceptsome species of tropical Agrionides, which have the abdomen nearlysix inches long, and very slender and cylindric.Dr. Leach also, many years ago, divided these insects into several additionalgenera, which have not been adopted by foreign writers; but Ihave little doubt that corresponding characters would be found to distinguishthe genera of Libe]lulides,in the preparatory stages, as well markedas those which I have noticed above in the genera of Agrionides.NEUROPTERA.MYRMELEONIDiE.The family Myrmeleonid^^ * comprises a considerable numberof large and handsome insects, none of which are ascertained to benatives of this country, and which are known, in their larva state,under the name of ant-lions (formations). The body of the perfectinsect [fig. 63.1. Myrmeleon formicarium, natural size,^y. 63. l — 19.Fig, 63.represent details of this species) is long and slender ; the bead small,with prominent lateral eyes, and destitute of ocelli ; the antennaelonger than the head, multi articulate, and thickened at the tip (fig.63. 2.) ; the upper lip is rounded at the sides, and attached to thehead by a distinct clypeus ; the mandibles (fig' 63. 3.) are horny,curved to the tip, with a strong tooth below the internal apex ;the maxillae fig. 63. 4.) are elongated and bilobed ; the inner onecompressed and ciliated ; the external lobe or galea articulated ;the maxillary palpi slender, short, and 5-jointed ; the labium {^fig.63. .5.) is large and square, arising from a narrowed mentum, andfurnished with a pair of very long labial palpi, arising from the baseBiBHooR. Refer, to the MyRMELEONiDiE.Percheron, Larva of Myrmeleon, in Guerlii Mag. Zool., pi. 59.Poupart. Hist. Formicaleo, Acad. Reg. Paris, 1704.Latreille. Genera Crust., &e., vol. iii. p. 191.Westwood, in Drury, new edition. (Eruption.)Klug. SymboL-c Physica; (many sp. of Myrmeleon figured).Guilding. Generic Char, of Formicaleo, with two new sp. in Linn. Trans., vol. xvi.Ditto, on Ascalaphus, in ditto, vol. xiv.Schaeffer, on Ascalaphus, 4to. Regent. 17G3, and in his Abhandl., 2 band.A. Blanchard. Note sur 1' Ascalaph. Italic, in Bull, d' Hist, Nat. Soe. Linn. Bordeaux,No. 1 .Angelina (in Bibliotheca Ital., torn, xlvii. ) Ascalafi Italian con Nova Specie,Newman, in Ent. Mag., No. 24. (Stilbopteryx.)Drury, CJiarpentler, Fahricius, Donovan, §'c.42 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.of the labium, and 3-jointed ; the basal joint being very short, andthe Other two of equal length, being nearly as long as the antennae ;the internal lingua is distinct and membranous ; the prothorax issmaller than the head, and transverse ; the two other segments forman oval mass ; the wings are large, and densely reticulated, and oftencoloured, with a strong vein, which is furcate at about one fifth ofthe length of the wing from the base ; they are of nearly equal size,and are deflexed at the sides of the body when at rest ; the posteriorpair not being folded ; the legs are of mode-ate size, with5-jointed tarsi ( ^^. 63. 6.); the abdomen is very long and cylindric,often terminated by a pair of long slender inarticulated appendages.These beautiful insects, in the delicate reticulation of their wings,vie with the dragon flies, whilst their habits render them equallyinteresting ; it is, however, in their larva state, that they have attractedthe greatest share of attention, as in the perfect state theyfly but little, keeping during the day amongst the leaves of treesand plants, and coming abroad only at dusk ; indeed, Mr. Guildingstates that after a long-continued search he never found a singleimago in a state of liberty, although the larvae swarmed in St. Vincent's,so successfully are they secured from every enemy by theirpeculiar mode of resting, and the favourable colour of their bodies.The larva * is of form totally unlike the imago, being short, thick,and fleshy (^^.63.9.); the sides furnished with numerous bundlesof short rigid hairs ; the head and prothorax narrow ; and the resoundmeta-thorax and abdomen forming a very large oval mass, so asto bear a considerable resemblance to a spider ; the head is oblong,with six tubercular eyes on a short footstalk fig' 63. 13.) on each side ;the head is attached to the prothorax by membrane capable of greatdistention and motion ; the antennae aise very short, slender, and mulearising from a thickened base fig. 63, 14.); the mandiblesare longer than the head, very slender, and curved, forming apair of toothed slippers, wherewith the insect seizes its prey. On theunder side they are grooved, and within this groove the maxillae, whichare still more slender, are placed, and in which they play backwardsand forwards ; there appear to be no rudiments of maxillary palpi ;the lower lip is short, and furnished with a pair of 4-jointed palpi, ofwhich the basal joint is large and ovate, and the three terminal jointsslender [fig. 63. lo. represents the under side of the head of the larva,Donovan nat. Misc., pi. 139.) has described the larva as an apterous female.NEUROPTERA. — MYRMELEONID^. 43a being the labial palpus, d- the mandible, and c the maxilla insitu; and ^^. 63.11. represents the maxilla partially, and y?j7. 63. 12.entirely, extracted from its groove in the mandible); the legs are longand slender, the two anterior pair being directed forwards ; but theposterior pair are shorter and stronger (^fig- 63. 15.), so affixed to thebody that they are not able to assist in progression, but are constantlyemployed in drawing the insect backwards, which is, in fact, its onlymotion ; the ungues being much stronger than in the anterior legs ;and the tarsus {Jig- 63. 15. e.) soldered to the tibia fig. 63.15. d.),whereby greater power is given the limb.* This peculiarity has notbeen previously noticed. This formation, together with its slowmovements and its carnivorous habits, renders the construction of asnare necessary for the support of the insect. Some larvae of thecommon species, M. formidable, which I brought alive to this countryfrom France, afforded me ample opportunities for watching their proceedings; and of which I have published a notice in Mag. Nat. Hist.,Nov. 1838. It is in very fine sand that the larva makes its pitfall.When placed upon the surface, it bends down the extremity of thebody (as in fig. 63. 8.), and then pushing, or rather dragging, itselfbackwards by the assistance of its hind legs, but more particularly ofthe deflexed extremity of its body f ; it gradually insinuates itselfinto, and beneath the sand, constantly throwing off the particles whichfall upon, or which it shovels with its jaws or legs upon its head, bysuddenly jerking them backwards,Opaque post tergum magna; cantata parentis."Proceeding in this manner, in a spiral direction, it gradually diminishesthe diameter of its path, and by degrees throws so much ofthe sand away, as to form a conical pit, at the bottom of whichit then conceals itself, its mandibles widely extended, being theonly parts that appear above the surface ^ fig' 63. 7. a small pitfall); with these, any luckless insect that may happen to fall down thehole is immediately seized and killed. When the fluids of the victimare exhausted, the ant lion, by a sudden jerk, throws the dry carcassIn the fore leg the tarsus is articulated (fig. 63. 9. e.)\ Reaumur states that it is able to creep almost as well when its legs are all cutoffas when present, the abdomen being the chief means by which its motions areeffected, •:j: Mr. Guilding states that those larva? which dig pitfalls are furnished withantennae (above described), which are held erect, and are doubtless useful in indicatingthe approach of their prey by the falling of the sand ; in the larvae of theAscalaphi they are wanting or obscure.441 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.out of the hole ; should, however, the bisect by chance escape themurderous jaws of its enemy, the latter immediately commencesthrowing up the sand, whereby, not only is the hole made deeper, andits sides steeper, but the escaping insect is probably hit, and againbrought down to the bottom of the pit. It is chiefly upon ants andother soft bodied insects that these larvas feed. They are, however,capable of undergoing long fasts ; for one of my larvae remained fromOctober till March without food. It has been supposed that, as thefood of these larvae consists entirely of juices, and as they appear tobe destitute of anal aperture, the whole of their food is assimilated.M. L, Dufour has, however, traced the intestinal canal terminating inan anus, which is, indeed, very difficult to discover. (A?i7i. Soc. Ent.de France, tom. ii. p. 67. app.) Latreille states that these larvae areproduced in the summer or autumn, and become pupae in the'followingspring. I found the larvae of all sizes in July, one of which became apupa, and assumed the perfect state ; whilst another, of equal size, remainedthrough the winter in the larva state. Previous to assumingthe pupa state, the larva forms a globular cocoon of less than half aninch in diameter (fig. 63. 17.) of fine sand, glued with silken threadsspun from a slender telescopic-like spinneret, placed at the extremityof its body fig. 63. 16.), and lined with fine silk. The pupa * (fig.63. 18.) is small, not being half an inch long, inactive, and with all thelimbs laid at rest upon the breast. When ready to assume the perfectstate, it uses its mandibles (^^r. 63.19.), which are quite unlike those ofthe larva and imago, and which haven't been before described-]-, to gnawa hole through the cocoon, and pushes itself partly through the aperture,in which it leaves the pupa skin i^Jig. 63. 17.). Immediately on assumingthe perfect state, the abdomen is almost immediately extendedto nearly three times its previous length. Rose (^Ins, BelusL, t. iii. t.l7 —21.) ; Reaumur (memoires, tom. vi. pi. 32 — 34.) ; Percheron ( GuerinMag.ZooL, p.59.); Disderi {\nTurmTrcms., tom. iii.) ; Bonnet (Observe.Mr. Culling observes of Formicaleo (a genus separated by Leach from IMyr-melon), " Nympba dum note declarator, acetabulum elongated mittens," and in asubsequent page he seems to regard the acetabulum as analogous to the meconiumof many animals, noticing also its chemical composition. Reaumur has also noticedit. (Mem., tom. vi. p. 372.)f Reaumur states that it is after the insect has become an imago that it gnaws ahole through the cocoon and escapes ; but, as the pupa skin is found half protrudedthrough the orifice, it is clear that it is whilst a pupa that this opening is made :indeed, this is the only use the pupa has for its mandibles.NEUROPTERA. MYRMELEONID^. 45diverses sur les Lis., torn, ii), have given numerous details, and i interestingaccounts of the habits and structure of this larva.Bonnet discovered in the environs of Geneva, specimens of a larvawhich differed from the common one, in not crawling backwards, butforwards, with the head raised, and in not forming a pitfall ; the bodyis considerably longer, and more pointed, and the hind legs affixed soas not to be so completely concealed beneath the body. (bonnet, op.cit. p. 282.; and Reaumur, tom, vi. p. 377.) Latreille thinks it probablethat this larva belonged to a species of Ascalaphus, rather than toMyrmeleon ; but, from the account given by Mr. Guilding of thepreparatory states of the former of those genera, this is evidentlynot the case. It appears rather to be the larva of M. Libelluloides,or an allied species, agreeing in some respects with the larva ofthat insect described by tonics in the Entomol. Magazine, vol. iii.p. 461., and which he states generally feeds upon heteromerous beetles,lurking underground in the sand, without making a pit.M. Percheron has figured a larva with details, which he gives as thatof M. Libelluloides, but it does not accord with the description of tonics.Guilding's account of the economy of a species allied to M.Libelluloides (the type of Leach's subgenus Formicaleo), does notmaterially differ from that of M. formicarium.The genus Ascalaphus Fahr. is remarkable for the peculiar structureof its antennae, which are very long and knobbed, like those of abutterfly (y%. 63. 21. ), whence Scopoli and others described one of theseinsects as a Papilio. Mr. Guilding states that his species A, Macleansits quietly during the day upon dry twigs, and with its abdomenat an angle so as to resemble a twig, and thus deceive its enemies.The eggs, from sixty-four to seventy-five in number, are deposited atthe extremity of the twigs in a double row, and defended from theirenemies by "circles multi repagulorum." These repagula are consideredto be without analogies in the animal creation ; they areelongata, peduncvilata, subdiaphana, rufescentia;" they are expelledfrom the ovary by the female with as much care as though they werereal eggs, and are so placed that nothing can approach the brood ; norcan the young ramble abroad till they have acquired strength to resistthe ants and other insect enemies. The abdomen of the larva is depressedand oval, with ten pectinations on each side ; all the legs aresensorial — " Larva segnis, corpus picturesque arenulis tenens, Sub lateribus recondite prcedam expectant." (^Linn.Trans.,MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.vol. XV. p. 511.) The figures which L. Guilding sent to the LinnaeanSociety, in illustration of the history of this curious insect, were notpublished. I am able, however, to give a figure (63. 20.) of a larvacontained in the collection of the Rev. F. W. Hope, which is evidentlythat of an Ascalaphus. The head is very flat, deeply emarginate behind,and the sides of the body are furnished with twelve setose appendageson each side.The family HEMEROBiiDiE * (Hemerobidee Leach) is composed ofinsects nearly allied to the preceding, but having a shorter and moredelicate body, broader wings, and long filiform and multiarticulateantennae (Jrg.Gi.i. Chrysopa perla). The head is small; the eyesprominent, rounded (Jiff, 64'. 2.), and often splendid golden-colouredFiff. 64.9^^ 1 ^. \\.„ (Yfii/ Vduring life ; the ocelli are mostly obsolete, but they exist (three innumber) in Osmylus ; the mouth is powerfully organised ; the upperlip large, and rounded at the anterior angles; the jaws (Jiff. 64. 3.)horny and acute, with a tooth below the centre ; the maxilla (Jiff.64. 4.) long, with the inner lobe broad and ciliated, and with a broad,compressed, hirsute external lobe ; the lower lip (Jiff. 64. 5.) is entireand rounded, arising from a distinct leathery mentum ; the prothoraxBiBLioGR. Refer, to the Hemerobiida^.Leach. Zool. Miscall., vol. i. p. 45. (Nymphes. )Newman, in Ent. Mag. No. 22. (Ithone ) — Ditto, No. 24. (Drepaneptoryx, newspecies, &c.)Bowerhank, Circulation in Wing of Hcmerobius, Ent. Mag. No. 17.Griffith. An. Kingdom Ins., pi. 72.Savigiti/ (Egypt), Curtis, Stephens, Fabricius.NEUROPTERA. — HEMEROBIIDjE. 47forms a distinct piece, narrower than the head and mess-thorax ; theabdomen is of moderate length, curved, and not furnished with terminalfilaments ; the wings large, deflexed at the sides of the bodyduring rest, and much reticulated ; the posterior being rather smallerthan the anterior, and not folded ; the legs are simple and slender,with 5-jointed tarsi, terminated by two claws and a pulvillus (Jiff. 64^.6.).These insects are of a small, or but moderate size, and appear to bechiefly inhabitants of temperate climes. The exceeding brilliancyof the eyes of some species, resembling polished gold, and the verydelicate structure of the wings, which reflect the prismatic colours, areespecially worthy of notice. They emit, however, a very disagreeableodour when handled: they fly generally during the twilight, remaininginactive during the day. In their motions they are very sluggish.The females deposit their eggs upon plants, attaching them at theextremity of a long slender and stiff footstalk, of a white colour, thebase of which is fastened to the leaf (Jiff' 64. 7.). This filament iscomposed of a viscid matter, discharged by the female at the time oflaying her egg, which very quickly hardens on exposure to the air.In this manner they are fixed in small clusters, and have all the appearanceof minute fungi. It has been suggested that it is for thepurpose of protecting them from the attacks of parasites that this proceedingis adopted. The larvae hatched from these eggs are veryvoracious, feeding upon Aphides ; and thus, in conjunction with thelarvae of the Coccinellidte and Syrphidae, they are very serviceable to theagriculturist. Unlike the ant lion, these aphis-lions, as Reaumur hastermed them, are wanderers, seeking their prey where it is to befound in the greatest abundance. The body (Jiff. 64. 8.) is long anddepressed, with the segments very distinct, and gradually narrowedto the extremity of the body ; the head of moderate size, and armedwith long curved mandibles, wherewith the insect seizes and sucks itsprey. No description of the mouth of these larvae has hitherto beengiven, Reaumur merely stating that the mandibles are hollow, forsuction. Such is not, however, the case ; the under side of theseorgans is deeply grooved, and the maxillae, which are nearly equal tothem in size, and of a similar form, play in this groove ; there are nomaxillary palpi; — the labial palpi are long, porrected, and apparently3-jointed ; the antennae are also long and filiform, but I cannot clearlyperceive any articulations [Jiff 64.9. under side of front of head oflarva). So ravenous are these larvae that it does not require more thanhalf a minute for them to suck one of the largest Aphides. They will48 Modern CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.also attack each other, the conqueror in like manner sucking the bodyof the vanquished. The head is capable of very considerable movements,owing to the flexibility of the neck. During the summer, it does notrequire more than fifteen days for them to arrive at their full growth.They assume the pupa state immediately after finishing their cocoon,in which they remain, as inactive pupos, during the winter. M. Audouinhas informed me that the manner in which the imago makes its escapefrom its cocoon is not by a head-piece scaling off, but by a slit at oneend of the cocoon being continued in a spiral direction, forming a narrowedand elastic slip. See also Reaumur (loc.cit.) ; Sowerby (BritishMiscellany, pi. 66. larva of Hemerobius — ?); Haworth, in Ent. Trans.,p. 62. ; Disderi (in Turin Trans., vol. iii.) ; Albin (pi. 64'.) ; Goddard(No. 104.) ; De Geer (in Der Naturforscher, torn. iii. t. 3.).The perfect insect of Chrysopa perla has afforded to Mr. Bowerbankthe subject of a valuable paper on the circulation of the blood ofinsects (^Entomol. Mag., vol. iv. p. 178. ; and see Tyrrel in Proceedingsof Royal Society).M. Rambur has shown me specimens of two species of a new genusof this family, captured by him in Andalusia, in which the antennae arestrongly bipectinated.Reaumur {{Mem., tom. iii. pi. 32, 33.) has represented four differentkinds of larvae belonging to this family ; but, unfortunately, it is impossibleto ascertain what are the species to which they respectivelybelong, with the exception of one, which is evidently that ofChrysopa perla. In one of these larvae the sides of the segmentsare furnished with short bundles of hairs *, of which the others aredestitute. One of these is naked, and of an elongated depressedfoi'm (likes. 64. 8.) ; whilst another is equally naked, but much moreconvex, employing the extremity of the body as a seventh leg, andhaving the segments more continuous. The larva of Chrysopa perlais also convex, but it covers itself with the carcasses of its victims,which gives it a most ludicrous appearance, and at the same timerenders it almost invisible amongst lichens, Sc. When full-fed theselarvae inclose themselves in globular or oval cocoons of silk, spunfrom the spinneret, at the extremity of the body, and which in somespecies are exactly like open network. Compared with the perfect,insect, the small size of the cocoon and pupa appears extraordinary,Frisch represents the larva of C. perla as furnished with fascicles (vol. i. st. 3.fig. 23.).NEUROPTERA. — HEMEROBIID^. 49the cocoon not being larger than a small pea, whilst the imago isnearly an inch long.F. Stein has described the pupa state of Osmylus maculatus (thelargest British species of the family), which is found in damp earthin the banks of ditches ; when preparing to undergo its final transformation,it quits its abode, and creeps up the stems of grass.(Weimar's Arch., vol. iv. p. 332.).A singular genus of minute species, which I first described underthe name of Consorts {Jiff- 65. l. C. tineiformis), proceed. Trans.Ent. Soc, July 1834; subsequently figured by Curtis under the nameof Coniopteryx, Brit. Ent., 528. December, 1834, and by VVesmaelunder that of Malacomyza), appears to me, although placed by Curtisand Stephens in the family Psocidae, to belong to the Hemerobiidae,with which it agrees in its head fig. 65. 2.) ; 5-jointed tarsi fig.65. 7.) ; multi-articulate antennae ; labrum fig. 65. s.); mandibles fig.65. 4.) ; and maxillae fig. 65. 5.). It differs, however, in the slightreticulation of the wings ; their white mealy covering (exhibiting noappearance of cilite, hair, or scales) ; the large size of the terminaljoint of the labial palpi; the obsolete labium (ligula) [Jig. 65. 6.);the absence of tibial spurs ; and the smaller size of the posteriorwings. The species sit with the wings deflexed, and feign death bybending their antennae vmder the body. Mr. Curtis has figured asingular larva fig. 65. 8.) belonging to this genus, communicatedby Mr. Haliday, who thinks it is probably aphidivorous, and entertainsno doubt that it is the larva of C. tineiformis. He sap's itsgeneral character is closely allied to the larva of Hemerobius, butthe structure of the head appears to me to be very different. The followingnote has been since kindly communicated to me by the lattergentleman. " Coniopteryx tineiformis, when preparing for transformation,spins an orbicular pouch of fine white silk of close texturegenerally on the trunk of a tree, in chinks of the bark, or among moss.The pupa is quiescent fig. 70. i.) "The family Sialid.^ * Leach consists of a few species of moderateor large size fig. 64. lO. — 22. Salis lutaria, and details), constitutingBiBLioGR. Refer, to the Sialid^b.Sucltow, in Zeitschr. fur die Organ. Phys., torn. ii. No. 3.Pictet, in Ann. Sci. Nat., second series, torn. v.VOL. II. E50 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.the tribe Megaloptera (Latr., Nouv. Diet, d' Hist. Nat. Tail. Meth.).They are distinguished by the larger size of the quadrate prothorax ;the palpi are short and filiform, the last joint not being larger thanthe preceding; the head of moderate size fig. 6'^. 11.) ; the labrumis cleft in the centre {fig- 64. 12.) ; the jaws horny, with a singlesharp apical tooth (fig. 64. 13.) ; the maxillae are terminated by twominute lobes; the maxillary palpi in Salis are 4-jointed (Jig. 6^. 14.);the labium is large, with reflexed 3-jointed labial palpi, the true labium(ligula) not extending beyond the palpi, but internally dilated (Jig.64.15.) ; the anterior wings are of large size, either deflexed at the sides(Salis), or carried nearly horizontally (Corydalis, &c.), the posteriorpair are rather smaller than the anterior ; the antennae are long, filiform,and multi-articulate ; and the tarsi are 5-jointed, either with thejoints simple, or with the fourth joint lobed beneath (Sialis,,^^. 64. 16.)The cell are absent in Salis, but they exist of a large size in Corydalis.These insects are very slow and inactive in their movements ;they frequent the neighbourhood of water, in which they pass thelarva state. The ordinary species (Salis lutaria Linn), is a well-knownbait with the angler, being produced in the spring months ingreat quantities. It is of a dull brown colour, and may be found uponwalls or palings near the water. The female deposits an immensequantity of eggs, which she attaches one by one to rushes or otheraquatic plants ; they are of a cylindrical form, terminating at the topin a sudden point ; they are attached together side by side with thegreatest regularity (Jig. 6^. 17.). The larva (Jig. 64. 18.) inhabits thewater, in which it swims well by the assistance of seven (LaurelledGeer, and my specimens, or eight, according to Pictet) pairsof slender 4- (5- ?) articulated setose filaments, attached at the sidesof the abdominal segments, representing the false gills of the larvae ofEphemeral, with which they are evidently analogous in their respiratoryaction.* The abdomen is terminated by a long and slenderGray, in Griffith An. Kingd., pi. 72.De Geer. Memoires, torn. iii. tab. 27.Palisot Beauvois. Europe., pi. 1.Drury. Exotic Entomology, vol. i. pi. 46.Newman. Entomol. Mag., No. 25.M. Pictet notices the curious fact, that one of these larvae lived fifteen days inthe earth before it changed to a pupa, being the only instance of an insect furnishedwith external respiratory organs respiring the ordinary atmospheric air.NEUROPTERA. — SIALIDjE. 51setose tall ; the legs are of moderate length, and terminated by twoclaws ; the head is scaly, and furnished with eyes and antennae. Themouth of the larva consists of an angular upper lip ; a pair of strongmandibles, armed with two teeth at the middle of the inner margin(^^.64.19.); the maxilla are curved, and furnished with a kind ofbifid palpus, according to Pictet ; but more properly consisting of twolobes, the inner acute, curved, and armed with three strong spines ;the outer lobe has its inner angle produced into a point ; the maxillarypalpus consisting of four joints {^fig- Gi. 20.) ; the labium, with itsshort 3-jointed palpi are represented in /?j7. 64. 21. ; the above figuresbeing the first which have yet been published of the details of thecurious mouth of this insect either in the larva or perfect state. Theantennae are setaceous, and 4-articulated ; the three thoracic segmentsare of nearly equal size ; the tenth abdominal lobe constitutesthe setose tail. When full grown, this larva quits the water, and burrowsinto the adjoining bank, in which it forms a cell, wherein it istransformed into an inactive pupa (^^. 64. 22.), with the limbs laidalong the breast ; it is, however, very lively, twisting its tail aboutwhen disturbed. The insect assumes its perfect form in its cell CDeGeer, Memoires, tom. ii. p. 716. ; Rose, Ins., torn. ii. class 2.; Ins.Aq., tab. 13. ; Pictet and Suckow, hoc. cit. supra ; Frisch, torn. i. pt. 8.tab. 14.).The family comprises two distinct subfamilies: — 1st, the Slides,described above ; and 2d, the Corydalides, having the tarsi simple,three ocelli, and the wings carried nearly horizontally when at rest.The latter insects appear to form a link between Hemerobius andPerla. Latreille considers Corydalis as allied to Raphidia (gen. Cr.,tom. iii. p. 199.). They are of large size, and often handsomely variegated; they are chiefly if not exclusively, inhabitants of NorthAmerica. The largest of these (Corydalis cornua Latr.) is distinguishedby the immense size of the mandibles in one sex. De Geer'sfigure 2. pi. 27. tom. iii., evidently represents the head of the female.Chalices is distinguished by the strongly pectinated antennae.There are several other undescribed genera belonging to this section,to which also belongs a species figured in Griffith's An. Kingd. his.,pi. 72., under the name of Chalices maculipennis G. R. Gray ; butpreviously described by Say.E 2MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.The family Fat^orpidje* Leach is at once distinguished by the frontof the head being produced into an elongated slender deflexed rostrumFiff. 65.(Jrff.65. 10. 11.), at the extremity of which the parts of the mouthare inserted. The body is moderately long and slender (^ Jig. 65. 9.Panorpa communis ^ ) ; the head is'vertical, and not broader than thefront of the thorax; the eyes prominent and semiglobose (Jif/. 65.10.) ; the antennae long, slender, and multi-articulate ; the clypeus isacuminated at the tip, leaving the sides of the leathery ciliated labrumexposed (Jl(/. 65. 12.) ; the mandibles are very small, narrow, toothedat the tip (Jiff. 65. 13.) ; the lower jaws and lower lip are elongated,the basal parts of the former being soldered together, so as to formthe under side of the rostrum (Jff. 65. li.) ; the maxillae are bilobedat the extremity (j^^. 65. 14,), membranous, and pilose ; the maxillarypalpi 5-jointed ; the lower lip is inserted upon the united base of themaxillae (Jff. 65, ll), it is narrowed in front, and does not extendbeyond the base of the labial palpi, which have been described as only2 or 3-jointed. I have represented them, in Jiff. 65. 15., as they appearunder a strong lens, in a dried specimen. The prothorax formsBiBnoGR. Refer, to the PANOEPiDiE.Linnaeus, in Trans. John. 1747. s. 176.Swederus, in Trans. Holm. 1787.Westwood, in Trans. Ent. Soc, vol. i. p. 75. app. (3 sp. of Neuroptera. )Klug. Monograph. Panorpida;, in Trans. Acad. Berlin, 1836. (See Ann. Soc. Ent.France, 1836, p. 75. app.)Newman, in Ent. Mag., No. 22. (Merope.)Pictet, in Mem. Soc. d' Hist. Nat. Geneve, torn. vii. p. 403.Warwick, in Linn. Trans., vol. xiv. ( Panorpa furcata. )Stephens, Curtis, Fabricius, Tlmnherg (2 sp. Panorpa.)NEUROPTERA. PANORPIDiE. 53a very short narrow collar ; the mesothorax is large ; the wings are ofmoderate and equal size, numerously reticulated, the posterior notbeing folded when at rest. The legs are long and slender ; the tarsi5-jointed, simple, with two tibial spurs, and denticulated ungues, anda large pulvillus (fig. 65. 16.).The type of this family is the Panorpa communis Linn., from whichthe leading characters given above are chiefly drawn. It is a very abundantspecies, known under the ordinary name of the scorpion-fly, fromthe singular apparatus with which the extremity of the body of the males{.fiy- 65. 9.) is armed. In this sex the sixth and seventh abdominalsegments are slender, and somewhat recurved ; and the eighth segmentis greatly thickened, forming an oval mass, armed with a pair of forceps.In the female the terminal segments are attenuated, and furnishedat the tip with a pair of very minute 3-jointed filaments(^5'' 65. 17.). These insects, as far as hitherto observed, feed uponother insects in the perfect state. They are very active, and the elongatedabdomen is capable of great motion in every direction, as wellas considerable elongation, evidently enabling the female to deposither eggs in deep holes or crevices. They are generally found inhedges, and amongst herbage, in damp situations. Of the larva stateof these insects, no observation has been hitherto recoil-ded. M.Macquart gave a description of the pupa of the common species inthe Annales Sci. Nat. 1831, tom.xxii. p. 463., without, however, beingable to state any thing of its habits, or whether it was quiescent oractive ; he thought it, however, most probable to be active, because itwas provided with limbs proper for motion ; its structure, however,clearly showed it not to be aquatic in this state. F. Stein has, moreover,published a figure of the pupa fig. 65. 18.) of the female (as isevident from the structure of the abdomen, although he calls it themale) of P. communis, which he found at the depth of an inch inmoist earth, at the foot of an alder stump. From this figure it is evidentthat it is inactive in this state, the limbs being laid along thebreast, and the antennae along the sides ; the head is much lesselongated than in the imago fig. 65. 19.) (Wiegmann's Arch., vol. iv.331.).The other English genus Boreus Latr. (Ateleptera Hoffmmis),forming the family Boreas Sfejj/i. and the osculant 'order RaphiopteraMacL. force Ent., 439.), comprises a single species of minute sizeand singular structure, agreeing with Panorpa in the general structureE 354> MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.of the mouth, but remarkably differing in the apterous condition ofthe female, and the style-like form of the wings of the male. Theabdomen of the female is terminated by a 3-jointed ovipositor, theunder side of which is defended by a produced valve-like bilobed plate,arising from the under side of the seventh segment (Jig. 65. 22.),The male (frontispiece, vol. i. Ji(/. 3.), has the abdomen (^g.65. 2o.)terminated by two short, recurved, attenuated, pilose styles (Jeff. 65.21.). The antennae are 23-jointed. This genus differs from all theothers in the family by the large size of the prothorax, and the wantof ocelli. The period for the appearance of these insects in the perfectstate is in the middle of winter. Dalman observes that thosefound in autumn in moss are pale-coloured and immature, and thatthe dark-coloured mature ones are to be found on the surface of snow.Stephens states that it has been found in England under moss andstones, at the same period.The exotic genus Bittacus Latr., in the structure of its mouth andthorax, and possession of ocelli, is closely allied to Panorpa ; but itsgeneral appearance is that of a large Tipula, resulting from the greatlength of the legs and wings, which are carried horizontally in repose.The abdomen is alike in both sexes, and the tarsi are terminated by*a single unguis. Dr. Klug describes eleven species of this curiousand widely distributed genus.The genus Merope Newmm. {Ent. Mag., No. 22.), from North America,is certainly referable to this family ; agreeing with Panorpa inthe essential structure of the mouth ; but the ocelli are wanting; theeyes reniform ; the antennae thickened in the middle ; and the prothoraxenlarged. The specimen described by Mr. Newman is a female,and has the abdomen terminated as in the female Panorpa ; the internalbase of the fore wings is furnished with a small incrassated lobe.Neuroptera Latr. comprises some of the most singularly formedspecies in the order, peculiar to Africa and Western Asia, Portugal,&c., having the wings extended when at rest, the posterior pair beingseveral times longer than the entire body, and linear; the ocelli arewanting; and the structure of the mouth (represented in detail in thegreat work on Egypt) is very different from that of Panorpa, approachingmuch nearer in the articulation of the maxilla and developedligula, to the Hemerobiidae ; indeed. Dr. Klug has removed it fromthis family in his monograph. Olivier, who observed them in theLevant, states that their flight is slow and heavy, so that they areNeuroptera. RAPHIDIIDiE. 55caught without difficulty. They appear in great numbers, and livebut a very short time. The Rev. F. W. Hope possesses a singularmonstrosity occurring in a specimen of N. coa, in which one of theanterior wings is partially undeveloped.*It is in this place that I may notice a singular insect, figured byP. Roux in the Annales Set. Nat., torn, xxviii. pi. 7., under thename of Necrophilus arenarius (Jjff'66. i.) ; but which appears tometo be a Neuropterous larva, exhibiting considerable affinity withthe larvae of the Hemerobiidae. If the relation of the Tempterswith that family be proved, is it possible that this may be the larva ofthat genus ? The body is oval, with a slender linear neck, longer thanthe entire body ; small head ; long sickle-shaped mandibles ; two an-tenure,and six long simple legs. From its size it might either producea Neuroptera, Bittacus, or Panorpa.The family RAPHiDiiDiE f Leach, consisting of the single genusRaphidia Lit., is a singular little group, distinguished by the elongatedneck-like prothorax, flattened head, and simple forelegs as well as by theelongated ovipositor of the female (Jiff. 66. 2. Raphidia ophiopsis $ ).The head {^ff. 66. 3. under side of head) is oval and flattened, broaderthan the prothorax, with prominent eyes placed at the front of the sidesof the head ; the ocelli, three in number (but wanting in R. crassicor-nis), are placed between the eyes ; the antennae are slender, filiform, andSee for descriptions of species Olivier, Encircle. Meath. ,• Leach, in Zool. Misc.,vol. ii. ; Ahrens, Fauna, fasc. 2. ; Savigny, Descr. de V Egrjpte ; King, Monoyr.Panorp. (12 species); Westwood, in Trans. Ent. Soc.,\o\. i. p. 75. App.f BiBLioGR. Refer, to the Raphidiid^.Latreille, Obs. Raphidia Ophiopsis (with fig. of larva), Bull. Soc. Phil. 1798.No. 20. A. 7. p. 153.Schummel. Versuch ein gen. beschreib. — der getting Raphidia. Breslau, 1 832,1 pi. 8vo. pp. 16.Percheron, in Guerin's Mag. Zool. Ins., pi. 66.Waterhouse, in Trans. Ent. Soc. London, vol. i.Stein, in Weigmann's Archiv. fUr Nature., torn. iv. pi. 7.Stephens, Curtis, Schaffer, Panzer, Illiffer (Rossi Faun. Etrusc. ).E 4>MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Fiff. 66.multi-articulate ; the labrum small and quadrate, arising from a distinctleathery cljpeus ; the mandibles powerful, curved, and strongly toothed{^ff- 66. 3.) ; the maxillae are terminated by two lobes strongly pilose ;the palpi short, filiform, and 5-jointed, the basal joint being very minute; the labium small, with short palpi, of which the terminal jointis longest; the hind part of the head is constricted into a neck orrotula, playing in the anterior aperture of the singular cylindricalprothorax, which is long and narrow, the sides being deflexed, andmeeting in the middle beneath, so that one folds partially over theother (j%. 66. 4.) ; the resound meta-thorax are much broader,and of equal size ; the legs are slender and simple ; the anterior pairare inserted at the under side of the prothorax, where its deflexedangles, being cut off, leave a triangular space in front of the mesosternum(Jig. 66. 4.) ; the tarsi (Jig. 66. 5.) are 5-jointed, the thirdjoint being deeply bilobed, and the fourth joint small, and affixedbetween the lobes of the preceding. Percheron describes the unguesas composed of two pieces, of which the apical one is moveable ;but this is certainly incorrect. The abdomen is sessile, of moderatelength, 9-jointed, and terminated in the females by a long sabre-likeovipositor (Jig. 66. 6.) of a slender construction, composed of twoplates (De Geer, 3Icm., torn. iii. pi. 15. f. 9.) very much compressed,transversely striated, longitudinally ribbed, and terminated by twominute oval appendages (Jig. 66. 7.); the wings are moderately large,of nearly equal size, the posterior not folded when at rest, whenthey are deflexed at the sides of the body : they are strongly veined,the veins being inconstant, even in the same individual ; but theirgeneral arrangement is as in the Silica;. &c., with a distinct stigma,NEUROPTERA. — RAPIIIDIIDiE. 57of which the differences of form have been employed as specificcharacters.These insects are of comparatively small size, agile in their movements; the structure of the head and neck, powerful jaws, and theelongated coxae of the legs, as well as the membranous attachment ofthe segments of the body, indicating predaceous habits. They receivetheir English name of snake-flies from the form of the head and neck,and the facility with which they move the front of the body in differentdirections. It is in the neighbourhood of woods and streamsthat these insects are chiefly found.This family seems to occupy an intermediate situation betweenthe larger species of the Sialidae and the Mantispidse, agreeing withthe former in the enlarged size of the prothorax and structure ofthe head, and with the latter in general form.The transformations of these insects have formed the subject ofmemoirs by Latreille, Percheron, Waterhouse, and Stein.The larva, for a specimen of which I am indebted to Mr. Ingpen,resides (according to Percheron, who reared two species) under thebark of trees; it is predaceous, and feeds upon minute insects*; itcreeps but slowly, but gives to its body violent jerking motions inevery direction, somewhat like those of a serpent. It is long andnarrow (fig. 66.8.), with the abdominal part of the body pubescent,dilated in the middle, and not so scaly as the head and prothorax ; itis 13-jointed including the head, which is oblong, flattened, with short3-jointed antennae, not including the radicle (^Jrg. QQ. 12.); the jawsare robust, curved, acute at the tip, with a strong tooth on the innermargin i^fig. QQ. 9.) ; the maxillae fig. QQ. lo.) and labium are distinctfig. 66. 11.), with short palpi ; the legs are short fig. 66. 14. tarsus) ;the abdomen is unarmed ; the eyes resemble ocelli fig. Q>Q>. 13.), andare situated near the base of the antenna?. I cannot observe morethan two on each side of the head, which is the number also noticedby Waterhouse : Percheron, however, states that there are seven oneach side. The pupa is not inclosed in a cocoon. It resembles theperfect insect in general form, but is furnished only with short rudimentsof wings, lying at the sides of the body fig. QQ. 17. male pupa,Mr. Waterhouse states that he always found the larva? in the bark, in which theyconned cells for themselves, and that he never observed them to feed upon otherinsects, although he admits that the structure of the mouth is that of a predaceousrather than a granivorous insect. I should apprehend that the larva? noticed by Mr.Waterhouse were preparing a retreat for their duration.58 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.from Waterhouse,j^^. 66. 15. female pupa,^^. 66. 16. extremity of itsabdomen sideways). Linnaeus was acquainted with the pupa, which hethus describes : "Pupa currie, matris similis, licet aptera. Caput ."syst. Nat., torn. ii. p. 916.) Percheron denies that thepupa possesses this active power, and asserts that the entire body ofthe pupa merely " jouit de la meme faculty de contorsion et de salts,que la larve execute a un si haut degree." Mr. Waterhouse has (quitecorrectly as it appears to me from analogy with some other quiescentpupae, as Myrmeleon, &c.) reconciled these statements by observingthat the pupa in some respects approaches the active pupae, althoughit cannot be strictly considered as such until immediately before assumingthe imago state, when the insect having gained sufficientstrength, is enabled to walk, although inclosed within the pupa skin,which, by the bye, is extremely thin. A peculiarity existing in thispupa, which has not been alluded to by previous writers, clearlyproves it to be inactive in the early stage of the pupa state, namely,that the hind legs are partially covered by the wings. ( Compare ^^ 66.15. wither. 41. 11. p. 336., ox jig. 48. 19. p. 387.) The species are veryfew in number, and I am not aware that any have been discovered outof Europe.The family Mantispid^* Westtv., like the preceding, consists of asingle anomalous genus, whose situation has greatly perplexed systematic,none of whom, however, appear to have given themselves thetrouble of investigating the structure of its mouths As already noticed,in vol. i. p. 412. note, it is without hesitation that I regard this genus asBiBLioGR, Refer, to the Mantispid^e.Stoll. Representation des Spectres, &c.Servile and St. Fargcau. Encycl. Methh., torn. x. p. 270.Latreille. Genera Crust,, vol. iii. p. 94.Newman, in Entomol. Mag., No. 24.Charpentier. (Horse Entomol.)Guerin, (Yoy. Coquille. )■f I must now omit my friend Erichson, who (in his admirable monograph inDr. Germar's Zeitschrift fur die Entomologie, No. 1. 1839, just received by me fromthe author) has investigated the affinities of the genus, and arrived at the sameconclusion as myself. lie describes twenty-four species chiefly from Africa andAmerica, but I am acquainted with several others yet described.NEUROPTERA. MANTISPID^. 59the type of distinct Neuropterous family, very closely allied to Heme-robins,both in the trophi and in the general character of the veins ofthe wings. The body is long and narrow ( ^^. 66. 18. Mantispapa pagan),somewhat like that of Raphidia, with a broad head, large prominenteyes, short submoniliform antennae, and an elongated prothorax,narrower than the head, but dilated in front : the ocelli are wanting,the clypeus and labrum distinct ; the palpi short and filiform (fig.66. 19. front of the head) ; the mandibles are horny and acute, butslightly curved, and occasionally with a small tooth within (^/7.66.20.);the maxilla are long and bilobed : the outer lobe broadest at thetip, where it is inarticulate and pilose ; the maxillary palpi are5-jointed, the terminal joint being longest (^<7. 66. 21.) ; the labiumis oblong, extending considerably beyond the insertion of the palpi,and entire at the tips (^^.66.22.); the prothorax is greatly elongated,and formed upon the plan of that of the Mantidae, but it isnot margined ; the fore legs are attached on the under side closeto the head (^^.66.23.), they are raptorial, like those of theMan-tide ; the other legs are simple ; the tarsi 5-jointed, with denticulatedungues ; the wings are of nearly equal size, deflexed at the sides ofthe body in repose, and numerously veined ; the veins being arrangedsomewhat as in the Hemerobiidae ; the abdomen is not furnished withterminal filaments, or an exserted ovipositor.The structure of the fore legs and mouth of these insects warrantsthe conjecture that they are predaceous in their habits. Latreilleinforms us that they reside upon oaks, their habits, and probably theirmetamorphoses, being identical with those of Raphidia. M. Bourgeois,who frequently captured M. pagan in the neighbourhood of Lyons,communicated a larva to Latreille, constructed like that of Raphidia,but considerably larger, and which, Latreille says, "je ne peux rapporterquia cette Mantis." (considerations Generals, p. 69.) Ihave in a preceding page noticed the use which has been made ofthese insects, with the view of establishing the passage between theOrthoptera and Neuroptera.The species are but of moderate or small size, of dull colours, andwidely dispersed, being inhabitants of Europe, South Africa, India,New Holland, Surinam, Brazil, &c.60 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Order TRICHOPTERA* Kirhy.(Lingua i?efem*, Neuroptera Plicipennes Za#m//e, Synistatap. Fabricius, Neuroptera p. Linn., Trichoptera p. MacL.^Char. Wings four, membranous ; the anterior generally pilose, withbranching nerves ; the posterior larger, and folded when at rest.Prothorax very short.Tibiae with long calcaria at the tip, and often beyond the middleof the limb in the four posterior legs.Mouth unfitted for mastication ; mandibles rudimental.Larva hexapod, ordinarily residing in a case formed of variousmaterials, in which it retains its station by means of twohooked anal processes.Pupa incomplete, inactive during the greater period of its existence.The insects of this order are the well-known advice-flies, or watermoths of the angler ; their larvae being called cads, or cad-bait, andresiding in portable tubes, composed of various extraneous materials.The body of the perfect insect {Jig- 67 ^ i. Phryganea grandis) is ofa leathery consistence, and thickly clothed with hair ; the head small(^fig.&l. 2, head of ditto in front), with prominent semi globular eyes,and three f ocelli. The antennae are as long as, often much longer*BiBLioGR. Refer, to the Trichoptera.Pictet. Recherches pour servir a I'Hist. et a I'Anat. des Phryganides. Geneva,1834. 4to. pp. 235, 20 pi. — Dit4to, in Mem. Soc. Hist. Nat. Geneve, 4torn, vii,Stephens. Illustrations Brit. Ent., vol. vi.Curtis. Brit. Entomb., and in London Edinb. Phil. Mag., Feb. and March, 1834.Percheron. Genera des Insectes Olostomis [Holostoinis phalaenoides nee africa]Near., pi. 3. (See Alannerheim (^Yie\ . Critique, p. 21.) as to the specific synonymsof this gentis).Dolman. Mem. Acad. Stockholm, 1819. Analecta Entomol. (Hydroptila. )Fischer. En4tomb. de la Lassie. 3 vols., 4to. Moscow.Savigny. Description de I'Egypte.Geoffroy, Linnceus, Scoffer, Scopoli, Gmelin, Villiers, Olivier Cent. Methh. torn, vi),Fabricius, Leach.i M. Pictet states," On voit sur le front deux petits yeux lisses " (Recherches.Phrygia). This is true ; but there is a third ocellus between the base of the antennaein many species, forming, with the two on the forehead, a large triangle ; but Curtisdescribes the Limnephili and Lcptoceri as having only two ocelli.TRICHOPTERA. PHRYGANEIDiE.Fig. 67.than, the body (as in Leptocerus (Mystacida) niger,^<7. 67. 7.) slender,setaceous, and multi-articulate. The mouth is neither fitted formastication nor suction ; it consists of an elongated, slender upper lip(fig. 67. 3., after Savigny), at the base of which, on each side, accordingto Savigny (Mem. An. S. Vertebra., pi. 1.), Curtis (brit. Entrypi. 592.), and Percheron (gen. Ins. New., pi. 3.), is to be perceived aminute, soft, pubescent, and trigonate organ fig. 67. 3. se), whichis the representative of the mandibles (which are erroneously statedby Latreille and Pictet to be " nulles '') ; the maxillas are also small,and terminated by an oval pubescent lobe {^fig-QI. 4.); the maxillarypalpi are long and slender, being only 4-jointed* in the males of thelarge species fig. 67. 5.), but 5-jointed in the females fig. 67. 4.).In the genus Phryganea, &c., the joints are of nearly equal thickness,and similar in their appearance ; but in Hydropsyche fig. 67- 8.maxillary, 67. 9. labial palpi), &c., the terminal joint is very greatlyelongated, and much more slender than the preceding, and annulated; and in the Mystacidae they are thickly clothed with hairs.The mentum is distinct and quadrate ; the labium produced and entire ;and the labial palpi 3-jointed fig. 67. 6. P. grandis), and partaking ofthe character of the maxillary palpi. The prothorax forms a veryshort collar. The resound meta-thorax are dilated into an oval ororbicular mass. The anterior wings are elongated and lanceolate inthe females, but rather more obtuse in the males of the true Phry-ganeae ; they are deflexed at the sides of the body during repose, andPictet describes them as only 3-jointed in the males of the true Phryganea.Curtis and Percheron, however, figure them as 4-jointed. *In the males of theother genera, they do not differ frown the females in the number of joints. In themales of Sericostoma ( Phryganea personate Spence, Introdd, to Ent., vol. iii. p. 489.,Sericostoma Spencii Steph.), the maxillary palpi, in the males, are short and dilated,uniting in front of the slice, and forming an obtuse rounded mask fig, 67. 10.).MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.are furnished with numerous branching veins ; the costal portion isnot transversely veined ; the posterior pair are shorter, but considerablybroader than the anterior, and are folded when at rest. The wingsare more or less clothed with hair (fig. cii fore wing of ); the legs are long and slender ; the anterior tibiae are spurred atthe tip, but the four posterior are furnished, not only with apical spurs,but also with one or two pair near the middle of the limb ; the conteare also elongated — both which characters add materially to the activityof the insects; the tarsi are 5-jointed, with minute claws andpul-villi. In the genera Hydropsy die Agapetus,«S:c., the intermediate tibiaeand tarsi are dilated in the females ; this is also especially the caseinan allied species figured by Savigny in the Description de I'Egypte.The abdomen is of moderate length, slender, the extremity being furnished,in the males, with several short curved inarticulate appendages.The females deposit their eggs in a double gelatinous mass, whichis of a green colour, and is retained for a considerable time at the extremityof the body ; the mass is subsequently attached to the surfaceof some aquatic plant, and Mr. Hangman has observed the female ofPhryganea grandis creep down the stems of aquatic plants under thewater, very nearly a foot deep, for the pm-pose of oviposition ; onbeing disturbed, it swam vigorously beneath the water to some otherplants ; its bundle of eggs was found to be of an oblong form, bent inthe middle, and the two ends attached to the tail of the animal (Curtis,Brit. Ent., fol. 592.).Fig. 68.The larvae ordinarily reside in cylindrical cases, open at each end,to which they attach various matters, as bits of stick, weeds, pebbles,or even small living shells {fig- 68. 2. case of P. fusca Pictet), by theassistance of silken threads, which they spin from the mouth in theTRICHOPTERA. PHRYGANEID^. 63same manner as caterpillars. Some cases are formed of fine sand, andcurved (Jiff. 68. 4. case of Sericostoma multiguttatum Pictet). Thelarva remains in this case, exposing only its head and three anteriorsegments of the body, and which it suddenly withdraws on theslightest alarm.The cases formed by these larvae being ordinarily composed of materialsscarcely specifically heavier than the water, are easily carriedabout. There does not appear to be an exclusive regularity in the choiceof the materials of which they are formed, according to the difference ofspecies, the individuals of each employing, occasionally, what comesnearest to them when engaged in its construction. M. Pictet indeedappears to consider that each species chooses its own peculiar materialsfor the construction of its case, and that the mode in which thesearticles are applied is uniform. Thus, P. rhombic selects morsels ofstraws or twigs, which it arranges transversely {Jig.6S. l.); whilst P.lunar employs the same materials, which it attaches longitudinally(Jig.6S.3.^. He, however, mentions a variety of instances in whichmaterials of a perfectly different kind had been employed by thesespecies. In some species, the materials (ordinarily strips of leaves)are arranged in a spiral coil fig. 68. 9. pupa case of P. varia Pict.Reaum. 3. pi. 14. f.9.).When the case, owing to the growth of the inhabitant, becomes toosmall, it has been stated by some authors that the larva quits it andconstructs a new one ; but M. Pictet considers that it rather adds freshmaterials of an enlarged diameter at the aperture, cutting off a portionof the opposite end, which would account for the conical formwhich these cases often exhibit.In the preface to the Historia Indecorum of Ray, p. xii., is publishedan interesting tabular arrangement of these cases, " ex observationsD. Willughby," of which an extract will be sufficient to provethe assiduous but neglected researches of our celebrated countryman.Insecta aquatic thetis se contegentia sunt, vel thecaimmobile, seu apicius affix, corpore velsubrotundato cum filaments ad latera,piano et compression absque filaments.mobile aut portatili, migratory; Phryganea vulgo dicta. [Tienfollows an admirable description of the larvae inhabiting thesemoveable cases.] Unique vel thetisrectus, vel habentibusfestus agglutinatas64< MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.parallels [straw-worms]transverse et breviores, quibus interdum admiscentur lapilliet conch alae ;festus nulla adherents, sed apollos aut arenulos quae veltereteSj [cod-baits]planaj, seu compressed,lapillis majuscLilis, these lateribus adhaerentibus nunquamsupine aut prone parti ;nullus ad latera adhajr. lapillis, sed theca utrinque intenues niargiiiem, seu limbum recurrence velut alasquaedam, theca planiore et compression quam insuperior.incurs seu cornutis mavis dicere. Sunt enim horus thecaeincurvated, et una extremity majore, altera minor."The Rev. J. Morton, also, in his History of Northamptonshire,chap, vii., has entered into many particulars relative to these larvaeand their cases, as has also Sir Humphrey Davy, in his Salmon.See also Insect Architecture, chap. x. Isaac Walton has also givenmany particulars of these insects, especially as regards their piscatorialqualities, and which he calls canis, pipers, cock spurs, straw-worms, orrufF-coats. In Mr. Ronald's Flyfishers Entomology various moderate-sizedspecies of Phryganeae are termed sand-flies, geraniums, and cinq; whilst one of the Mystacidae is naemd the silver horns.The larvae of these insects i^fig. 68. lo. larva of Phryganea rhombicPictet) are of an elongated, nearly cylindrical form, with a scalyhead fig. 68. ll. upper, 68. 12. under side of head of larva of P. striataPictet), furnished with a bilobed upper lip, a pair of strong mandibles,obtuse at the tip, with several short teeth fig. 68. 13. and.of larva of P. striata Pictet), fitted for gnawing vegetable matters. Inthe larvffi of Hydropsyche they are terminated by a more elongatedtooth fig. 68. 15. and. of larva of H. senex Pictet') ; and these speciesare more essentially carnivorous than the others. The maxillaeand labrum are small, fleshy, and soldered together fig. 68. 14. P.striata Pictet') ; the former are terminated by two minute corneouspoints, supposed by Pictet to represent the terminal maxillary lobeand palpus, of which there is no other rudiment ; neither does thereappear to be any labial palpi, except two exceedingly minute pointson each side of the spinneret, which is also very minute. In thelarvae of the Sericostomae and Rhyacophilae, the maxillary lobes areTRICHOPTERA. — PIIRYGANEIDiE. 65more elongated ; and in the latter of these genera M. Pictet representsthe external lobe as articulated and palpiform. My ^^.68. 16.represents the maxillae of the larva of Phryganea pellucida, after DeGeer. The head exhibits no trace of antennae ; the corneous coveringof the eyes is very small, and apparently composed of points atthe sides of the head, and destitute of gesticulations ; the three thoracicsegments of the body are leathery, each being furnished with apair of legs, the anterior pair of which are shorter and stronger thanthe others. In the larvae of the tru Phryganeae there is a slenderhorn between the anterior legs, which Reaumur considered to be thespinneret, but the use of which has not been ascertained (Jit/. 68. 17.pre sternum of larva of P. striata Pictet). The nine abdominal segmentsare more fleshy, being seldom exposed beyond the mouth of thecase, in which they retain their station by means of three conicalfleshy tubercles on the first segment, and by the two moveable articulatedappendages, of variable form, at the extremity of the body. Inthose species observed by M. Pictet, which reside in fixed cases,these abdominal tubercles are wanting, and the anal hooks are elongated,and placed upon long footsteps (Jiff' 68. 18.), giving them greatcapacity for movement, and enabling them to fix themselves firmlyin their rough and irregular retreats. Other peculiarities exist in theform of this organ in the different genera, which correspond with theirvarious modes of life and movements. The abdominal segments aremoreover furnished with white membranous filaments, of variousforms, which are the external organs of Respiration.The food of the larva has been stated to consist of minute aquaticlarvae, and such is the rase with Hydropsyche, M. Pictet having observedthat the larvae prey upon those of other aquatic Neuroptera, andeven upon each other, in a state of captivity ; but the greater numberare purely herbivorous, the structure of their jaws being fitted forgnawing vegetable matters ; and M. Pictet supplied them with willowleaves, upon which they fed well ; the larger species devouring thewhole leaf, but the smaller ones leaving the veins entire ; they would,however, occasionally attack other aquatic larvae.From the common occurrence of these advice worms, it is not surprisingthat they should have attracted the attention of the early naturalists,by some of whom they were known under the names ofLigniperdae ; and Reaumur and De Geer have entered very fully intotheir natural history and structure. The former of these authorsVOL. ir. V66 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.(Memoires, torn. iii. Mem. 5.) has described many of the varieties inthe cases formed of leaves, twigs, straws, wood, stone, sand, or shells.He has also figured (Ibid., pi. 12, 13.) the transformations of P.striata (according to Linnaeus and Pictet), and, in pi. I'i. f. 1 — i;,those of a species which Linnaeus quotes as P. grandis, but which appearsto agree both in the spirally-arranged case, and the spotted wingsof the imago, with the P. varia picket, pi. 11. f. 1.). The cases of aminute species are also represented, together with the imago, in thesame plate, but too vaguely to be determined ; they are probably aminute species of Mystacida ; whilst, in the fifteenth plate of the samevolume, he has figured the cases of the larvae of a Mystacida Latr.,the hind legs of which are greatly elongated.De Geer has entered more minutely than Reaumur into thedetails of the habits and structure of these insects, of which he tracedfive species through their different states. These are P. pellucidaOliv., Pictet (Mom., torn. ii. pi. 11, 12.), P. grandis (pi. 13. f. 1—17.),P. grisea (pi. 13. f. 18 — 21.), P. fusca? (according to Goeze's edit,vol. ii. p. 412.), and P. bimaculata Linn., which is evidently aMystacida. He, moreover, figured a variety of cases of differentforms, of which he had observed the larvae, and of which some(pi. 15. f. 15 — 17.) are of a singular form, being apparently composedof fine sand, of an elongate-ovate shape, with a broad mouth and twoprotuberances at the opposite extremity. They probably belong to aspecies of Hydroptila. He, moreover, figured several perfect insectsof which he had not observed the larvae.Rose (Abhandl. von Ins., vol. ii., Ins. Aqiiat., tab. 14 — 17.) hasfigured various cases, together with the transformations of threespecies, which have been cited as P. grandis, striata, and rhombic.With the exception of Reaumur's figures in his fifteenth plate, abovereferred to, and those of De Geer's of P. bimaculata (all of which aredestitute of sufficient precision in the details), the various larvasfigured by these authors are all referable to one type of form,having the head and three thoracic segments scaly, the legs moderatelylong, the basal segment of the abdomen furnished withthree fleshy protuberances, and the third armed with two shorthooks, with the external organs of respiration, consisting of slendersoft filaments, arising separately, and lying transversely on theupper and under sides of the abdomen. Such are the characters ofthe larvae of the genus Phryganea, as restricted by Pictet. Those ofTRICHOPTERA. — THRYGANEID.^. 67the genus Mystacida, as above noticed, differ in having the posteriorpair of legs greatly elongated ; whilst those of Sericostoma have theexternal organs of respiration short and united on a common base, soas to form small bundles of short filaments. In the larvae of the Tricho-stone the anterior angles of the thoracic segments are greatly producedin front, forming acute points ; and in those of the Hydroptiloe,the thoracic segments are narrow, and the abdomen swollen anddestitute of external organs of respiration ; these reside in small flattenedkidney-shaped cases, opened by a slit at each end fig. 68. 5.case of H. pulchricornis Pictet). M. Pictet further notices theinteresting circumstance (long ago, however, observed by Willughby,as above detailed), that the larvae of many of these insects reside inimmoveable cases attached to stones, <Src., but formed of materialssimilar to the moveable cases* fig. (SS. Q. case of Hydropsychesenex Pictet: Jig. 68. 8. elongated tortuous fixed cases, composed ofsilk and fine sand, formed by the larvae of Hydropsyche maculicornisPictet). These larvae are therefore compelled to quit their retreats whilstsearching for their food in a naked state, and they are accordinglybetter fitted for such a kind of life, by having the abdomen of a firmerconsistence, with stronger anal hooks fig. 68. 18. larva of Hydro-psycheatomaria Pictet), and the organs of respiration consisting ofnumerous short bundles fig. 68. 19. gills of the larva of Hydropsycheatomaria Pictet, Jig. 68. 20. gills of the larva of Rhyacophila vulgarisPictet), or entirely wanting. Of these species the pupae of the genusHydropsyche are enclosed in a single silky envelope, to which variousmaterials are attached ; whilst those which have the pupa enclosed, inaddition to this outer case, in another distinct internal cocoon fig. 68. 7.inner cocoon of Rhyacophila vulgaris Pictet) spun by the larva, composethe genus Rhyacophila of Pictet.In those species which are destitute of external gills, the respirationis effected by spiracles placed on each side of each abdominal segment ;and species thus circumstanced are placed by Pictet in the same genuswith others furnished with external organs of respiration.From these considerations, M. Pictet has constructed the following.V. Audouin communicated to the Entomological Society of France, on the9th of January, 1833, a piece of granite, on the surface of winch were a number ofsmall rounded eminences, formed of minute granules of quartz, and which were discoveredto be the cases of a small species of this family.I- 268 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.table, confirming, in respect to the peculiarities in the preparatorystates, the genera founded upon the characters of the imago.C (external organs of respiration T p,I isolated, legs moderate -J •'"\ External ~|withLarvEBenclosedin a «( circularjane.Thoracicsegmentsrounded.organs of I Hind legs long - Mystacida. 'respiration [ legs short - Sericostoma.moveable opening. lain bundles. Jcase Thoracic segments with the front angles") m • , ^■ , J ° J- Trichostoma.l posted - - - J[opening with a slit - - - Hydroptila.Larvae not "jenclosed I The pupa enclosed in a double envelope - - Rhyacophila.in a move [ The pupa enclosed in a single envelope - - Hydropsyche.able case. JM. V. Audouin has shown me the case of a small unknown speciesof this family, quite unlike any hitherto figured, being composed offine sand cemented together, and saucer-shaped, so that it is difficult toconceive how the larva could employ it as a means of defence or abode.When the period for assuming the pupa state is arrived, the larva?,which reside in moveable cases, fasten them to some fixed substancebeneath the water, and close the two extremities with an openworkfence, which varies in form in the different species, and which, by admittinga current of water, permits the respiration of the pupa ; indeed,Reaumur states, that he actually saw this framework in alternatemotion from convex to concave, as the water passed out and in (Jeff.67. 12. represents the grating of the case of P. fusca? after De Geer).Within this retreat they then became inactive pupae, in which theybear a considerable resemblance to the imago, except that the antennae,palpi, wings, and legs are shorter, enclosed in separate sheaths,and arranged upon the breast (J/ff- 67. 13. pupa of P. pellucida DeGeer), the antennae, in the species which have those organs, greatlyexceeding the length of the body, being extended beyond the abdomen,with the extremities curled up ( /iff. 67. 17. pupa of Mystacida immaculateDe Geer). The front of the head fig. 67. 14. head of pupa ofHydropsyche senex Pictct) is moreover furnished with a pair of corneoushooks, but which are the real mandibles, crossing each other,and different in form from those of the larva and pupa, which givethe head the appearance of a beak, varying in form and strength inthe different groups, according to the nature of the cocoons fig.67. 15. mandible of pupa of Hydropsyche atomaria Pictet). Withthis the pupa makes its way through the openwork mouth of itscase, shortly before assuming the perfect state, at which period itTRICHOPTERA. PHRYGANEIDiE. 69assumes considerable activity, swimming along, as I have observed,by means of its two hind legs, which are strongly ciliated, andcrawling about by means of its four fore legs, which becomedetached from the breast. M. Pictet has made some interestingobservations on the relations of the limbs of the pupa with those ofthe larva, and of the manner in which the former are enclosed withinthe larva skin. The pupae of the larger species creep out of the water,crawling up the stems of plants, &c., and undergoing their finalchange in the air ; but the smaller ones merely come to the surface,where they shed their pupa skin in the same manner as gnats, theirold envelope serving them as a raft.The pupa is furnished, as well as the larva, with external respiratoryfilaments, besides which, each of the segments of the abdomen, exceptthe first and last (yfig. 67. Second abdominal segment of thepupa of P. striata Pictet), is dorsally provided with a pair ofsmall patches, charged with recurved points, which evidently assistthe pupa in making its escape from the case, previous to assumingthe perfect state. The pupa of Phryganea have also a row ofshort filaments at the sides of the abdomen, the uses of which areunknown. The abdomen is also terminated by various appendages,of which the form varies in the different groups. The perfect insectsare of small or moderate size, seldom reaching a couple of inches inthe expanse of the wings. They are very active, running with agilitywith a kind of gliding motion, not unlike that of certain Tipulidae, andother insects with long tibial spurs ; but their flight is awkward, exceptin some of the smaller species, which assemble in troops, and fly overthe surface of water towards sunset: they frequent damp marshysituations. From the weak structure of the mouth, it is evident thatthey can live but a very short time in the perfect state, taking nonourishment, and only anxious to continue their species. Theircolours are obscure, being ordinarily brown or grey ; when handled,they emit a very disagreeable odour. A very few exotic species areornamented with spots and markings. Few, only, have been broughtfrom extra-European countries.This order was first proposed by De Geer (to which his commentatorRetzius applied the name of Lingua), and included the LinnaeanPhryganese and Ephemerae, which two groups were also unitedby Dumeril into his family Buckles or Magnates. Linnaeus hadunited the Perlidae and Phryganeee into one genus, from the charactersF 370 • MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.of the imago, such as the folded wings, &c., which plan was alsoadopted by Lamarck. Mr. Kirby, in the 11th volume of the Linn.Trans., and subsequently Leach, restricted it to the genus Phryganeaof De Geer, of which the leading characters are given above ; whilstLatreille retained the family as a distinct section of the order Neuroptera,under the name of Plicipennes ; in this respect he has beenfollowed by M. Pictet, who has substituted the name Phryganides.Mr. MacLeay, in the Hovcb Entomologist, from an erroneous idearelative to the larvae of the Perlidee, considered that family as belongingto the same order as the Trichoptera, the inaccuracy of which hasbeen commented upon in a preceding page ; but Mr. MacLeay proceededon this false foundation to show that, as the organisation of theperfect Perlidse and Phryganeae is so variable, (whilst he considered thelarvae to be all cylindrical, with membranaceous feet, and to undergothe metamorphosis object* Linn,) it would be difficult to exclude theTenthredinidte from the order (shore £'«tomo/., p. 431.), which heaccordingly divided into three stirpes, Pertinax, Phryganina, and The introduction of the Perlidte into the order, whichwas Mr. MacLeay's ground for the admission of the I'enthredinida?,having been already shown to be untenable, will render it unnecessaryfor me to enter into any arguments against reinstating the in the order Hymenoptera, especially as Mr. Kirby hascompletely answered Mr. MacLeay's objections in the Introduction toEntomology, vol. iv. p. 374. That there may be a slight relationbetween the Trichoptera and Tenthredinidas ^ may be admitted, butit appears to me that the genus Phryganea forms the connecting linkbetween the Neuroptera and Lepidoptera. That it is closely relatedto the Neuroptera will be evident, because Latreille, Pictet, and othersstill consideriPhryganea as Neuropterous, being especially related to thegenus Salis, which seems to form the passage between the Phryganersand Perlidaj ; but not only are the veins of the wings arranged uponthe plan of the Lepidopterous wings, the general habit of the insects,Neither the Persia;, Phryganeida, nor Tenthredinidas undergo obtected metamorphosis,as assumed by Mr. MacLeay.f Mr. MacLeay hora; Ent,, p. 432.) mentioned a terrestrial larva, inhabiting acase, found in Java by Dr. Horsfield, and which he considered to be that of a terrestrialTrichopterous insect. It is, however, clearly the larva of a Lepidopteroussect, allied to Oiketicus of Guilding and to the Sacktragers of the Germans(Psyche, &c.).\ Latreille introduces the Phryganea; between the Neuroptera and Hymenoptera.TRICHOPTERA PHRYGANEIDiE. 71the Structure of the legs, coxae, calcaria, and mandibles, as noticedby Kirby, and, indeed, the general rudimental form of the mouthbeing similar ; and, what is more important, the internal structure ofthe larvae, as noticed by De Geer, agrees with that of the Lepidopterouslarvae rather than with the Neuroptera. There are many Tineidse, thelarvae of which reside in cases somewhat similar to those of the Pryganeae^ whilst the long-horned Japan moths (Adelae) seem to presenta near relation to the Mystacidae of Latreille (Leptoceri Leach), Mr.Newman, (Sphinx Vespiformis, table opp. p. 21.), has even introducedthe Lepidopterous genus Psyche into the order Neuroptera, in whichhe also includes the Trichoptera.Until very recently, but little attention had been paid to these insects.Dr. Leach, indeed, studied them carefully, and announced a distinctwork upon the subject, but which he never completed. Subsequently,Mr. Curtis published the descriptions of various species in the PhilosophicalMagazine (new ser. Feb., March, 1834), but the most valuablework upon the group is that by M. Pictet of Geneva, upon the Phry-ganece of Switzerland. In this admirable memoir, the natural habits,anatomical and physiological characters, transformations and specificdifferences, of a great number of species have been recorded, andwhich, from a consideration of their characters, both in the preparatoryand perfect states, he is induced to arrange into seven genera alone.Whilst the entire number of species collected from various sourcesby Olivier {Encycl. Methh., tom. vi.) amounted only to 77, M. Pictetdetected, in Switzerland, nearly 120 species, of which he had noticedthe preparatory states of not fewer than 52, whereas seven onlyhad been previously observed in their earlier stages by De Geer, &c.,as above mentioned. It is to be regretted that the figures of thespecies in the imago state, are, in the majority of cases, completelyunrecognisable, whilst the peculiarities in the evenings of the wingsare too much overlooked. Shortly afterwards, Mr. Stephens describednearly 190 British species in his Illustrations, which he divided intoeight families, corresponding with seven of Pictet's genera, to whichhe added another anomalous family, Acentropidae, which, in my opinion,belongs to the order Lepidoptera. The other families, ,Rhacophilidae, Hydropsychidae, Sericostomidae, Psychomidae,Leptoceridae (Mystacida, Latr.), and Phryganidaej he divided intonumerous genera, founded, like those of Mr. Curtis, established in thePhilosophical Magazine, upon the neuration of the wings, and the72 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.variations in the tibial spurs. I shall, however, regard these groupsas sub-families, constituting one great family Phryganeidae, and ofwhich the following tabular characters will show the chief distinctions.1. Antennae filiform, or pectinated ; hind wings not folded. [Hydroptilides.]2. Antenna setaceous.i. Hind wings not folded. [Psychomyides.]ii. Hind wings folded.A. Without transverse nerves in the wings.a. Maxillary palpi dilated in the males. [ Sericostomides. Jb. Maxillary palpi alike in both sexes.a. Terminal joint ovoid. [Rhyacophilides. ]S. Terminal joint filiform, very long. [Hydropsychides. ]B. With transverse nerves in the wings ; terminal joint of maxillary palpiovoid.a. Maxillary palpi very long, very pilose, 5-jointed in both sexes. [Lep-tocerides.]b. Maxillary palpi moderate, slightly pilose, 4-jointed in the males.[Phryganeides.]Order HYMENOPTERA* Lin.(Hymenoptera Linn, olim; Geoffroy-Gvmnoptera-scop.; PiezataFar. ; Phleboptera Clairv.^Char. Wings four, naked, membranous ; the posterior pair smallerthan the anterior, with comparatively few veins.Mouth with horny jaws, and with a lower lip or tongue, sheathedby the maxillae.Tarsi generally 5-jointed.Abdomen armed with a multivalve saw ovipositor, or sting, in thefemales.Larva apod and vermiform (or cruciform and pedate in one group).Pupa incomplete and inactive.• BiBLiOGB. Refer, to the Hymenoptera in general.Jurine. Nouvelle Method de classes les Hymenopteres, 4to. 1807, and in Mem.Acad. Roy. Turin, torn. xxiv. (Observ. on Wings of Hym.)Spinola. Insecta Ligurije. 2 vols. 4to. Genuae, 1808.Kirby. Monographiaia apud Anglia;. 2 vols. 8vo. Ipswich, 1802. — Ditto, in Linn.Trans., vol. iv.Fabricius. Systema Piezatorum. 8vo. Brunsv. 1804.Panzer. Kritische Revision der Insektenfaune Deutchsl. band. ii. (Entomol.Versuch die Turin. Getting. Numb. Svo, 1806.)HYMENOPTERA. 73If interesting habits and economy, great development of instinctivepowers and social qualities, be considered as indicating superiority intheir possessors, the insects composing the order Hymenoptera havecertainly far greater claims to be placed in the foremost ranks of theinsect tribes than any of their brethren. The bee, the wasp, theant, the saw-fly, the gall-fly, and the ichneumon-fly, all belonging to thisorder, have attracted the attention of the observer of nature from theearliest period.As an order, these insects are distinguished by the number, comparativesize and structure of the wings, the raandibulated mouth,enclosing a labium unsheathed by the maxillae, the ovipositor, or sting,with which the females are provided, and the nature of their metamorphoses.The eyes are generally large and lateral, occasionally occupying, inthe males of certain groups, the greatest portion of the head : theyChristius, J. L. Nature. Klassific. unci Nominal. der Insect. von Bienen, &c.4to. Franks. a. M. 1791.Harris, M. An Exposition of Engl. Insects, fol. Lond. 1781.Fallen. Specimen novara Hymenoptera Dish. Method, exhibits. Lundce, 1814,4to.Klug, in Der Gesellsch. Natin-forsch. Freunde zu Berlin Magaz., vol. i. p. 2. 4.Ditto, Vergleicliung der Piezata Fab., und Hymenoptera Jitrtne (in Illic.Mag., vol. vi).Saint Fargeau. Hist. Nature. des Insectes Hymenopteres, torn. i. Paris, 1836, 8vo. ;and in Encycl. Methodique, 4torn. x. 4to.Illiger, in Magazin der Entomol., vol. ii. ; and in Hellvvig's edition of Rossi.Dahlhom. Exercitationes Hymenopterologicae, part 1 — 5. Lund. 1831-33. — Ditto,Clavis Novi Hymenopt. System, abject. Synods. Larvarura. Lund. 1835,4to. — Dit4to, Prodromus Hymenopt. Scandinav. Lund. 1836.Zetterstedt. Insecta Japonica, small fol. 1837.Bulletin Moscow, tom. ix. p. 431. Description d'Hymenopt. tant nouveaux queconnus.Latreille. Nouv. Observ. sur la maniere dont plusieurs Ins. Hymenopteres pour-soienta la Subsistance de leur Posterity, in Ann. du Mus. d'Hist. Nat. 1809,tom. xiv.Savigny. Description de I'Egypte.Say. North American Hymenoptera, in the Contributions of the Maclurian Lyceum,vol. i. Jan. 1829, p. 67. Ditto, in the Journal of the Natural HistorySociety of Boston, vol. ii. 1837. Ditto, in Goodman's Western Reporter, 1823.Waltll. Reise nach Tyrol. (Hymenopt. by Klug).Holiday, in Trans. Linn. Soc, vol. xvii. ( Description of American Hymenoptera.)Westwood,in Proceedings of Zool. Soc, April and May, 1835; and the generalworks of Linnaeus, Fabricius, De Geer, Rossi (ditto edit, by Illiger), Olivier(Encycl. Meth.), tValchenaer, Panzer, SchranJt, Klug, Curtis, Stephens.74 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.are generally accompanied by three minute simple ocelli, placed inatriangle, or curved line, upon the crown of the head. M. Dufourhas described a species of Amplius (Fam. Pompilidte), having only asingle ocellus (Ann. Soc. Ent. de Finance, torn. ii. p. 484.) ; and in theapterous females of certain genera they are entirely wanting. In avery few species, the eyes themselves appear also to be entirelywanting.The antennae are very variable in structure in the different groups ;those of the males are generally much more developed than in theother sex, and often furnished with various appendages. The numberof the joints varies very greatly in the aberrant tribes, or those furnishedwith an ovipositor ; but, in the typical aculeate division, theseorgans are filiform, or setaceous and simple, and almost uniformlycomposed of thirteen joints in the males, and twelve in the females.The mouth is composed of a membranous or leathery labrum ; apair of horny mandibles, a pair of long membranous or leathery maxillae,each provided with an articulated palpus, varying in the numberof its joints from one to six; and a lower lip, or tongue, having a basalmentum ; lateral palpi, also varying in the number of their joints fromone to four, and occasionally with slender filaments, or paraglossse :this organ varies in length according to the size of the maxillae, in themotions of which it participates. In many species the mandiblescannot be regarded as organs of manducation, being employed solelyin the construction of the nest ; the maxillae, also, are unfitted formastication, uniting with the lower lip and its appendages, to whichthey form a kind of sheath, and forming an elongated rostrum, of verycomplex construction, by which they collect their food, which consistsof honey, and forming a passage to the entrance of the alimentarycanal. This latter character may, indeed, as St. Fargeau suggests(Hist. Nat. Ins. Hymen., tom. i. p. sos), be regarded as the most distinguishingtrait of the order.The body of these insects is covered with a hard scaly integument,the three portions of which it is composed being ordinarily distinctfrom each other.The head is attached to the thorax by the narrowed part of theprothorax ; it is generally transverse, and narrower than the thorax.The thorax generally forms an oval mass ; the prothorax, to whichthe fore legs are attached, is of very small size, owing to the necessarilyincreased development of the other thoracic segments supportingHYMENOPTERA. 75the wings ; the only portion visible from above (except in a few species,which have an elongated neck, as Xiphydria, &c.) being the partwhich is usually termed the collar, having its posterior marginarched, and sometimes extending to the base of the fore wings, andforming the front of the upper portion of the thorax. It is, however,so much detached from the remainder of the prothorax, that Mr.Kirby considered it as not belonging thereto, but as an organ, suigeneris ; Messrs. MacLeay and Audouin, however, agree in regardingit as a portion of the prothorax, although they differ as to its exactanalogue. (Consult Kirby and Spence, Introdd., vol. iii. p. 549., MacLeay's Memoir in the eighteenth number of the Zool. Journ.,A\xdiO\x\ii&translation thereof, with additional notes, in the Ann, les SciencesNature., tom. xxv., Haliday, in Entomol. 3Iag.,\o\. v. p. 212., and Burmeister'sManual, English edition, p. 78.) The two other thoracicsegments are united into a mass ; the mesothorax, from bearing thelargest pair of wings, being more extensively developed than the ,and bearing on its upper surface a conspicuous plate, whichis the mesothoracic scutellum ; and at the base of the fore wings is apair of small corneous pieces, termed regulate. According, however,to Audouin and Latreille, the terminal portion of the thorax, in whicha pair of lateral spiracles is observable, is the ideal representative ofthe basal segment of the abdomen (in those species which have theabdomen pedunculated) ; the metathorax itself being supposed to bereduced above, to a narrow arch, whilst the first apparent segmentof the abdomen, forming the peduncle in certain groups, is, in effect,the second abdominal segment. Messrs. Kirby, MacLeay, SaintFargeau, and Burmeister, however, consider this spiracle-bearing portionas the termination of the metathorax; and I have clearly shown,in a memoir upon the anatomy of the earwig, published in the Transactionsof the Entomological Societies, vol.i., that the metathorax is providedwithapair of spiracles.* In a memoir, published in the twenty-fifthnumber of the Entomological Magazine, I have also endeavoured toprove that the hind part of the thorax in the petiolated Hymenoptera,cannot be regarded as abdominal ; and, in a subsequent page, under theConsult Latreille {Fam. Nat,, p. 259.), Cuvier rapport, on Audouin's Mt-noire,p. 11.), MacLeay, (in Zool. Journ., No. 18.), AudouiH (in Ann. Soc. Nat.,tom. Xxv), Burmeister manual, p. 85.), Saint Fargeau hist. Nat. Ins. Hymen.,tom. i. p. 78.).76 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.family Tenthredinidae, I have entered into the same subject, as regardsthe species which have the abdomen sessile.The wings are four in number ; they are naked, membranous, andhorizontal, the anterior pair being much larger than the posterior,with a scaly plate (tegula Latr.) at the base of the former ; they aremoreover furnished with corneous nerves, or, more properly speaking,veins arranged longitudinally and transversely, but much fewer innumber than in the Neuroptera, so that they do not form a close network,as in the latter order ; the spaces, or areas enclosed betweenthese nerves are of various sizes, and are termed cells, and which areof great service in the investigation of the inferior groups and genera,as first pointed out by Moses Harris, in his Exposition of EnglishInsects, published in 1782, and subsequently more fully developed byJurine, in his Nouvelle Method de classes les Hymenopteres, &jC. (4to.1807).* The anterior wings are also furnished with an incrassatedspot, termed the stigma, near the extremity of the anterior margin,from which proceeds a nerve of a curved form, running towards thetip of the wing, and enclosing one or two cells, termed marginal orradial; below, and running nearly parallel with this curved nerve, isanother, connected therewith by transverse nerves, enclosing severalcells, termed the submarginal or cubital. The number of these nervesis, however, liable to considerable reduction, the wings being almost,and even entirely, destitute of nerves in some of the minute species,constituting the families Chalcididse and Proctotrupidae.Another character of the order consists in the connexion, duringflight, of the two wings on each side of the body, by means of a seriesof minute hooks along the anterior margin of posterior wings whichMore recently, Jurine, in the 24th volume of the Memoirs of the Academyof Turin, Saint Fargeau (Hist. Nat. Hymenopt., p. 46 — 69.)) Shuckard, in amemoir published in the first volume of the Transactions of the Entomol. Soc. ofLondon, and in his work on the^British Fossorial Hymenoptera, Gravenhorst (Ichneu-7nonologia Etiropcea, vol. vi. plate 1.), Haliday (Entomol. Mag., vol. v. p. 211.),Professor Wesmael (Monogr. Braconides de Belgique, pi. 1.), and Dr. Th. Hartig(Die Aderfl. DentchsL, pi. 7. fig. 1.) have respectively examined in great detail thecomposition of the wings of the Hymenoptera, applying distinct names to the differentcells and to each vein. But as the nature of the wing-ribs is now clearlyascertained to be that of veins, it appears to me that a more natural mode of treatingthem than has hitherto been proposed must be based upon the relation of thedifferent minor veins with those which are employed in the greater ascending anddescending currents.HYMENOPTERA. 77catch the hinder margin of the anterior wings, thus producing onecontinuous surface on each side.The legs are generally long and slender, and the tarsi (except inafew minute species, — Eulophus,) are 5-jointed. In the females ofmany fossorial species the anterior tibiae and tarsi are furnished withstrong lateral bristles, useful in clearing away the sand in nidification ;and, in the bees, the basal joint of the tarsi is greatly increased insize : these and other modifications of form are consequent upon diversityof economy.The abdomen is very variable in the number of its segments, especiallyin the Terebrantia. In the Aculeata it is, for the most part, composedof seven segments in the males, and six in the females. Its formis also very various ; in some species being sessile or attached to theposterior part of the thorax by its entire breadth, and, in others, beingconnected therewith by a more or less slender peduncle. In the femalesthis part of the body is furnished with an instrument consistingof five or six valves, or setae. Although the various uses to which thisinstrument is applied, in the different groups, as a borer, saw, or venomoussting, require correspondent modifications in structure, yet itappears to me that a typical formation is to be traced throughoutthe various forms under which it appears ; it is defended externallyby a pair of lateral flattened plates, articulated near the centre,or, rather, near the point where they emerge from the anal cavity,the edges being externally applied closely together, forming a sheathfor the protection of the internal organs, which consist of a pair ofdarts, or retro serrated spiculae, which are alternately thrust forwardand withdrawn, being themselves enclosed in an internal sheath. Inthe aculeated tribes, the latter, enclosing the two speculate, constitutesthe sting, but they are so fine that they appear to the naked eye toconsist but of a single piece, the articulated sheaths being internal. Inthe Ichneumonss with exserted ovipositors, the two sheaths are equallyexserted, constituting the two sheaths of the ovipositor itself, which,although appearing like a simple bristle, is formed like the sting ofthe bees, &c. In the saw-flies, the spiculae are broad, serving as saws,the internal sheath being also flattened and divided along its wholelength into two portions, forming supports, like the thickened backs ofthe ordinary hand-saw to the saws themselves. Tl>e outer sheaths aredistinct and broad, the saws lodging between them when unemployed.Saint Fargeau regards the ovipositor, oroviscapte,as he terms it, and the78 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Sting as distinct instruments, and stating that there is a tribe whichpossesses both organs. (^HisL Nat. Hymenopt., p. 80.) I cannot butthink, however, that there must be some mistake in this assertion.Burmeister has given another and apparently incorrect view of theanalogous structure of this organ. (^^Manual of Entomb, p. 1 98.)Exceptions, of course, exist to almost all the characters of the order :thus, apterous insects are found in the families Homicide, Mutillidce,Chalcididae, Cynipidae, &c. Some ants are destitute of mandibles ;others do not possess an aculeus ; and some do not appear to possessthe least trace of organs of sight.The Hymenoptera undergo that species of metamorphosis whichhas been termed incomplete, the pupa itself being incomplete; thelarvae, in the majority, are vermiform and footless; the mouth in theseis but slightly developed. In the saw-flies, however, the larvae resemblethe caterpillars of Lepidoptera, having a scaly head and six scaly feet,and numerous fleshy prolegs, and the mouth is also strongly manipulated; the mandibles, maxillae, and lips, being distinct and of a moderatesize ; the extremity of the under lip is also furnished with a spinneret,for the discharge of the silken threads employed in the constructionof the cocoon. The larvae of the saw-flies feed upon leaves, and thoseof the Siricidte upon wood ; but those of the remainder of the orderbeing destitute of legs, are indebted to the instinctive care of theparent flv, which deposits her eggs in those situations where the futuregrubs will be certain of an ample supply of food, either in the interiorof the bodies of other insects (as in the Ichneumonss, &c.), or by feedingupon insects which have been captured and deposited with the eggs (asin the Fossores), or by devouring the substance of vegetable galls raisedby the irritating matter deposited by the female at the time of opposition(as in the Cynipidae), or lastly, by feeding upon vegetablematter, as pollen paste, deposited with the egg, in curiously constructednests, as in many bees. The larvae of the ants, however, as well as ofsome species of bees, and other social species, are tended and fed bythe perfect neuter insects, with as great care as though they were theirown offspring. When arrived at their full growth, and after undergoingseveral previous mounting, these larvae are transformed into inactivepupae, in which all the limbs of the future insect are observable,encased in distinct sheaths, and folded upon the breast. In somesmall species of the order, chiefly belonging to the family Chalcididae,the limbs are so firmly arranged together, that the pupa has the appear-hymenoptera.79ance of an obtected (Lepidopterous) chrysalis. Dr. F. T. C. Rateshas published a memoir in the Nova Acta Nature. Ctirios. (torn.xvi. 1832), entitled Uber Entivickelung der Fusslosen Hymenopterahaven mit tenderer rucksicht auf die getting Formica, the chiefobject of which is to prove that the first segment of the body, as wellas the head of the apodal larva, corresponds with the head of thepupa ; that the fourth segment of the body (exclusive of the head)corresponds with the metathorax, and the fifth segment with the abdominalpeduncle. Ratzeburg appears to have arrived at this conclusionfrom having noticed that, in the larva immediately preceding thechange to the pupa state, the eyes of the pupa appear visible throughthe slender skin of the second segment (inclusive of the head), andthat the fifth and sixth segments are contracted. This view of thesubject is so completely at variance with what is observed in other,pedate larvae, in which it is certain that the head of the larva correspondswith the head of the pupa and imago, and the circumstancesnoticed by Ratzeburg are so easily accounted for upon consideringthe necessary increased size of the head of the enclosed pupa overthat of the larva, that I do not hesitate to consider these views as untenable,as I have more fully endeavoured to prove in a memoir uponthis subject, published in the Transactions of the Entomological Society(vol. ii. p. 121.).On arriving at the perfect state, these insects, for the most part,take but little nourishment, and this almost exclusively consists ofthe nectar of flowers. Many species, indeed, especially belonging tothe family of the bees, may be observed, from morning till night, busyin the flowers ; they are, however, occupied in collecting pollen andhoney for the stores of their future progeny, rather than providingfood for themselves ; and the same remark may be made respectingthe ferocious Fossores, which may be observed dragging along thedead bodies of other insects, which they themselves do not devour.The wasps and ants are certainly more or less carnivorous ; but thehavoc which these insects make in our wall-fruit prove that they areequally partial to vegetable matter ; and cells filled with honey havebeen observed in the nests of some Polistides, having even been foundby M. Aug. Saint Hilaire in the nests of the Brazilian P. licheguana,a very venomous species. The affection which the ants bear to theAphides having for its object the obtaining a supply of the saccharinefluid emitted by the latter, called honey dew is also a proof of the80 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.same fact. Hence, the various forms observable in the structure of themouth of these insects, notwithstanding the uniformity of the nature oftheir food, are dependent upon the form of the flowers from which thenectar is procured ; the means by which it is prepared and transportedeither for food or for store for the future young ; and the various modesin which the different parts of the mouth are employed in the constructionof the nests. For instance, if a flower be long and tubular, it isnecessary that the tongue should be elongated and slender ; whereas inthose species which collect the honey from shallow or flat flowers, thetongue is shortened. In those species, again, which collect honey forstore for their young, the tongue and its appendages are of large size ;whereas in those which need only a very small supply of honey fortheir own support, it is short and narrow. The form of the mandibles,again, is entirely dependent uj^on the mode of construction of the nest,serving as trowels, rasps, &c. The order is also anomalous, from comprisingspecies which are composed of three kinds of individuals,namely, males, females, and neuters. The latter occur in no otherorder of insects except in the single Neuropterous family Termitidae ;and as they exist only in the social species, where a great share of thelabour of the community is cast upon a certain portion of the inhabitants,it is necessary for the due performance of the labour by thelatter, that they should not interfere with the duties of the individualsoccupied in continuing the race ; and their sexual organs and instinctsare accordingly rendered singularly abortive. In all other respectsthey are females. These peculiarities will however more properlyobtain notice under the respective families. The duration of theexistence of these insects never exceeds one year, there being onlyone generation during that period.This order is of very considerable extent, being apparently inferioronly to the Cleopatra. Messrs. Kirby and Spence have estimated thenumber of its species as averaging about one fourth of the insect population.In this country we probably possess 3000 species, of whichtwo thirds are of minute size. These insects, judging at least from thenumber of large species sent home by travellers, appear to be farmore abundant in tropical climates than in our country. The speciesseldom occur of a very large size, very few attaining or exceeding twoinches in length, or three in the expansion of the wings.Messrs. Kirby and Spence seem to consider that, in respect to themode of taking their food, the Hymenoptera can belong to neither ofHYMENOPTERA. 81the great divisions Mandibulata and Haustellata, but that they reallylap their food, and might thence be termed rapiers, their mandiblesbeing employed in their economy. Dumeril however, (considerate.General., p. 9.), gives them " la double faculty" of masticating andsucking the food, considering the lower organs of the mouth as forming" une sorte de tube et de langue." Hence Lamarck makes theHymenopterathe connecting order between the Mandibulata and Haus-tellata. Latreille, attaching greater importance to the organs of flightthan to the mouth, lias placed the Hymenoptera between the Neuropteraand Lepidoptera, regarding Phryganea and Termes as formingthe passage between the tM'o former orders and the long-tongued beesas approaching the Lepidoptera. (considerate. General., p. 73. 76.),Another circumstance, confirming the relationship with the last-namedorder, occurs in the resemblance between the larvae of the Saw-fliesand the caterpillars of the Lepidoptera.Mr. MacLeay, on the other hand, places the Hymenoptera betweenthe Cleopatra (with which they are supposed to be connected by theosculant order Strepsiptera), and the Trichoptera, the Tenthredinidaebeing considered as Trichopterous, and the Uroceridae as forming anosculant order, Bomboptera, between the Trichoptera and Hymenoptera,which last order is thus reduced to the species possessingapodal larvae ; thus, by means of the connection between the Ants(Formicid3e),and White Ants (Termitidae); and theCaddice-flies(Phry-ganeidae), and Saw-flies (Tenthredinidae), a strong relation is shownto exist between the Linnaean orders Hymenoptera and Neuroptera.It seems to be admitted on all hands that the insects, which are thereal analogues of the present order, exist in the Dipterous order, almostevery Hymenopterous group having its representative in the latter.Mr. MacLeay has also noticed the apodal structure of the larvae asanalogous in both orders, adding also the incomplete or coarctatenature of the metamorphosis : no Hymenopterous insect, however,undergoes the latter kind of transformation.The order was established by Linnaeus under the name of Hymenoptera(naked wings), in the 4th edition of the Systema Naturce (1744) ;it had previously, by the old naturalists, been united with the Neuroptera.In this edition, as well as in the 1st edition of his FaunaSuecica (in which work the name of the order was changed to Hymenoptera),it was composed of only four genera, Tenthredo, Ichneumon,Apis, and Formica ; but in the subsequent writings of the il-vol.II. G82 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.lustrous Swede, the genera Cynips and Urocerus were separated fromTenthredo ; Sphex, Chrysis, and Vespa from Apis, and Mutilla fromFormica. In his last edition of the Systema Naturce, 314- Hymenopterousspecies were described ; but in Gmelin's 13th edition of thiswork, their numbers were increased to 1241. Other genera wereadded by Geoffroy, Fabricius, Panzer, &c., but the first attempt todistribute these generic groups into primary sections was successfullymade by Latreille, who divided the order into, 1st. The Terebrantia;and, 2d. The Aculeata ; * the former including the Saw-flies (Secusand the Cuckoo-flies (Pupivora) ; and the latter comprising theAnts (Heterogyna), Sandwasps (Fossores), Wasps (Diploptera), andBees (Mellifera). In the Terebrantia the construction of the abdomenand ovipositor and the antennae offer the most satisfactory charactersfor classification, but which become almost useless from theiruniform structure amongst the Aculeata ; resource is therefore had,in the latter section, to the wings, the habits of the insects, and thenature of the food of the larvae, &c.Mr. MacLeay, excluding Tenthredo and Urocerus from the order,divides it into five gi-ours : — 1. Anthophila (Bees), connected by theWasps (the folding of the wings of which does not appear to him to be acharacter of so much importance as it possesses in Latreille's system),with 2. Rapacity (Sand-wasps); 3. Pupivora (Cuckoo-flies, &c.) ; 4.Heterogyna (Ants); and 5. Tubulifera (Ruby-tails). The removal ofthe Ants (and Mutillae), from their intimate allies the Anthophila andRapacity, to a situation between the parasitic Pupivora and Tubulifera,cannot be maintained. In like manner, and for the reasons given byMessrs. Kirby and Spence (introduce., vol. iv., p, 374.), and uponother considerations which I have detailed in my volume upon Insectsin the Cabinet Cyclopcedia of Dr. Larder, I do not adopt Mr. MacLeay'sremoval of the Tenthredinidee and Uroceridae ; and thereforepropose the following arrangement, founded chiefly upon the views ofLatreille : —Sect. I. Terebrantia, Za^re?7/e, (HymenopteraAberrantia), exhibitingvery variable structure, but having the abdomen of the femalesfurnished with an instrument employed as a saw or borer for depositingthe eggs. Antennae various.Sub-section 1. Phytiphaga, Sessiliventres, Securifera, orIt may be noticed that Linnaeus thought of dividing the Hymenoptera into twosections, " secundum aculeum prae4torium vel litera," (Philos. En4tomb, 4to.,p. 29.)HYMENOPTERA. 83Serrifera, having the abdomen sessile, the larvae feedingupon vegetable matter, with a well developed mandibulatedmouth. Fam. ]. TenthredinidcB. 2. Uroceridce.Sub-section 2. Entomophaga (Pupivora Latr.), having theabdomen attached to the thorax by a portion only of itstransverse diameter : larvae with slightly developed manipulatedtrophi, for the most part feeding parasitically uponother living insects.Division 1. Spiculffera, abdomen with an elongate univalveoviduct : larvae for the roost part feeding parasitically uponother living insects. Fam. 3. Cynipidce. 4. Evaniida:. 5.Ichneumonidce. 6. Chalcididcs. 7. ProctotrvpidcB.Division 2. Tubulifera, Latr. Extremity of abdomen tubular,retractile, and furnished with a minute sting. Larvaefeeding upon the larvae of other Hymenoptera, or upon deadinsects deposited by the parents of such larvae for the supportof the latter. Fam. 8. Chrysididce.Sect. II. Aculeata, Latreille (Hymenoptera Normal, or thetypical portion of the order), the abdomen of the females (andneuters), armed with a sting connected with a poison reservoir.Antennas of the males, females 12-jointed.Sub-section I. PniEDONES, Latr. (Heterogyna, Fossores, and Di-plotters,Latr.^ having the basal joint of the posterior tarsicylindrical, not dilated, nor formed for collecting pollen : larvaefeeding upon other insects stored up, or upon animal or vegetablefluids provided by neuters. Fam, 9. Crahronidcc, 10. Larridce,II. BemhecidcB, 12. Sphegidce, 13. Scoliidce, 14. MutillidtB15. Homicide, 16. Vespidce.Sub-section 2. Mellifera, Latr., having the basal joint of theposterior tarsi dilated and pollinigerous. Larvae feeding uponhoney or pollen paste, deposited by the parent, or collected byneuters. Fam. 17. Andrenidm., 18. Apidre.A succession of affinities appears to exist amongst these families.The bees, which are the most perfectly organised and typical insectsof the order, lead to the Vespidas by means of such short-tonguedbees as Pylorus, &c.; whilst the transition from the wasps by thesolitary species (Odynerus, (Sic.) to the Crabronidas, Sphegidte, Bem-becida), Scoliidas, and Mutillidas, is almost unbroken. The ants areof difficult location. Their introduction immediately preceding the• G 284 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.wasps, according to the views of Latreille (genera Crustaceorum, 8^-c.,vol. iii. p. 220.), interrupts the series founded upon the great resemblancebetween such genera as Philanthus and Vespa (Latr.Consul. Generales, p. 76.), and upon the fossorial habits of certainVespidae ; whilst, by placing the ants at the head of the Prsedones,as in the later works of the same author, they are far removed fromthe social bees and wasps with which they agree in their entireeconomy. I have adopted the former situation for this family, althoughI cannot but think it would violate fewer relationships werethe ants to terminate the order ; their supposed affinity with theMutillidffi would, indeed, in this view be broken ; but the relationbetween these two families is in reality very slight. By this meansthe series above-mentioned would be maintained, and the connectionexisting between the aberrant Chrysididse and certain Fossores, asevinced by their habits, maintained. In the construction of theovipositoi-, as well as in the nervures of the wings, some Chrysididaenearly approach the Proctotrupidae, especially certain splendid exoticspecies which I have seen in the Royal Museum of Berlin, allied toBethyllus*; the genus Stephens seems to connect the Ichneu-monica and Evaniidas, which latter are regarded by Latreille asnearly related to the Uroceridte. The Cynipidae appear to me however,in their gall-forming and consequent herbivorous habits, toapproach nearer to the Tenthredinidas, some of which are similarlygall-formers. In the structure of the ovipositor they also approachOryssus amongst theUroceridac, whilst in the parasitic habits of severalrecently observed species (Allotria victrix, JVestw., Sc.) they areclosely connected with some of the minute Adscitous Ichneumonss,especially Aphidius, &c. The Urocerida?, in the structure both of theovipositor and larva?, admirably intervene between the Entomophagaand Tenthredinidae ; which last are certainly farther removed from thetypes of the order than any other of the Hymenoptera. -j-The genus Betliyllus seems to be nearly allied to certain Tiphia. Mr. Holidayeven seems to regard it as aculeate, and as closely connected with Stigmus ;from his account of its habits it also appears to be fossorial.•f- By reversing the groups composing the section Aculeata, as arranged above,the bees, which are certainly the types of the order, would be removed to thegreatest distance from the adjacent orders of Trichoptcra (with which the saw-fliesfrom the connecting link) and Cleopatra (with which some species of ants, accordingto Mr. Mac I^eay, form the connection). By this means, however, the circularsuccession would be prevented, the ants and saw-flies having no bond of union.HYMENOPTERA. 85It remains shortly to notice the arrangements recently proposed byStephens, Saint Fargeau, Dahlbom, and Hartig ; the three last ofwhom have devoted almost exclusive attention to this order. Thearrangement of Mr. Stephens agrees with that given above, exceptthat a third section (inappropriately termed Tubulifera) is formed ofthe families Chrysididae, Chalcididac, Proctotrupidae, and Cynipidae,and placed after the bees. In adopting this plan, Mr. Stephens wasdoubtless influenced by the remarks of Mr. MacLeay upon the supposedaffinities between the Chrysididre and some splendid foreignbees, and between the Chalcididae and the order Strepsiptera, whichMr. Stephens places immediately after the Hymenoptera. The removalof the Cynipidae, Chalcidida?, &c., from the Ichneumonidae, isclearly unnatural, as well as the juxtaposition of the latter and theants.The views of M. Saint Fargeau, as developed in various articles inthe Encyclopedic Methodise, 3Iagasbi de Xoologie, Annales de laSociete Entomol. de France, and more especially in his Hist. Nature.des Hymenopteres., are highly interesting, being the result of a scrupulousexamination of " toutes les parties des corps de 1' Hymenopteraadults, dont la forme est l' expression de ses habitudes morales etmeme de sa vie sous la forme de larve " (hist. Nat. Hym. p. 89.).The adoption of these views has necessarily required a minute inquiryinto the habits of the various groups, and an equally carefulexamination of the variations of structure dependent thereupon ; andits effects are perceived in the arrangement of the families. Theorder is divided into two sub-orders, corresponding with the twoprimary sections given above, but to which the names of HymenopteresOvitithers (or Aculeata), and Oviscapters (or Terebrantia)are applied, in allusion to the mode of depositing the eggs. In theformer there is said to be no exterior elongation of the oviduct, theeggs passing from the aperture of this organ into an anal cavity*,which opens horizontally, and discharges the egg near the food preparedfor the future larva, the female being moreover armed with asting. In the Oviscapters the eggs are introduced into the interior ofvarious bodies, and it is necessary therefore that the oviduct shouldFigured by Reaumur {{Mem. torn. v. pi. 29. fig. 1.). This figure is at variancewith the more elaborate figures of Swammerdam (pi. 18 and 19. ) ; hence, as wellas from the slight degree of attention hitherto bestowed upon the mode in whichthe egg is dischai-goil in these tribes, I feel inclined to regard Saint Fargeau's definitionwith distrust.G 386 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.be externally prolonged for this purpose ; which external elongation isnamed the oviscapt. The sub-order', Ovitithers, is divided into Phys(the larvae of which feed upon vegetable fluids), and Zoo-pages(the larvae of which feed upon other insects, larvae, or spiders).The Phytiphages are divided into either Sicilians (nest-makers), or parasites.The Sicilians are divided into the social and solitary species,and the social species into those whose communities exist severalyears, and those which are annual.The Phytiphagous, nest-making, social, perennial, Ovitithers, comprisethe family of the Ants, and the two genera Apis and Meliorategenus Bombus, and the family Polistides (including Vespa,Polistes, Epipone, and some new genera of social wasps) are annual.So far only have the details of this system been developed. Thatthis view of the subject is highly interesting; and likely to lead, whenfully worked out, to important results in the classification of theorder, cannot be doubted. At the same time when we see by thismode of arrangement, insects widely separated, which are most intimatelyallied in general structure, although varying in the form ofthose particular organs which are employed in constructing a nest —when, for instance, Psithyrus and Euglossa are removed far fromBombus, Odynerus from Polistes, cic., we cannot, as it seems to me,but question whether too great an importance has not been bestowedupon the "habitudes morales" of these insects. I have, however,elsewhere entered more fully into this question (brit. Cycl. vol. ii.p. 874.), and shall only add that, in many cases, as for instance inPsithyrus, Nomadaa, Ceropales, &c., the parasites, as they are notquite correctly termed, merely deposit their eggs in the already provisionednests of other insects, and that the progeny of the intruder beingfirst hatched, consume the food stored up for the real inhabitant. Thereis, therefore, no real difference between the constitution and more importantorganisms of these miscalled parasites and the species uponwhich they are parasitic. It is therefore as absurd to place themapart, as it would be to separate the cuckoo, as a distinct primarydivision, from other birds.Dr. Dahlbom, a most assiduous Swedish Hymenopterologist, hasrecently published a very interesting sketch of the distribution of thisorder in his Clavis Novi Hymenopterorum Systematic (Lunae, 1835,4to.). He considers the fossorial Hymenoptera as the analogues of theMammalian Primates, on account of the very imperfect or undevelopedIIYiMENOPTERA. 57State of the young and the great activity of the predaceous imago,whilst the herbivorous Tenthredinidae, from their more perfectly organisedand active larvae and sluggish imago, appear to represent thePectora at the end of the order. He considers the order as containingfour principal divisions, which, from their habits, he names Raptatoria,Parasiticaa, iEdificatoria, and Plantivora, each being connected withthe other three by means of transition groups.His more detailed view of the distribution of the families "externa, metamorphose moribusque simul consideration," doesnot appear to be quite in accordance with the quaternary divisionmentioned above, being evidently artificially constructed, as appearsfrom the numbers attached to the families. The following is aconcise abstract of it : —I. Imago with petiolated abdomen. Larva apod, subvermiform.A. Imago predaceous, aculeate, solitary, fossorial. Larvas insectivorous, orgranivorous.Fam. 1. Compiling, 3. Cellini, 7. Bembicini, 5. Pemphredonides,4. Spliegides, 2. Narrates, 6. Carronades.B. Imago stylLferous, tubuliferous or aculeated, solitary. Larvae granivorous,or pupivorous.Fam. 8. Ichneumonides, 9. Braconides, 10. Evaniales, 20 Matrices,13. Slides, 14. Tiphiales, 21. Nomadic, 11. Pteromaliui, 18. Eumenides,12. Chrysidides, 17. Sapygini, 15. Mutillaria;.C. Imago nest-building, living in society. Larvae omnivorous.Fam. 19. Vespasian (sociales), 15. Formicaria;.D. Imago nest-building, solitary or social. Larva herbivorous.Fam. 22. Andrenides, 23. Anthophorini, 24. Apiariaj (sociales).E. Imago living in galls, with the abdomen compressed. Larvae feeding ongalls.Fam. 25. Cynipseaa.II. Imago with sessile and depressed abdomen; oviduct spiral. Larvaj carnivorous?.Fam. 26. Orsini.III. Imago with sessile and depressed abdomen. Larva' eruciform, pedate, plan-timorous.Fam. 27. Suicides [Urocerida], 28. Tenthredinides.With the exception of the different location and juxtaposition ofthese primary groups the arrangement here given is not materiallyunlike that of Latreille. The section B appears to be a most artificialassemblage, sufficient to prove, in connection with the admissionof Dahlbom (that certain parasitic species occur in the dictatorial,herbivorous, and gallivorous groups, which nevertheless agree completelyin general habits, as, for instance, Psithyrus amongst the bees,&c.) that a distribution of the Hymenoptera, based upon natural habitsG 488 Modern CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.alone, is as completely artificial as any arrangement resting upon anyother single character. Thus the Eumenides and Mutillariac amongstthe Parasiticaa are strictly dictatorial ; and, if the parasitic Psithyrus,&c., be admitted into the iEdificatoria, there is no ground for excludingthe Nomadic. In this respect the views of Dahlbom are not soprecise as those of Saint Fargeau, which are based, not only upon thenatural habits but also upon the precise structure of those individualorgans which are employed in performing such habits.Dr. Theodore Hartig, in a memoir published in Wiegmanns Archiv.1837, No. 2., and in his Die Aderfiugler Deutchslaiids, has proposedan arrangement founded upon the external characters of the imago,and originating in a dichotomy, nearly agreeing with that of La-trifle,well characterised by the structure of the trochanters, a peculiaritynot previously adopted for this purpose.{tibiis antics spines apicalibus"! TT p. ,. ,duabus - - j ' J' 1 ' o' •tibiis antics spina apical 1 tt -v i ^^ ' J- H. Xylophaffa.unica - - J J L aabdomen vel sessile vel petiolato - - II, Parasiticaa.Variorum poetic. article. 1 mus. simplex H. Sapientia.Tars. post, article. 1 mus. plerumque"! tt * ^i i -idilatatus - - - ^]H. Anthoplnla.HymenopteraDitrochaTrochanteribusarticulates)HymenopteraMonotrochaTrochanteribusinarticulate)The Phyllophaga comprises the family of the saw-flies ; the Xylophagathat of the Uroceridae ; the Parasiticaa, those of the Evaniidae, Ichneu-monica, Chalcididae, Proctotrupidae and Cynipidae ? ; the Sapientiaconsists of the Sand-wasps, Wasps, Ants, and Chrysididae ; and heAnthophila, the solitary, social, and parasite Bees.The TEREBRANTIA, or first general and aberrant section of theHymenoptera, is distinguished by having the posterior trochanters2-jointed, and the abdomen in the females furnished with a lamellaeor filiform, auger-like, and generally more or less exserted instrument,employed for the purpose of depositing the eggs in the various bodiesdestined for their reception. This instrument is connected with glandswhich do not secrete a highly concentrated poison, although it isevident that, in some species (as the Gall-flies, and some Tenthre-divide), the act of oviposition is accompanied by the emission of anirritating and analogous fluid.* The antennae are very variable in theThe Ichneumonida?, when alarmed, endeavour to use the ovipositor as an organof defence, and certainly emit a fluid. (See E. W. Lewis, on Pimpla stcrcorator ;and my additional observations, Mag. Nat. Hist. vol. vi. p. 414.)HYMENOPTERA. 89number and form of their joints, both in the various species, and inthe sexes of the same species. The females do not lay up a storeof food, either of pollen paste, or other insects, for the supply of theirprogeny.The section Terebrantia comprises the two subjection,A. PHYTIPHAGA. Abdomen sessile. Divisible intoa. Serrifera. ^ armed with saws.b. Terebellifera. 9 armed with a borer.B. ENTOMOPHAGA. Abdomen pedunculated. Divisible intoa. Spiculifera. Abdomen not tubular at the extremity ; ovipositor spiculab. Tuhulifera. Abdomen tubular at the extremity ; ovipositor sting-like.Messrs. Saint Fargeau and Serville have proposed another mode o^distribution of the Terebrantia, founded upon variations in the formof the ovipositor, proposing five families ; namely, I. Serrifera (Ten-thereto),2. Spirifera (Cynips and Oryssus), 3. Terebellifera (Chalcis,Ichneumon, Evania, and Sirexx), 4. Canalifera (Proctotrupes), and5. Tubulifera (Chrysis). I have not adopted this arrangement forthe reasons subsequently detailed.The first sub-section, Phytiphaga, Securifera, Sessile centres, or Terrisas it has been variously named by Latreille and Saint Fargeau,is distinguished by having the abdomen sessile, hiding the base of theposterior legs. The ovipositor in the majority consists of two saws,which are alternately protruded and employed in preparing a placefor the reception of the eggs, as well as in conducting them to theirdestination. In a few species (Terebellifera), the ovipositor is similarin its construction to the ovipositor of the Ichneumonida^, &c., whilstin one genus (Oryssus), it is spiral. The larva feed entirely uponvegetable matters, for the most part upon leaves ; a few, however, areinternal feeders, and others reside in galls, in the manner of the CynicThe larvae are furnished with completely developed organs ofmanducation; they also for the most part possess six short articulatedlegs, and a greater or less number of anal prolegs or other appendages.The Phytiphagous subsection consists of two tribes, each composedof a single family, namely,a. Serrifera, TENTHREDiNiDiE. Abdomen of the female furnishedwith a pair of saws.b. Terebellifera, Urocerid.^. Abdomen of the female furnishedwith a borer.MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.The family Tenthredinid^ *, Leach, corresponding with theLinnaean genus Tenthredo, comprises the insects ordinarily termedFig. 69.Saw-flies fig. 69. l. Cimbex femorata S ). The antennae are variablein form, and in the number of their joints, from 3 to 30 (fig. 7J. 2.BiBLIOGR. Refer. to THE TeNTHREDINID^.Klucj. Die Blattwespen, in der Gesell. Nature. Freunde zu Berlin Magazin, 1808(vol. ii); Tarpa and Lyda, 1812 — 1814 (vol. vi); Lophyrus, PterygophorusandHylotoma, 1815, 1816, 1818; Tenthredo, 1819. — Ditto, die Blattwespender Far. Samml., in Wiedemann, Zool. Mag., 1 band. 3 st. 1819. — Ditto, inEntomology. Monographien. — Ditto, in Jahrbucher der Insektenk, 8vo. 1834.Lepelletier, Conte de Saint Fargeau. Monographiaia Tenthredinum. Paris, 1823.1 vol. Svo. pp. 176. — Ditto, in Ann. Soc. Ent. de France, vol. ii. (3 sp. Cimex).— Ditto, in ditto (on gen. Sicygonia). — Ditto, in Encyclopedia Methodique,vol. x. — Ditto, in the Faune Franchise (plates only).Dahlbom. Clavis novi Hymenopt. Systematic, abject Synopsis Larvarum. crucis4to. Lund. 1835. — Dit4to, Conspectus Tenthred., &c., Scandinav.4to. 1835. — Dit4to, Prodi-omus Hymenopt. Scandinav. Svo. Lund. 1836.G. Fischer. De Nycteridio (Pteronus Panzer, Lophyrus Latr.) Act. Soc. Phys.Med. Moscow, t. i. 1806.FaUen,in. Swedish Trans. 1807, 1808. — Ditto, in ditto, 1813 (Sp. nov. Hym.Dispon. Methh.) — Ditto, Monogr. Tenthred. Suecia?, Svo. Lund. 1829.Leach, in Zool. Miscell. vol. iii.Hartig. Die Aderflugler Deutchslands, Erst. Band. Die Fallen der Blattwes-pen und Holzwespen, Svo. Berlin, 1837.Say, in Journal of Nat. Hist. Soc. of Boston, vol. ii.Hermann, in Vetensk. Acad. Handll. 1763, p. 154. (De Tenthredinibus earumqueJarvis). — Ditto, Supplement Histories Reaumuriana? Tenthredinum, inNov. Act. Upsal, t. iii. 1767.Westwood, in GrifF. An. K. P). (Perga scutellum). — Ditto, in Trans. Ent. Soc.vol. i. p. 234. (P. Lewis). — Ditto, in Proceedings, Zool. Soc. April, 1835.Newman, in Ent. Mas. Nos. 18. and 25.Hymenoptera TENTHREDINID^. 91antenna Hytoloma ^, 71. c. ant, of Croesus Septentrionalis, 71.25.ant. Celui), but generally short, the basal jot not greatly elongated.Those of the males are in some species pectinated, furcate, orlamellae (Jiff. 71. 3. antenna Schyzocerus, S , 71. 4. ant. Lophyrus,^ , 71. 5. Lophyrus $ ). The labrum is mostly transverse or quadrate,with the anterior angles rounded and pilose (y?^. 69. 7.); the mandibles,which are larger in the males than in the females, are elongated,horny, narrow, compressed, and dentated (Jif/- 69. 3, 4, 5.) ; the max-illsare elongated, membranous, and bilobed, with the maxillary palpimoderately long and 6-jointed (^ Jig. 69. 5.8.); the labium is small,arising from the membranous connection at the base of the maxillae,and is trifid at its extremity, and the labial palpi ■i-jointed (^Jiff. 69.4, 5. 9.). My Jigs. 69. 2 — 13. represent various details of Trichio-soma Decorum, Jigs. 2 — 9. exhibiting parts of the mouth ; Jig. 69. 2.shows the front of the head, with the jaws closed, and the labrumfolded over them ; Jig. 3. shows the jaws partially opened, and thelabrum shut close down upon the maxillae and labium, which are foldedup and at rest in the oral cavity, as represented in Jig. 4., in whichthe labrum is lifted up over the mandibles; fig. 6. shows the mode inwhich the maxillas and labium fold up; in Jig. 5. these parts arestretched out to their full extent, showing the basal parts or stipesof the maxilla to be as long as the terminal parts ; Jig. 7. exhibitsthe labrum ; Jig. 8. the maxilla ; and Jig. 9. the labium separately.The thorax forms a large solid mass, generally broader than thehead, (Jig 72. l. pro and mess-thorax of a Cimbex, the prothoraxdotted). The meta-thorax often exhibits two minute white spots (Censfig. 72. 2. and 3. x and j^^. 73. 6. and 7. x) at the sides of thepart ordinarily termed the post scutellum. The hinder portion of theBoscc. Sur une Nouv. Esp. Tenthredo (T. Boleti), Nouv. Bui. Soc. Phil. 181S,and in Journal de Physique, Nos. 86 and 87. — Ditto, on Cephus pygniajus,In Bull. Soc. Nat. 1823.Claret. Memoires sur quatre Esp. Tenthred., Ann. Soc. Ent. France, torn. i.Brebisson, in Nouv. Bull. Soc. Philos. 1S18 (gen. Pinlcola. Xyela).Dalman,\n Analecta Entomol. (Xyela).Sch'dffer. Die Tannensagflieger (Lojjhyrus Pini) in Abhandl. von Ins. 4to.Brulle. Metamorph. Cladius difformis, Ann. Soc. Ent. France, vol. i.Peck. Natural History of the Slug Worm, in the Collection of the Massacre. Hist.Soc. vol. V. Boston, 1799. — (Ditto, published sepnv.ntcly by Young andMinds).Linnceus, Fabricius, liossi, Panzer, Stephens, §x.92 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.metathorax or meta scutellum fig. 72. 2. and 3. s.), is divided fromits anterior part or metaprsescutum ibid, z.), by a deep impression,extending down the sides (incorrectly figured by Burmeister, Manual,pi. 12. No. 1. f. 2.), so that it appears to be a distinct segment (andconsequently portion of the abdomen), it is also furnished on each sidewith a spiracle (^^. 72. 3. o.).*That this hinders division (s.) is really a portion of the niesothorax may at once beseen by carefully comparing figures 72. 1, 2, 3. with the thorax of Cephus,Urocerus, orespecially Oryssus (^fig- 73. 6, 7.) ; in all which, as indeed in other shorter-bodiedspecies, the dorsal and ventral arcs of the real abdominal segments will be found tocorrespond together. In Cimbex ( fig. 72. Q, 3.), the episternum ibid, v.), and epic{ihid. y.) of the metathorax, are well defined, the latter giving support tothe base of the posterior coxae [ibid. t. ), whilst the meta scutellum is large, with theedges acute, and the sides deflexed (Ibid. s s.), and extending to the base of theposterior coxae, having the meta thoracic spiracle (o. ) on its deflexed sides. The analogyof these pieces with those of Vespa, figured by MacLeay (Zool. Journ. vol. v. pi. 5.fig. 1 . ) is unquestionable. In Oryssus, the meta thoracic epimeron and episternumare confluent (in the piece marked y. in fig. 73. 7.), and the meta scutellum (ibid, s.)has no acutely deflexed side, having a longitudinal direction. It might, perhaps,be at first supposed that the two arcs r. in this figure represented s s. in Jig. 72. 3.;but the position of the Cenchri ( x ) in the piece marked z. in fig. 73. 7. ; and thecircumstance that these two arcs have a distinct motion like the other abdominal segments,clearly proves that s. is' meta thoracic and r. abdominal. In some species(Cimbex, fig. 72. 1, -2, 3.), the posterior margin of the metathorax is deeply emarginate,so that it is connected with the first abdominal dorsal arc by a slenderwhite membrane (fig. 72. 2, 3.f ), which I regard as analogous to the funiculus K.of the petiolated species. In many other species, as in Aratus, Tenthredo (andalso in Urocerus), this hinder part of the metathorax is slit down the centre, whilstin Cephus, &c., the slit is dilated into a triangular excision, covered with yellowmembrane. Great confusion and consequent inaccuracy in the description of thecolouring of the respective abdominal segments has originated in the want of a carefuldiscrimination of the structure of this piece ; for instance, in Aratus Divides thebasal segment of the abdomen is said to have a white spot on each side ( Stephh. III.And. vii. p. 66.), whereas it is the posterior portion of the metatliorax which isthus marked. In Zarasa fasciata, ^ , the colours are still more strongly marked. Byall authors the abdomen is described as black, with the basal segment white, whereasthe white segment is part of the metathorax. In Oryssus coronets the abdomen issaid by all authors to be rufous, except the two black basal joints ; whereas it is thehinder portion of the metathorax (which is not slit, ^^. 73. 6. s. ) and the basal segmentof the abdomen alone (r. ) which are coloured black. In Urocerus, likewise, the abdomenis described as 9-jointed, whereas it has but eight segments; the hinder partof the metathorax having been regarded as the basal segment of the abdomen. Thenotes of Latreille upon this subject are completely at variance, supporting twodistinct theories. He distinctly states (Ligne An, tom. v. p. 268.), that the segmentwhich bears the inferior wings is separated from the following, " ou du premierde I'abdomen, par une incision ou articulation transverse." Now the part which pre-hymenopteraTENTHREDINIDffi. 93The wings are of ample size, with numerous complete cells *, anda large stigma ; the legs are of moderate length ; the posterior tibiae fare spurred in the middle in some genera ; the calcaria are of variousshapes ; and the four basal joints of the 5-jointed tai-si ( j%. 69. lo.)generally furnished beneath with small membranous appendages,which in some species resemble minute cups (fig. 69. 11.). In themale Cimbices, the basal-joint of the four posterior tarsi is producedInto a spine beneath, and clothed with wool {Jig- 71. i., hind leg,Cimbex, $ , showing the 2-jointed trochanter). The abdomen is sessile,subcylindric, and terminated in the females on the underside in apair of compressed alike plates, applied against each other. Theseorgans are curved upwards, and each is formed of two distinct portions,namely, the saw itself and the back support ; the lower edgeof the saw is finely denticulated and its upper edge is received in agroove on the under and thickened edge of the support, which is aflattened piece, also serrated on the upper edge, and which acts notunlike the back of a common saw. These organs are also obliquelyribbed, so that they present a very elegant appearance. When at restthese organs are received between another pair of larger and flattenedplates or valves, articulated in the centre; a pair of minute pilose stylesis also attached to the extremity of the last abdominal segment oneach side, which has been overlooked by Entomologists :j:, but whichcedes this " incision " bears a pair of spiracles ( Burmeister Manual, pi. 1 2. No. 1.1 B.)In p. 264., of the same work he had however as expressly said that the metathoraxest tres court, ne forme qu' un arceau superior, et il est ordinairement intendmentuni avec le premier segment de I'abdomen," which last presents two spiracles ;and consequently, that the peduncle in those species in which the abdomen is pedunculated,is the second abdominal segment ; the latter theory being adopted from theviews of M. Audouin, as above noticed, in the general observations upon the order.It is true, that in many Saw-flies the hinder portion of the metathorax, notwithstandingits peculiar character (slit or excised), has so much the appearance of a segmentof the abdomen, that the correctness of the above observations will be called inquestion. If denied, however, we shall be compelled to adopt the still less tenabletheory of Audouin and Latreille. Saint Fargeau has indeed ventured to overcomethe difficulty by rejecting both theories, considering (Hist. Nat. Hym. p. 4.) thishinder part of the metathorax as abdominal in the Sessiliventres, and ( Ibid. p. 78. )as thoracic in the Pedunculiventres.Jurine asserts that the number of cells in the wing of the imago is regulated bythe number of prolegs in the larva.•}■ I possess an anomalous undescribed genus of this family from Africa, entirelydestitute of calcaria.\ Except by Mr. Newman, who, apparently [unaware of their general existence,has named a genus in which they are prominent Euura.MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Fig. 70.also exists in the Groceries and Ichneumonidag. M^y Jigs, 70. 12 — 19.illustrate the structure of the saws of" these insects, as exhibited inTrichiosoma Decorum. Fig. 12. represents the abdomen of thefemale of this insect seen laterally, and 13. the same seen ventrally ;Jig. 14. shows the extremity of the abdomen beneath, with the terminalsegments partially opened, whilst Jig. 15. exhibits the sameparts seen laterally, with the saws themselves partly exposed. Inthese figures the segments are severally numbered, the ventral arcsbeing distinguished by the addition of x, as 7 x ; a indicates the minuteinarticulate style above mentioned ; b represents the basal, andb b the apical part of the outer sheaths of the saws ; Jig. c representsthe saws themselves, c showing the back piece or support andthe saw piece (as inJig.iG.) ; in Jig. \5. the position of the saws in actionis represented by the dotted part of the figure ; Jig. 16. represents one ofthe saws of Trichiosoma separately, and much more highly magnified;Jig. 17. exhibits still more highly magnified part of the edge of thesawing parts. 18. being one of the minute transversely striated teethof the saw, whilst Jig. 19. shows part of the inner surface of one ofthe saws of Cimbex, to represent the zig-zag grooves on its surface.The form of the saws varies considerably in its minute details indifferentspecies, and from its admirable construction it cannot bedoubted that a careful examination of its various modifications mightllu'nish ideas for improved mechanical instruments. In some speciesthe edge of the saw is very obtusely serrated, but the longer portionof each sensation is very finely denticulated. In others the sensationsare much more acute, and the denticulations on one side of eachof considerable length, in others the edge of the saw is furnished withminute rounded lobes, whilst in others these marginal lobes some-hymenoptera.— TENTHUEDINID/E. 95what resemble leaves separated by a smaller rounded lobe with radiatedcosts. In Cephus, the external valves and the ovipositor (fig.71. 24.) are formed as in the typical species, except that the sawsand their supports are not transversely striated : the same also occursin Xyela *, in which the saws and supports are membranous, exceptdown the central line of union, where they are corneous i^fig. 71. 14.).Each of these saws is attached by strong curved muscles, so that it iscapable not only of being protruded from the extremity of the abdomento a certain distance, but also of being considerably deflexed (asin fig. 70. 15.) : moreover, each of the saws, instead of being, like acommon saw, affixed to its back support, is capable of being pushedforwards and backwards, whilst the support remains fixed. In somegenera, Lyda, &c. (^fig- 71. lo), the base of the saws is greatly dilatedand elbowed. With this admirably contrived pair of instrumentsthe female Saw-fly forms a slit in the stems or leaves of plants, the twosaws acting upon the same spot with an alternate movement, onebeing protruded, whilst the other is drawn backwards, and vice versa.The action of these instruments, and their structure, has beenminutely described by Reaumur memoires, vol. v. ; and by Blot, inthe 3Iem. Soc. Linn, du Calvados, vol. i.). There is considerabledifference in the mode in which these incisions are made : thus HysRose makes a simple series of slits, whilst H. Pagan makestwo series close together. Each series consisting of numerous slits,but each slit contains only one eg. Some species, on the otherhand, introduce their eggs by means of their saws into the edges ofleaves (Nematus conjugate, Dahlb.), and others beneath the longitudinalribs of the leaves. A few, indeed, merely fasten their eggsupon the outer surface of the leaves (Nematus Grossularise, &c.) attachingthem together like a string of beads reaumur, vol. v. pi. 10.f. 8.), whilst a few place them in a mass on the surface of the leaf{ihid. pi. 11. f. 8, 9.). When the wounds thus formed are completed,an egg is deposited in each, passing down the channel or cavityformed by the internal union of the saws and their supports, by whichit is conducted to its proper destination : the deposition of each e^^^is accompanied by a drop of frothy matter, which is supposed to preventthe closing of the wound. Moreover', the sides of the saws areBy Dalman and Curtis the ovipositor of this genus is represented as single. Ihave however ascertained, by dissection, that it consists of two plates inclosedbetween the two ordinary valves.96 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.provided with a vast number of very minute points, Which serve toirritate the wound, and to cause an overflowing of the sap ; thewounds further increase in size, according to the growth of the egg,the latter curious circumstance having been discovered by VaUisnieri,and also recorded by Reaumur (vol. iii. p. 579., and v. p. 121.) ; theeggs imbibing nutriment in some unknown manner, through their membranousskins, from the vegetable juices which surround them, andattaining twice their previous size. Sometimes also these attacks aresucceeded by the production of galls of various kinds, which servefor the residence and support of the young larva. In general, however,the larvffi are external feeders ; occasionally, as in the specieswhich feed upon the leaves of the turnip and gooseberry, occurring toso great an extent, that they are the cause of real injury to thefarmer and horticulturist. These larva?, in their form and colours, aswell as in the number of prolegs with which they are provided, havea very considerable resemblance to those of the Lepidoptera ; in thetrue caterpillars, however, the legs and prolegs do not exceed 16in number, whereas the false caterpillars of the Tenthredinida?, (witha very few exceptions), have from 18 to 22. The prolegs differ fromthose of the Lepidopterous larvae, in being simply membranous, anddestitute of the coronet of curved spines which exist in the latter.The body is divided into twelve cylindrical segments, exclusive of thehead {Jiff. 70. 2 — 9. head and details of Trichiosoma larva) havingnine pairs of spiracles (Jig. 70. ic, head and prothorax of larva ofCimbex, to show the pro thoracic spiracle). They have only twosimple eyes (7%. 70. 9.) placed at the sides of the head ; the antennaeare very short and conical (Jir/. 70. 8.) ; the upper lip is generallyemarginate in the middle. The mandibles are powerful, horny, andmore or less toothed (Jig. 70. 3, 4.) ; the maxillae are membranous andbilobed, with short, 4-jointed palpi (Jiff. 70. 5. maxilla in situ, 70. 6.ditto, separated), and the labium is small and fleshy, with very shortconical, 3-jointed labial, palpi (Jiff. 70. 7.), and provided with a spin-naresand silk secretory, but they produce silk in a very small quantity.They almost exclusively feed upon the leaves of various trees andplants. They have also the habit, especially when alarmed, of rollingthemselves up in a spiral manner, so that in this position they beara very considerable analogy to the lulidae. Their colours are generallygreen, of various shades, with lines and spots of various colour's.They shed their skins several (ordinarily four) times, materiallyHymenoptera. — TENTHREDINID^. 97changing in appearance after the last moulting. The larvas of thedifferent genera vary in the number of the legs. Those which havebeen observed with sufficient accuracy may be thus arranged.Larvae with the extremity of the body not armed with a spine : —A. Larvaj with 22 legs (6 pectoral, 14 abdominal, and 2 caudal).a. Feeding upon the leaves of plants.Solitary, resting in a spiral manner, ejecting a fluid from the pores of thebody; forming a cocoon, (Cimbex, Trichiosoma, Cancellaria.)Solitary or social, not ejecting a fluid from the sides of the body ; forming,or not forming, a cocoon. ( Tenthredo, Athalia, and certain Atlantic, andDolerus. )b. Feeding upon the leaflets of the pine, social, not ejecting a fluid from thesides of the body ; quiescent, attached by the legs to the edges of the leaflets;forming a cocoon. (Loplii/rus.)B. Larva; with 20 legs (6 pectoral, 12 abdominal, and 2 caudal).a. Feeding upon the leaves of plants ; resting at the edges, or upon the surfaceof leaves. (Hylotoma atrata, &c. , Claudius, Prisfiphora, Nematus, Croesus,and certain Teiithredines [likewise Zarcei and Aha, according to St. .)b. Feeding upon the leaflets of the pine, social ; resting at the edge of the leaflet; forming a simple cocoon. (senatus abietinus and Leacldi.)c. Living in the galls of plants, {Nematus interdum, &c. )C Larvas with 18 legs (6 pectoral, 10 abdominal, and 2 caudal). Hylotoma enodis.D. Larvae with only 6 pectoral legs. (Linda [and Xiphydria, according to Dahlbom,but see i7ifrd] Capitis. )This table is abstracted (with additions), from Dahlbom's SynopsisLarvarum Scandinavians eruciformium ex ordines Hymenopteruniycontained in the work above noticed ; in which Dr. Dahlbom has givencareful descriptions of 63 species of larvae belonging to this family.Dr. Hartig has also entered into considerable details relative to thetransformations of the different genera, in his Die BlaUicespen, Sec.,a work which, for minute and careful investigation into the structureand habits of these species, in all their states, may be considered asone of the most excellent entomological works hitherto published.Cedar, Reaumur, and De Geer, published figures of many speciesin their different states, but those of the two former authors are oftentoo rude to be determined. (See also Bergman, in the StockholmTransactions for 1763, and in those of the Acad, of Upsal for 1767 ;likewise Disderi, in Transactions Turin Acad. \o\. ii., on the larvae ofthis family.)The larvae of the larger species (Cimbex, &c.) have twenty-twofeet, the body being covered with minute granular setigerous tubercles,like those of some of the Smerinthi, and, when alarmed, they dis-vol.H. H98 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.charge a clear greenish watery fluid, from lateral pores placed abovethe spiracles, to a considerable distance. This, however, only takesplace when the insects are in a state of nature, and is exhausted afterseven or eight discharges. (Fennel, in Slag. Nat. Hist. No. 32.)These larvae always rest on the upper surface of the leaf, rolled up inaspiral direction, the tail occupying the centre. They attain a considerablesize ; and, when full grown, they construct a strong cocoon of a brown colour, which they attach to the branchesof the trees upon which they have been feeding, or beneath fallen leaveson the surface of the earth, and in which after remaining a considerableperiod in the larva state, they are changed to inactive incompletepupa, which state lasts but a short time. De Geer (Memoires, tom. ii.tab. 33. f. 1 — 16.) and Lyonnet apostle. Mem. pi. 15. f. 20—29.) havepublished complete details of the transformations of Cimbex lutea ;and In De Geer's figs. 17 — 24. are given those of Cancellaria america.His tab. S*. f. 1 — 8., and Hartig (pi. 1. f. 1 — 23.) represent Cimbexfemorata (variables) in its different states, with elaborate details. Itis in the months of August and September that the larva of this insectis to be found on the alder, birch, and beech. From the diversity ofits food, Dahlbom states that varieties in the imago, which have beenregarded by Leach and others as distinct species, have been produced.Drewsen (in Ann. Soc. Ent. de France., 1835, p. 169.) has communicatedsome observations proving that this insect ordinarily remainstwo years in its cocoon. Frisch (^Beschr. Ins. Deutchsl. vol. iii. p. 25.),Albin (gnat. Hist. Engl. Ins. pi. 59.), Dahlbom in Wetensk. Acad.Handll. 1834, and Roesel (this. Belust. vol. ii., Bomb, and Vest.,tab. 13.) have represented the transformations of this species, whilstthose of Cancellaria amerjnae have been also described by the lastauthor ( Op. cit. tab. 1. f . 1 — 4., and tab. 2.; and by Goddard, Ins. tom.i.pi. 64.). In its earlier stages its larvae are gregarious, but by degreesthey become more and more solitary. Its cocoon is not so stronglyformed as that of Cimbex femorata, and is reticulated. Lyonnetapostle. Mem. pi. 16.) has given complete details of another largespecies of Cimbex, which De Haan gives as C. sylvanus ; but, bothin his pi. 15. f. 20. and pi. 16. f 1., the larvae are represented incorrectly,the apodal segment succeeding the meta thoracic segment beingomitted.The larva? of Trichiosoma lucorum (fig. 69. 12.) are not of uncommonoccurrence on the white thorn at the beginning of August. FromHYMENOPTERA. — TENTHREDINID^. 99'the large size and attractive appearance of these larvae, they are occasionallyattacked by ichneumon parasites. I have obtained two distinctspecies of Ichneumonidas from one cocoon belonging to an individualof Trichiosoma lucorum. I have likewise obtained specimens of aspecies of Ichneumon, and others of one of the Pteromalida^, from onecocoon.* ' Mr. Woodward also noticed the occurrence of parasites inthe cocoons of this insect, in the 3Iag. Nat. Hist. No. 23. Thecocoon fig. 69. 13., cut open to show the enclosed pupa) of this insectis as large as a small bird's egg, and is attached to the branches ofthe white thorn, upon which it may be easily perceived in the winter,when the trees are destitute of leaves. In one which I observedthe larva remained in that state through the winter, not assuming thepupa state till the end of April, and the insect appeared in the perfectstate in about a fortnight.The larvae of the genus Hylotoma are distinguished by having thesides of the abdominal segments produced over the legs, and the baseof the claws of the thoracic feet is furnished with a large fleshy tubercle.(Hartig, pi. 2. f. 12.) The larvae of H. Rose are ordinarilyobserved on the leaves of the rose, resting with the extremity of thebody elevated, and often curved into the form of S.Some larvae belonging to this genus have twenty feet, namely, sixthoracic and fourteen abdominal. Here belongs the insect which feedsupon the birch, figured in its different states by De Geer {{Mem. t. ii.p. 38. f. 32 — 35.), which has been given as Asia nitens, but whichHartig and Dahlbom properly regard as Hylotoma nstidata ; as well asaspecies which feeds on the rose, which Dahlbom gives as H. atrataKlug, but which St. Fargeau gives as H. ustulata ; also figured by DeGeer (tab. 39. f. 14-20.).The other larvae in this genus have only eighteen legs ; or, rather,the pair on the seventh abdominal segment are so small as to appearnearly obsolete. (Hartig, p. 76.) Of these species Rcisel (/«*. Belust.vol. ii. Bomb Vesp. tab. 2.) and De Geer have figured H. IlosarumKlug, Hartig (Rose St. Farg.), Dahlbom, Bouche {NaturgesxJi.p. 135., in his plate 39. f. 21 — 29.), which feeds on different species ofroses ; and H. enodis Linn., Dahlbom, and Hartig (H. atro-caeruleaSt. Fargeau), which feeds upon the sallow, is figured by De Geer(pi. 40. f. 1 — 6.). Reaumur has figured the history of two species ofRose Hylotomae in his Memoires (tom. v. pi. 14 and 15.).The details of these observations will form the subject of a separate memoir.H 2lOO MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.The cocoon in this genus is double ; the outer being reticulated,and the inner compact and close, but paler coloured.Amongst the smaller species, with 22-footed larvae, which donot emit a fluid from the pores of the body, those of Allantus precinctsFab., Hart , Dahlh., which feeds upon Lonicera caprifolia(Tenth, vespiformis St. Far., T. rustica Fourcc), have been observedby De Geer (3Iem. tom. ii. tab. S^. f. 9— 19.), and Hartig (tab. 5.f. 39.) ; likewise those of Allantus pulveratus Fez. (leucozoniusHartig, Ibid. tab. 34-. f. 20—25.).The 22-footed larva of Allantus scrophulariee Linn, is describedby Bouche nature. Ins. p. 138.), and figured, with the detailsof the transformations of this species, by Reaumur (Jem. tom. v.pi. 13. f. 12 — 23.). The insect does not form a regular cocoon, butmerely constructs an earthen cell at the foot of the Scrophularia. It isalso figured in the Entomol. Mag.{yo\.'\. pi. I. f. 2, 3.), varying incolour very considerably after the penultimate moulting of the skin ofthe larva. An allied species, A. flavicornis Kl., luteicornis Fab., hasbeen figured, in its different states, by Lyonnet (mem. Posthh. pi. 15.f. 13 — 18.). The larvae of Emphytus circus and rufo-cinctus ^/m<7 (T.pavida ^S*^. Farg.^ are found upon the rose in the autumn. The latterspecies is figured, in its different states, by De Geer (pi. 35. f. 14 — 18.).The former, when full grown, quits the leaves, and burrows into the pithof the stem to the depth of several inches, closing the aperture withits excrement, and thus morning a safe retreat for itself. (Reaumur,tom. v. p. 163. pi. 10. f. 1, 2, 3. ; Bouche, Nature. Ins. vol. i. p. 139.,by whom the transformations of Emphytus perla are also described.Ibid. p. 140.)The preceding species have smooth-bodied larvae. Those of Selan-tria ovate Linn., forming (with some other .species) the sectionnamed Eriocampa by Hartig (p. 279.), are 22-footed ; but have thesegments of the body clothed with small patches of white woollymatter, giving them still more the appearance of certain caterpillars.(De Geer, Mem. tom. ii. pi. 35. f. .1 —13.) This matter is easily rubbedoff, and is not found after the final moulting of the caterpillar, which isfound upon the alder. The cocoon is double.The larvae of Selandria bipunctata are 22-footed; but theyare distinguished by having each segment of the body armed withstrong spines, forked at the tip, but which do not exist after the penultimatemoult of the larva. De Geer has represented one of theseHYMENOPTERA. — TENTH Rein Ide. 101larvae (Ment. torn. ii. pi. 35. f. 19, 20., adding figures of simple, bifurcateand 4-furcate spines) ; he was, however, unable to rear it. Hartighas figured another similar larva, found on the oak (tab. 5. f. 27 — 30.),and which he gives as that of Tenthredo bipunctata (p. 262 — 277. )»forming it (with some others) into the subgenus Hoplocampa, fromthe spines with which the larvae are armed. Reaumur (3Itm. tom.v.pi. 12.) has figured two species of these armed larvae, found upon theoak and Prunus domestica ; Lyonnet has also described one of thesespecies of spined larvae, found upon the oak (3It'm. Posthh. pi. 15.f. I — 12.), which he succeeded in rearing to the perfect state, andwhich De Haan doubtingly gives as the Dolerus hsematodes of Klug.De Geer (torn. ii. pi. 38. f. 11—13.), Reaumur (tom.v. pi. 12. f. 17,18.), and Dahlbom, have figured a very curious 20-footed larva, foundupon the alder, having the body flattened, and greatly resembling thelarvae of the butterfly genus Thecla, or the flattened AselH. Neitherof them were able to rear it, nor has Hartig been able to point outthe group to which it belongs ; he, however, introduces it into hisgreat genus Tenthredo, copying De Geer's figure (pi. 5. f. 41.).Lyonnet (Posthh. Mem., pi. 14.) has given complete details of thevarious states and structure of an undetermined species of Dolerus?*of which the larva is 22-footed.The 20-footed larvae of Selandria crash Linn, (i^thiops Fab.^,which feed upon the leaves of plum and other fruit trees, are remarkablefor the entire covering of greenish black viscid matter with whichthey are clothed, and which exudes from the sides of the body. Byday they remain quiet upon the surface of the leaves, with the headwithdrawn into the pro thoracic segment, and the latter distended ; thelegs are also concealed, so that the insect has not the least appearanceof animation, and looks more like a small portion of slime (Jig 71. 8.).(De Geer, tom. ii. tab. 38. f. 16 — 24. ; Reaumur, tom. v. plate 12. f. 1 —4.; Bouche, JVcdiu-ffesch. Ins. p. 137. ; Westwood, in Gardener's Mag.No. 92. November, 1837.) This, together with some allied species,has thence been formed by Hartig into the subgenus Blennocampa.(See his pi. 5. fig. 31.)To this subgenus also belongs the " slug worm" of North America,which occasionally commits so much injury on the cherry, pear, plum,The antennae are described as only 7-jointed, but are represented as 8-jointed ;but evidently incorrectly, as no species of the family has yet been described witheight joints.II 3MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Fig. 71.and quince, in the United States. Its history has been completelydetailed by Professor Peck, in the memoir above noticed, and whoreared one of the Encyrti (?) from it.The 22-footed larva of Athalia spinarum, according to Dahlbomand Drewsen (^Clav. Nov. Hym. Syst. p. 16.), is gregarious, andfeeds upon various species of Brassica, which it completely stripsof its leaves, leaving only the stronger nerves. There are two generationsin the course of the summer; and the larva does not formany cocoon, but merely encloses itself in an oval cell in the earth, ofwhich it plasters the sides with a glutinous secretion, mixed with theearth.The 22-footed larva of Athalia centifoliaj has periodically, inthis country, proved to be one of the most obnoxious of our insectenemies. It is of a greenish black colour, whence it has obtainedthe name of the nigger, or black caterpillar, of the turnip, to whichplant it is chiefly detrimental, by devouring the leaves, and thus totallydestroying the crop in an incredibly short space of time. Albin, in hisNat. Hist, of English Insects, 1720, pi. 62., first figured this insect in itsdifferent states, observing that whole fields were occasionally destroyedby it; and an instance is recorded in the Philos. Transact, for 1783(vol. Lxxiii. p. 317.), by Mr. Marshall, in which their destruction was sogreat that many thousand acres were obliged to be ploughed up. In1835, 1836, and 1837, it was exceedingly abundant and injurious. Theappearance of the blacks is preceded by that of the imago, a prettyyellow and black species, which first appears about the middle of Mayorbeginning of June, depositing its eggs within the parenchymatoustissue of the leaf, introducing her saw between the edges of the cuticle;and from which, in five or six days, the larvae are hatched.HYMENOPTEUA. TENTHREDINIDiE. 103These are very voracious, and shed then suis several times. Whenfull grown, they descend into the ground, forming an oval cocoon ofagglutinated earth, at the depth of several inches, the interior of whichthey plaster with a white shining secretion, and in which the earlierproduced individuals remain but a short time ; but the late broods donot make their appearance in the winged state till the followingseason.Hand-picking, and the employment of ducks to eat the grubs, arethe most serviceable remedies hitherto suggested for the destructionof these obnoxious insects.Rustics, in Entomol. Mag. vol. iii. p. 339. ; Darrell, in Trans. Zool.Soc. vol. ii. p. 67. pi. 14. ; Westwood, in Gardeners Mag. No. 86.May, 1837 ; W. C, in Saturday Mag. vol. vi. p. 181. ; Curtis brit.£^^^., October, 1836); W. W. Saunders, in Trans. Ent. Soc. vol.i.p. 76. App. ; and especially Mr. Newport, in his admirably elaborateprize essay (1838), have given ample details of the history, &c., of thisspecies.M. Brulle has published an account of the transformations of Cladiusdifformis King annal Soc. Ent. de Fr. 1832, pi. 11. f 11, 12.), thelarva of which is found upon the leaves of Rosa centifolia and .Curtis also reared this species from larvae found on the undersideof the leaves of the China rose, eating small holes through them.Dahlbom once observed it upon Salix vitalis: it is slender, subcy-cylindrical, clothed with slender upright hairs, and 20-footed. Curtissays that the anal feet do not assist them in walking. They are full-fedon the 28th of July, and the imago appears on the 11th or 12tliof August, and they form a double cocoon of a very irregular shapeamongst the leaves. Hartig has figured the larva and imago ofNematus (Pristiphorus) allies, with numerous details (pi. 2. f. 1626.). The larva is 20-footed, and closely resembles that of Cl.difformis; it feeds upon the under side of the leaves of the cherry.The larva of Nematus (Pristiphorus) Bullet DaJilh, (Phosphorus 5.)is very similar to the preceding, and inhabits the Rumex and Rubusfruticosus ; it is 20-footed, and forms a double cocoon, composed of aglutinous secretion, mixed with very fine silken threads.One of the most destructive insects in the family inhabits the gooseberry,upon which the larvae are found in society' ; from 50 to morethan 1000 being sometimes observed upon a single tree, of whichthey devour all the leaves in the beginning of the summer, so thatH 4104 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.the fruit cannot ripen. There are two generations in the course of ayear. The larva; are of a glaucous colour, with numerous transverserows of black shining pestiferous warts ; they are furnished with 20 feet.The insects also undergo their transformations in society, one attachingthe end of its cocoon to the end of the next. The species hasbeen named Nematus grossularise by Dahlbom, who has given thehistory of the species in the Vetenskaps. Acad. Handll. for 1835, andwho considers it as identical with the insect represented by Reaumur(torn. V. pi. 10. f. 4, 5.), which feeds upon the " groselier ;" but thatauthor states that his insect had 22 feet. Bouche {Naturgesch.p. 140. J describes the insect as the Tenthredo ventricle King(Nematus v. Hartig^ p. 196.). The Caledonian Horticult. Society haspublished a number of plans for the destruction of these caterpillars.(See also E. S. in Mag. Nat. Hist. No. 13. ; vol. v. of the New Seriesof the Manchester Memoirs ; Sort, Mag. 1831.) Stephens has describedan allied species (Nematus Ribesii), the larva of which feedsupon the red currant.At the end of June, 1838, I observed that nearly the wholecrop of the young apples in the garden of my residence at Hammersmithhad fallen to the ground, being then about the size ofsmall walnuts ; and, on opening some of them, I found the interiordevoured by one or more larvae of one of the Tenthredinidae (probablya Nematus), having 6 thoracic, 12 abdominal, and 2 anal feet;the body not pilose, with thick lateral wrinkles. Its appearance inthe perfect state will not take place until the next spring, when I hopeto be able to add the name of this curious and destructive species.When alarmed, this larva emitted an odour like that of Cimex rectusThe larva of Nematus dimidiatus feeds upon the poplar; it isyellow, with a black head, and large lateral black spots ; it is figuredin the Entomol. Mag. vol. i. pi. 1. f. 1., and is stated to have 14abdominal legs.The 20-footed larvae of Nematus ochraceus Hartig (p. 218.),found upon the willow, in society, generally attach themselves to theedges of the leaves, the prolegs being placed on the opposite sides.Here they continue to feed incessantly, with the hind part of the bodyelevated in the air, and which, when disturbed, they throw about invarious directions. De Geer has figured the history of this species{{Mem. torn. ii. pi. 37. f . 1 — 11.). Reaumur also appears to have intendedthis, or a closely allied species, in his vol. v. tab. 11. f. 3 — 6. De Geerhas also figured another very closely allied species, N. melanocephalusHYMENOPTERA TENTHREDINIDtE- 105Hart'uj (which St. Fargeau gives as the T. salicis Linn), iii the sameplate (figs. 12 — 22,); and his fig. 23. is given by Hartig under thename of N. betulte. The last-named author has also figured the larvaand imago of another species (N.abietum), with details (pl.4. f. 11 — 24.).The 20-footed larva {Jig.ll. 7.), of Cro2SLis septentrionalis, whichlives in society upon the elm, protrudes a series of black fleshytubercles between the abdominal legs when it is alarmed, but whichare withdrawn into the body when the danger is passed. (De Geer,Mem. tom. ii. pi. 37. f. 24 — 28.) It is also figured in the Entomol.Magazine vol. i. pi. 1. f. 5. The larva of another species of the samegenus, of a fine green colour, with 9 rows of black dots, is found uponSalix vitalis. It is figured by Goddard (t. 1. pi. 19.), Frisch(st. 6. t. 4. f. 1 — 7.), Reaumur (tom. i. pi. 1. f. 18.), and De Geer(tom. iii. pi. 38. f. 1.), and is supposed by Dahlbom to be the Nematusvarus Village ann. Soc.Ent.de France, tom. i. pi. 11.- f. 8.); T.salicis Linn., Reaum., tom. v. pi. 11. f. 10.De Geer has also figured the larvas of several species of Nematus?which are 20-footed, and are not gregarious in the larva state ; namelyN. capraeae {{Mem. tom. ii. pi. 38. f. 1. ;) N. migrates Hartig, Ret. ibid.f. 2 — 4.), both on the willow ; and N. interruptus St. Far., 249. ; N.abietinus Dahl. ibid. 5 — 7.), on the fir ; likewise the 20-footed larvaof Diner De Geerii Hartig, which St. Fargeau gives as Nematusvarius. Frisch has figured the various states of Nematus salicis{Besclir. &jC. vi. 4.) ; Dahlbom has also described the larva? of manyspecies of Nematus, which he divides into those which are gregariousor solitary. A correspondent of the Mag. Nat. Hist. (vol. vii. p. 423.)has published an account of the devastation committed by Nematuscaprsese to osiers, producing a loss of at least 200/., by devouring theleaves annually, and thus destroying the young plants.Several small species of Nematus deposit their eggs in the youngshoots of the willow, causing the formation of woody galls upon the stemin which several larvae reside in society and undergo all their changes(N. medullary Hartig, De Geer, tab. 39. f. 1 — 13. ; N. entendreDahlb. ; T. salicis entendre Vil), or of globose spongy pedunculatedgalls along the main rib of the leaf (De Geer, tab. 38. f. 26 — 31.; N.interdum Panzer, Dahlbom ; N. gallarum Hartig, De Geer, tab. 38. f.26 — 31.), in which a single inhabitant resides during the larva state.Another kind of gall is produced upon the leaves of various kinds ofMr. Paget (Nat. Hist. Yarmouth, App. ) states that the larva; of this species arevery abundant on willows, entirely stripping many of these trees of their leaves.106 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.willows by another species (Nematus gallicola Westiv., Stephh. ; N.saliceti Fallen, DaJilb. ; Tenthredo Gallae foliorum salicis Linn.,Frisch, Ins. Germ., vol. iv. p. 22. tab. 4-. ; Reaumur, torn. iii. pi. 37.f, 1 — 5. 8.). These galls are irregular in shape, and often of a redcolour. They extend on both sides of the leaf, and are of a spongysubstance. They are at first solid, but by degrees a cavity is formedin the centre, by the feeding of the inclosed inhabitant ; which, whenfull fed, quits the gall and descends to the earth.I have traced the natural history of this third kind of gall-makingNematus *, and have ascertained that it is attacked by a beautifulspecies of Eulophus (E. Nemati W.), the female of which pierces thesubstance of the young gall. (See also Rose, Insect. Belies. vol. ii.Bomb, et Vesp. tab. 10., wherein are figured these two leaf gall-makingspecies in their different states ; and Swammerdam, Book ofNature, pi. 44., in which N. gallicola is represented in its differentstates.) Euura Cynips Newman {Ent. Mag. No. 1 8.), allied to N.gallicola, also resides in galls in the larva state.The 22-footed larvae of the genus Lophyrus are social (each familyconsisting of from 50 to 100 individuals), and devour the leaves ofvarious species of firs ; they also gnaw the young twigs, formingchannels of some depth : they commonly repose along the leaves,having their heads inclined on one side. When touched they emitfrom the mouth a drop of clear fluid, of a resinous smell. Thefemales are much larger than the males, and may be distinguished bythis character in all their stages. De Geer {{Mem. tom. ii, tab. 35.f. 24 — 27., and tab. 36. f. 1 — 30.) has represented the details of twospecies of this genus, L. rufus and L. Pini. The cocoon is simple, andnever made in the earth ; it is of very small size compared with that ofthe larva by which it is formed, and which is compelled to lie in acurved direction within. Curtis states that one of Dr. Leach's caterpillarsof L. pallidus, remained in its cocoon unchanged for two years.Scheeffer has given the history of one of the species of this genus underthe name of Die Tannensagfliiege (Abhandl. von Ins. vol. ii. tab. 8.),with figures. In the first vol. of the Gardener s Mag. (1826) is containeda notice of an 8vo vol. by D. E. Miller, on the ravages committedby the caterpillars of Tenth. Pini, Pinastri, Juniper, anderythrocephela, by which several thousand acres of pines were entirelydestroyed in Franconia. ( Usher der Afterraupenfrass, 8)^c. AschafFen-The details of these observations, with the history of its parasite, will form thesubject of a separate memoir.HYMENOPTERA. TENTHREDINlDiE. 107burg, 1821.) But the most complete account of the genus has beenpublished by Hartig, in his Die Blattwespen, in which 17 species aredescribed, with all the details of their economy and transformations.(See also Loschge, in Der Naturforscher, st. 22.) Mr. Dale, underthe date of August 16., states, " Lophyrus rufus ? bred, they allpunished on June 2., and they continued to breed [emerge from thecocoon ?] till September 16. mag. Nat. Hist. No. 25.)The larvae of the genus Lyda (Pamphlets Latr.) differ from thoseof the remainder of the family in being destitute of abdominal prolegsthe body being terminated by two short points, beneath which aretwo longer articulated appendages, resembling the thoracic legs, butstretched backwards {fig.ll. 12. larva of L. hypothropica Hartig).These larvae reside in society in webs, upon several kinds of fruit trees,and upon firs, the leaves of which serve them for food; each larva,moreover, spins for itself a separate case, and the whole societyare covered by a roof of leaves fastened together with silk. Themotions of these larvae are curious and quite unlike those of the otherspecies which are furnished with abdominal prolegs, having more ofa sliding motion, and employing its powers of spinning silk for assistingits progress. When they descend from a leaf they let themselvesdown by a silken thread, after the manner of caterpillars.One of the species of this genus lives on the pear, and emits a blackfluid from the mouth when alarmed. The larva of Lyda pratensis hasformed the subject of a memoir by Half and Schwaegrichen {Bemer-hung. tiber den Aftei^raupenfrass, S)^c. Bamberg and AschafFenberg,1829), and that of L. erythrocephala has been described by Treviranus(in Verhandlungen des Veins ziir Bordering des Gartenhaues, vol. ii).The larva of Lyda sylvatica resides upon pear trees in a web ; it is ofa yellow colour with a black head, and is represented in the Entomol.Mag., vol. i. pi. 1. f. 4. Hartig (pi. 9. f. 1 — 9.) has represented thelarva and imago of another species (L. hypothropica) which feeds uponthe pear.Another species of Lyda lives upon the aspens, the larva beingsolitary, and inhabiting the interior of a leaf, which it rolls up into acase fastened together with silk. It makes no use of its legs inwalking, but merely glides along by the contraction and elongation ofof the segments of its body. For several years past I have observedone of the species of this genus (L. inanita,^^, 71. 9.) frequenting thegarden of my residence at Hammersmith, and regularly making its108 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.appearance, in the winged state (despite of the variations of theseasons) in the last week of May. I have also found, liter in the year,on the rose bushes, specimens of the larvae of a Lyda (which I do nothesitate to regard as those of L. inanity), each enclosed in a portablecase, formed of bits of rose-leaves arranged in a spiral coil {fig-71. 11.). De Geer has figured various species of this genus in his40th plate ; but the synonymy appears impossible to be tracedcorrectly. His figure 15. and Reaumur's fig. 7. pi. 15. vol. iv.represent the twigs and leaves of a pear tree spun together by thelarvae, most probably, of L. hortorum.In general, the larvae of these insects arrive at the full size at theend of the summer, when they descend from the leaves into theground, in order to pass the pupa state, having previously inclosedthemselves in a hard cocoon, in which they occasionally introducegrains of earth. Some species, moreover, defend themselves byspinning an internal cocoon of a finer texture than the exterior.Some species, however (Cimbex, Lophyrus, &c.), attach their cocoonsto the branches or twigs of the trees on which they have beenreared ; and, as they remain in this state throughout the winter, theyare easily perceived when the leaves have fallen.It is in these cocoons that the insects ordinarily pass the winter ;some as pupae i^fig. 69. 13. pupa of Trichiosoma lucorum, Jig.^0. il.pupa of Cimbex), but many as unchanged larvae. The perfect insectsappear at the beginning of the following summer, gnawing a holethrough the hard cocoon with their jaws. Mr. R. H. Lewis has publisheda very interesting notice of the habits of the perfect female ofPerga Lewis W., a native of Horton, Tasmania (Van Diemen'sLand). This insect deposits its eggs in a longitudinal incision betweenthe two surfaces of the leaves of a species of Eucalyptus, adjoiningthe mid-rib; they are placed transversely, in a double series,and are in number about eighty. On this leaf the mother sits till theexclusion of the lax-vae ; and as soon as these are hatched, the parentfollows them, sitting with outstretched legs over her brood, protectingthem from the attacks of parasites and other enemies with admirableperseverance. These observations were made upon insects at large.(See, further", Trans. Ent Soc. vol. i. p. 233.)*In a subsequent communication, with vliich I have been favoured by Mr.Lewis, he states, " I did not succeed in rearing these larva?, nor am I yet acquaintedwith the male insect ; but I have had another opportunity of confirming my observe— TENTHREDINIDtE. 109The perfect insects are of moderate size; some, however (Cimbex,&c.), are amongst the largest species of Hymenoptera inhabiting thiscountry ; they do not, however, much exceed an inch in length. Theyare ordinarily of dark colours, varied more or less with pale markings ofwhite, red, or yellow. Their flight is, in general, heavy, and attendedwith a humming noise in the larger species. Those of the genusLyda^ however, are exceedingly agile in the hot sunshine. Themales, in some species, are very fierce ; and I have observed two maleTrichiosomae lucorum fighting and biting each other violently. Thespecies seem, for the most part, inhabitants of moderate climes, veryfew species being received from the tropics. There is considerabledifference in the appearance of the sexes of some of the species; andin some the males are met with abundantly (as in Asia), whilst inothers the females are far more abundant (Zaraea). Mr. Curtis hasfigured a singular gynandromorphous individual of Tenthredo (Strongcingulata Far., in which the opposite sides are not symmetrical,the right half being feminine, and the left masculine.The number of parasites which subsist upon these insects is verygreat, many species attacking the same species of saw-fly : thus,Hartig gives a list of twenty parasites of Lophyrus Pini, fifteen ofwhich are Ichneumonida.They are chiefly vernal ; they frequent nectariferous and pollingplants in the greatest abundance, especially those of the Umbelliferous,obtaining their chief supply of food from the pollen or nectar-likesyrup of the flowers. Various species, however (T. viridis, salaries,&c.), attack and devour living insects which frequent the sameplants, as observed by St. Fargeau (Ann. Soc. Ent. de France, 1834,p. 11.), and Dahlbom (prod. Hym. Scant. p. 38.).Amongst the various insects collected by Mr. Raddon from rawturpentine, were many specimens of two large new species of Lydae,which had evidently lost their lives from having been attracted to thenations, and I shall use every' endeavour to breed the male this season. There isbut one brood in the year ; and it is somewhat singular that the earliest portion oftheir lives is passed in our winter, when we are subject to heavy rains. When restingin the day, the larvae, like most other Terebrantiae, carry their heads erect j ontheir moiitlis is a drop of yellow gummy fluid, and, if touched, they throw their headsback, and vomit this in some quantity [thus materially differing from the larvae ofthe Cimbices]. It is very thick, and seems to be given them as a protection againstIchneumonidae, one of which tribe preys upon them ; and I have seen it dead, withthe wings and legs covered and glued together by the gummy matter."110 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.turpentine, when flowing from the wounded fir trees. I remarked,however, as a curious circumstance, that all these individuals weremales.In the perfect state many of these insects exhibit various interestingstructural peculiarities ; thus, Cimbex and its allies have clavateantennae ; in Hylotoma these organs are apparently composed of asingle inarticulated joint, two very short basal joints being alone observable; the males of Schizocerus Leach have each of the antennaeformed of two long equal branches ; those of Cladius have these organsslightly branched on one side, whilst they are deeply biramose inLophyrus ; in Lyda the antennae are slender, setaceous, and multiar-circulate ; whilst in Capias they are thickened at the tips and multiar-circulate. In Tarpa the lower parts of the mouth are considerablyelongated, so as to form an castellum.The genus Xyela Dalm. (Pinicola JBrebisson, Mastigocerus King,Jig. 71. 13. Xyela pusilla ? ) is one of those anomalous forms whichso much perplex systematic. The general form of the head andbody is not materially unlike that of Lophyrus or Lyda, but theantennae are singularly constructed, being 13-jointed; the basal joint,overlooked by Dalman and Curtis, being small and laconic ; thesecond longer; the third short ; the fourth forming a long, robust, andcylindric stem, equalling or exceeding the nine terminal joints in length,which are short and slender ; the terminal joint very small in X,pusilla, but as large as the preceding in X. Dahlii King, a species forboth sexes of which I am indebted to Dr. Klug. The jaws are robustand unevenly toothed fig. 71. is); the under jaws are minute andmembranous ; the inner terminal lobe truncate and setose; the external(according to Curtis) being terminated by a smaller one. Hartig,however, describes the outer lobe as terminating in two conical lobes.The maxillary palpi are greatly elongated and elbowed, so as to resemblea pair of short legs arising from the mouth ; they appear to be4-jointed, and are so described by Dalman and Curtis ; but Ilartigstates that the terminal joint is terminated by three minute fleshyjoints, preceded by a constriction of the fourth joint. chart. pi. 6. f 30.)In X. Dahlii, these organs appear to me to be only 6-jointed, and theirappearance is represented at y?y. 71. 17. The labium is representedas porrected between the labial palpi by Dalman ; and Hartig states itto be 3-lobed (^^.71.18.); but Curtis has entirely overlooked it.The labial palpi are short, and described by Dalman as 3-jointed, andHYMENOPTERA. — TENTHREDINIDiE. Illby Curtis as 4-jolnted; but Hartig states that there is only a constriction,and not a distinct articulation, between the third and fourth joints.The cells of the wings are numerous ; they have been described as havingthree marginal and two complete submarginal cells ; and such is theirappearance in X. pusilla; but an examination of the wing of X. Dahlii(fig. 71. 16.) will enable us to form a more correct notion of the analogiesof these cells. The ovipositor of the female is exserted, and aslong as the abdomen ; it is inclosed between two compressed externallypilose lamellae, and is membranous, with a strong horny centralrib. From the descriptions of Dalman and Curtis, it would appear toconsist only of a single piece ; but I have ascertained that, in X. pusilla,it consists of two plates i^fig. 71. 14, extremity of abdomen of $ , withthe saws extended), very slightly serrated, and thus agreeing in its compositionwith the saws of the other Tenthredinidae. The anterior tibieehave two apiccd calc arise (fig. 71. 19.) ; the posterior tibiae have twobristles on the external edge in the middle, although described byCurtis as having only one spine at the tips. Latreille, under this genus,states, " les larves vivent dans I'interieur des veg^taux, ou dans lesvieux bois." {Regne An. 2d ed. torn. v. p. 277.) Dalman consideredthis genus to belong to the Siricidae (Uroceridae) ; Curtis, althoughnoticing that it beautifully unites the TenthredinidfEwith theUroceridge,and that in its ample wings and large stigma it bears considerable resemblanceto Lyda, adds (in consequence of his not being acquaintedwith the true structure of the ovipositor), that " it cannot be deniedthat the compressed oviduct brings it close to Xiphydria ;" he accordinglyplaced it in the family Xiphydriadse Leach. Dahlbom, on thecontrary, unites it with the family Tenthredines, as well as Hartig,who places it at the end of the family. The curious little genusBlasticotoma Filiceti Klug appears to me to be allied to Xyela in thestructure of the antennae, although the terminal joints are obsolete.The genus Cephus Latr. (Trachelus Jur., Status Klug) is asanomalous as Xyela, and equally serves to connect the Tenthredinidaeand Urocerida?. The antennae are multi articulate (21 — disjointed*,generally thickened towards the tips fig. 71. 25.) ; the mandibles arerobust and strongly and irregularly toothed; the labium is divided into3 elongated lobes fig. 1\. 21.); the labial palliate 4-jointed, the jointsbeing irregular in size; the maxillae are bilobed, the outer lobes beiitgThey have been described as only 2I-jointed by Klug, Hartig, &c. ; but in thesubgenus Phylloecus Newmm, they are 28-jointed, and filiform.112 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.the largest, and pilose ; the maxillary palpi long, slender, and 6-jointed ;the four basal joints gradually increasing in length ; the fifth veryminute, and the last as long as the third (fig. 71. 20.). Like theGroceries, the calcaria of the anterior tibiae are single {fig- 71. 22.) ; buteach of the tarsal joints is furnished with a minute membranous lobebeneath. The intermediate tibiae have also one, and the posteriortibiae, two spurs towards the middle (^^. 71. 23.), which, together withtheir multi articulate antennae, indicate a relation with Lyda. Thecollar is elongated, as in the Uroceridae ; the ovipositor consists of twocompressed plates, nearly straight, and serrated, but formed as in thetrue saw-flies, defended by two external 2-jointed sheaths (yfig. 7. 24.apex of abdomen of Cephus J with the saws extended).The larva of the typical species C. pygmies (Sirexx pygmies Linnetresides in the interior of the stems of wheat, and occasionally commitsmuch injures A memoir was published upon this insect by Bosccbull. Sciences Nat. No. 5. 1823, and see Philos. Mag. August,1823,) in which various means were suggested for its destruction.The larva is figured by Guerin {Iconogr.). Another species (C. abdominal,Latr.) is stated by Latreille to live upon the flowering budsof fruit trees, and do them a great deal of mischief. M. V. Audouinhas, however, informed me that it deposits its eggs on the young shootsof the pear in a spiral direction, and that the larva feeds within theslender shoots. maud. MSS. Ohs. 1835, No. 9.) The larva (fig. 71.26., copied from Audouin's highly magnified drawing) is fleshy', with ascaly head, and six thoracic minute legs, but destitute of anal prolegs ;the abdomen has the terminal segment attenuated and terminated bytwo minute points; there is also a minute conical lobe near the base oneach side of this segment. The situation of this genus has been thesubject of much discussion. Dr. Leach placed it in his familyXiphydriadas, and Klug and Hartig amongst the Siricidae ; the latterbeing influenced by the form of the collar, saws, and anterior calcaria.Latreille united Xyela, Cephus, and Xiphydria into a distinct sectionat the end of the Tenthredinidae. Curtis, from the form of the labium,elongated palpi, and spurred posterior tibias, arranged it with Tenthre-divide ; which I certainly deem its most natural relations, having moreespecially regard to the form of its larva and that of Lyda.The distribution of these insects had been attempted by variousauthors ; Leach, Klug, St. Fargeau, Dahlbom, and Hartig having devotedmuch attention to this branch of the subject. Geoffrey firstHymenoptera. — TENTHREDINID^-. 1 13separated the species with clavate antennae (or Cimbices), under thegeneric name of Crabro, which has since been applied to very differentinsects. Fabricius added five other genera, and Jurine four.Leach divided the family into nine stirpes, founded chiefly upon theform of the antennae, and the number of cells in the wings ; and addedseveral other genera. St. Fargeau proposed another artificial distribution,founded entirely upon these two characters. The arrangementproposed by Latreille in the second edition of the Regne Animalappears far more natural as regards the affinities of the genera.The arrangement proposed by Dahlbom is confined to the species ofScandinavia, and that by Hartig to the German species ; so that wecannot gain a knowledge of their views as to the arrangement of theexotic groups, as Pterygophorus, &c.* By combining the differentmost nearly allied genera together, it appears to me that the family isdivisible into the following subfamilies : —1. Ohnbicides. — Antennae short, clavate, with not more than eightjoints ; larvae 22-footed, emitting drops of viscid matter from thepores of the body. (Cimbex, Perga, etc.)2. Ht/lofomides. — Antennae 3-jointed, terminal joint greatly elongated ;labrum apparent; larvae sto 20-footed, not emitting dropsof viscid matter. (Hylotoma.)The genus Athalia seems to be the connecting link between thissubfamily and the next.3. Tenthredinides. — Antennae 9- to 14-jointed, simple, filiform to thetip ; labrum apparent ; saws with parallel sides. (Tenthredo,Nematus, Dolerus, Selandria, Sc.)4. Lycidas. — Antennae multi-articulate, sometimes strongly pectinatedin the males ; posterior tibiae often spined in the centre ;labrum minute ; saws but slightly serrated at the tip, stronglydilated and elbowed at the base {Jig- 71. lo. saw of Lyda) ; larvaevarious.The anomalous genera Lyda, Tarpa and Lophyrus agree in these lastcharacters ; and I cannot but think that those afforded by the form ofthe ovipositor (which have not been previously employed in the distributionof this family) are of primary importance ; in which respectThese two authors have adopted a plan which appears to me to be likely tolead to much confusion ; the genera, subgenera, sections, and tribes being all namedas genera : thus the Tenthredo melanocephala Fah. is named Tenthredo, Selandria,Blennocampa, Monophadmus, melanocephala, by Hartig.VOL. II. 1114 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Lophyrus bears but little relation to Hylotoma or Cladius, near whichit has been ordinarily arranged.The genera Cephus and Xyela, and probably also Blasticotoma,appear to be respectively types of separate subfamilies. Xysla^ in thesize of its wings, approaches nearest to Lyda. Perga has a long andstrongly serrated saw, whilst that of Pterygophorus is more like thatof Lophyrus.The second family, Groceries * Leach (Siricidse Curtis), correspondingwith the Linnaean genus Sirex-j-^ is distinguished fromthe preceding insects by the structure of the ovipositor or borer,the irregularity in the trophi, the entire labium, the existence of asingle spur on the fore tibiae, and the elongated prothorax and collar.The body is of an elongated parallel and nearly cylindric form, themales being more depressed fig. 72. 8. Urocerus juvencus ^ ). Thehead fig. 72. 9. front of head of ditto) is rounded, and about as broadas the thorax ; the eyes somewhat kidney-shaped ; the antennae filiformor setaceous, vibratile, and composed of from 10 to 25 joints. J TheBiBLioGR. Refer, to the Siricid^.Klug. Monographiaia Siricum Germania;. 4to. Berlin, 1 803.Foggy. Note of an Insect of the Genus Urocerus, in Edinburgh Journal of Science,vol. ii. 1825.Guiding m Mag. Zool. 1833. Ins. No. 68. (Urocerus Lefebvre,)Latreille. Memoire sur un Nouv. Genre d'Insectes (Orusse) presente a InstitutNational le 28 Floral, An 4. — Ditto, in Encycl. Methh., torn. viii. p. 561.(Oryssus, new sp. )Westwood, in Zool. Journ., vol. v. p. 440. (Oryssus Sayii. )Newman, in Ent. Mag. No. 4. p. 415. (Urocerus — Sires.) — Ditto, in ditto,No, 25. p. 486. (Oryssus, new sp. )Shuckard, in Mag. Nat. Hist, New Series, vol. i. p. 630. (U. duplex.)-j- The genus Urocerus was established by Geoffrey in 1762, four years previousto the publication of the twelfth edition of the Systema Nature, in which Sirexx wasproposed by Linnaeus, who incorrectly referred to Geoffrey's Urocerus under thename of Grocers. Stephens adopts the family name Uroceridae from Leach, butfollows Linnaeus and Fabricius in using the name Sirexx. The French authors properlyretain that of their countryman Geoffrey.:j: In the genus Urocerus, the number of joints in the antenna; differ in the differentspecies. In Urocerus signs ^ the antenna are 24-jointed, the two terminalHymenoptera.UROCERIDjE.Fig. 72.upper lip is minute and elongated ; the mandibles short, but verystrong and horny ; the lower parts of the mouth vary considerably intheir form. In Urocerus they are very anomalous and minute ; themaxillae are two elongated setose lobes, united by membrane at thebase, with very short inarticulate (inarticulate ? Curtis, and in Klug'sMonogr. section i. tab. 8. fig. 18. from S. gigas) palpi (^Jig.1% lo.from S. juvencus $ ). The lower lip in this genus is attached uponthe membrane connecting the base of the maxillae (fig. 72. li.) ; thementum is transverse, and broadest in front ; the labium is producedbetween the palpi, which are short and 3-jointed in S. juvencus, whilstthey are 2- or 4-jointed in other species, according to Klug, who,however, as Latreille justly observes, did not understand the peculiarconstruction of these organs, judging, at least, from the figures givenin his Monogr. Siricum. Latreille, indeed, states that he regards themaxillary palpi as 2-jointed and the labial as 3-jointed in all the species.gen. Cr., &c., torn. iii. p. 240. note.) The anterior tibiae arefurnished with a single spur at the tip (^Jig.TZ. 12.), and the maleshave the hind legs flattened. The prothorax is elongated beneathinto a short neck, the collar being broad and elevated ; the mesothoraxis large, and the metathorax composed of two distinct dorsal parts,the anterior of which is furnished with two cenchri, and the posteriorjoints being closely soldered together ; in U. juvencus <? they are sand in the5 19-jointed. I possess males of the latter species in which, they are 19-jointed,and others in which they are only 17-jointed. Latreille places U. gigas in thesection with 25-jointed antennae, and U. juvencus in that with 21- to 23-jointedantennae, (See further hereon, Kirby, Mon. jlp, Angl., vol. i. p. 219. )I 2MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.(hitherto regarded by all authors as the basal segment of the abdomen)having a longitudinal impression down the middle. The abdomenis perfectly sessile, somewhat flattened in the males of Urocerus,but cylindrical in the females : in both sexes, the terminal segment isproduced into a point ; but it is much stronger, larger, and morehorny in the females : in the latter, on the under side of the terminalsegment, is an impression which has been mistaken by Latreille forthe anus. The construction and real nature of the instrument of oppositionor borer of these insects has not been satisfactorily investigated; but which, from the peculiarity, structure, and habits of thisosculant group of insects, is so necessary for affording proofs of therelation of the saw-flies with the other Hymenoptera. My fig. 72.13. represents a lateral view of the extremity of the abdomen of thefemale Urocerus juvencus, exhibiting, at a, one of the two minutepilose styles (hitherto unnoticed by any previous author), and whichwe have seen to exist in the Tenthredinidae ; h represents the basaland h h the terminal division of the outer horny flattened sheaths ofthe ovipositor, which in U. spectrum are nearly as long as the body.Between these sheaths, when at rest, lies the boring instrument c,a long horny piece which is nearly cylindrical and hollow, but inclosesin its lower cavity two horny spicules*, having a separatemotion from that of the borer itself. Fig. 72. 16. represents a transversesection of this compound instrument; c being the borer, consistingof a horny cylinder, with lateral impressions c x, and channelledon the under side for the reception of the two spicula;, c and c. Fig.72. 14. represents a small portion of the base of the under side of theseinstruments, showing the dilated root of the borer itself, c o, and ofthe two spiculse?, c o : these spiculse are slightly grooved at the base :one of them is here represented as propelled forwards by a muscle; inwhich case, of course, its point would extend beyond the point of theborer the spiculae and borer being of equal length ; at e is a groovein the oblique edge of the borer, which seems to receive a slight ribin the spicula. Fig. 15. represents the extremity of the borer c, partof it being broken off, in order to show the separation between it andthe spicula c, which is strongly toothed at the tip, or its under side ;and c X represents the lateral impressions of the borer (as vnfig. 16.C X ), forming a strong lateral serrature. On comparing these detailsvieille incorrectly describes the terebra as " bivalvulata." genera Cr.,p. 242.)HYMENOPTERA. UHOCERIDiE. 117with those of the saw-flies fig. 70. 12—19.), we are at once struckwith the relations existing between several of their parts ; the minutestyle ■(«) and the 2-jointed outer sheaths (h and h h) are perfectlyanalogous, so that we are at once led to the opinion that the borer ofthe Urocerus is but the saw of the Tenthredo, modified to fit it forits functions. The Tenthredinidae ordinarily oviposit in the soft substanceof leaves, and their saws are accordingly of a delicate structure; but the Uroceridae deposit their eggs in sound timber, andhave need of a far more powerful instrument. In order, therefore,that their instrument of oviposition should possess sufficient strength,it is not only horny, but the two compressed back supports of thesaws of the Tenthredo are soldered together into a cylinder c, whichboth as regards its situation with the spiculse, and its action as a supportto them, cannot but be analogous to these supports. The twospiculae of the Urocerus, on the other hand, are clearly analogous,both in action and almost in their serrated structure, with the sawingparts of the two saws of the Tenthredo. Burmeister, indeed, firstcorrectly describes the superior channel of the terebra as including adouble bristle ; but, as we shall see that there is a precise analogybetween the borers of Urocerus and Ichneumon, we cannot adoptBurmeister's view (^^Manual, p. 198.), that the upper half tube (c) isformed of the two entire saws of the Tenthredo, and that the lowerpart of the terebra (or the two spicula) is an elongation of a smalltriangular plate which exists at the base of the saws of the Ten-thereto.With this powerful boring apparatus the females are enabled todeposit their eggs in timber, especially preferring the various kindsof firs. The larva of Urocerus Gigs has been figured by Rcisel, andthat of U. juvencus by Hartig. I am indebted to Mr. Raddon for anopportunity of examining one of the latter {fig- 72. 17.). The larvaeare long, cylindrical, fleshy grubs, with the segments transverselyplicate : the head fig. 72. 18.) is small and horny, destitute of eyes,but furnished on each side, above the jaws, with a minute conical antenna,articulated, as it appears to me, both at the base and extremityfig. 72. 19.), although represented by Hartig as inarticulate ; withthe exception of the jaws, the parts of the mouth are small ; the upperlip arises from a distinct transverse clypeus ; it is transverse, with theanterior angles rounded off, and emarginate in the centre. The mandiblesare horny, quadrate, one being depressed and the other comI 3118 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.pressed, terminated by three or four nearly equal teeth, and furnishedwith a large horny lobe (yfi.g.^% 20.). The action of these jaws mustbe remarkable, because the acute edge of one is brought into contact,when at rest, with the broad extremity of the other. The maxillaare small, and terminated by three lobes; the inner one is ovaland strongly setose ; the outer one is very minute and inarticulate ;whilst the intermediate one, which appears to me to be the analogueof the palpus, is broad at the base, and terminated by a small narrowerpart, which I believe to be articulated both at its base and in themiddle (^fig.^1. 21.). The figures given by Hartig of this organ(tab. 8. fig. 26. 6.), give no notion of its true form. The lower lip isfleshy, transverse, and produced considerably within the mouth ; it isprovided at the sides with a pair of minute 3 ?-articulate palpi {fig- 72.22.). Each of the three anterior segments of the body is furnishedwith a pair of minute inarticulate legs. The abdominal segments aredestitute of prolegs, which are replaced by fleshy protuberances, andthe terminal segment of the body is large, and armed with a horny point.In the larva state these insects reside in the interior of trees, whichthey perforate in various directions, often causing great destruction inthe pine forests, of which the larger species are inhabitants.* Whenfull grown, these larvos are stated by some authors to form a slendersilken cocoon, mixed with chips of wood and excrement, at the endof their burrows, and in which they undergo their final transformations.The pupa greatly resembles the imago, having the limbs laidalong the sides of the body and breast. When the transformations ofthe insect take place in the summer, the imago is produced in thespace of a month ; but if the larvae are not full grown until autumn,the fly does not appear until the following summer.The perfect insects are amongst the largest in the order, and makea considerable humming on the wing, like the humble bee ; whenceMr. MacLeay, who formed them into an osculant order, between theMr. Raddon forwarded to the Entomological Society specimens of U. Juvenis,accompanied by specimens of the wood of a fir tree from Bentley Forest, Worcestershire,perforated by this insect. Of this tree, 20 ft. were so intersected by theburrows, that it was fit for nothing but firewood ; and being placed in an outhouse,the perfect insects came out every morning, five, six, or more each day. Thefemales averaged one in twelve for the first six weeks, but afterwards became moreplentiful, and continued to make their appearance until the end of November,females only being produced during the last two or three weeks. ( Trans. Ent. Soc,vol. i. p. 85. App.)Hymenoptera. UROCEHIDiE. 119Hymenoptera and Trichoptera, named them Bomboptera. As thelarvae generally reside in fir timber, the insects are imported into thiscountry, and consequently often make their appearance in the perfectstate in newly built houses, having undergone their transformations inthe timber employed in their construction.Some species, in Germany, have occasionally appeared in such numbersas to raise alarm in the minds of the ignorant. They have alsobeen regarded as the species of insects recorded (in the Abhandl. derKaiser. Acad, der Nature or seller, 9 th. p. 252., M th. p. 82.) ashaving stung many men and beasts to death in and near the town ofCzierck. (See Griffith's An. K., part xxxiii. p. 404'.) Dr. Klug hasbeen at some pains, in his Monograph Siricum Germanic, to eradicatethis unfounded assertion, considering the account given in that workto be fabulous.The sexes of these insects vary considerably in their colour andform, particularly in the abdomen and legs, and have hence been describedunder different names. The species are few in number, andof considerable rarity in this country. They frequent mountainousdistricts, especially those clothed with fir forests. Like all Xylopha-goes insects, they are also subject to the greatest variation in size,some individuals not being one third the size of others.The Count de Saint Fargeau has informed me that he considersthese insects to be parasites, like the Ichneumonidse, and that it isupon Xylophagous larvae, and not upon wood, that the larvae subsist;and in the Encyclopedia MetJiodique, tom. x. p. 770., he has noticed that"les debris que nous avons trouve autres de sa coque, tels queene teteecailleuse que nous a paru trees distinctement etre celle d'une Carvede Coleopt^re," seemed to confirm this idea. The accounts, however,which have been furnished by so many authors, and especially by theGermans, who have abundant opportunity of observing these insects,leave no doubt of their Xylophagous habits ; and the description which Ihave given of the head of the larva of U. Juvenis would easily causeit to be mistaken for that of the larva of a beetle.Further notices of the destruction caused by these insects in firplantations are contained in Curtis, Brit. Ent., fol. 253. ; Kirby andSpence, vol. i. p. 212. ; Marsham, in Linn. Trans., vol. x. p. 403. ;Kirby, in ditto, vol. v., ditto, vol. xiv. App. ; Rossmassler, Kollar{Forstinsecten). (See also De Geer, vol. i. ; Reaumur, vol. v. ; Hartig,Latreille, &c., for further structural details of these insects.)X 4120 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.The genus Xiphydria Latr. (fig. 72. 4. X. Dromedarius ? ) hasbeen the subject of much confusion as regards its relations. Linnaeusunited it with Sirexx ; and Klug introduced it, with Cephus and Crassus,into his Monographiaia Siricum. Latreille, however, always placedit, with Lyda and Cephus, as a distinct terminal section of the Tenthre-divide ; remarking, however, " Xiphydriae Cephique corporis forma,oviductu exert, elongata, cum Tenthredinetis et Uroceratis albigenses,ad familiar secondaries acceded videntur" i^Gen. Cr. Sec.vol. iii. p. 238.), which evidently induced Leach, followed by Stephens,to form Xiphydria, Cephus*, and Xyela into a separate but inaccuratelycharacterised family, Xiphydriadae. The discovery of its preparatorystates enables me to prove its connection with Urocerus ; although,like Cephus and Xyela, it serves, in its perfect state, to form the passagebetween the two families Tenthredinidae and Uroceridae. Themandibles are small like those of Urocerus ; but the lower parts ofthe mouth differ from that genus, as well as from any of the saw-flies.The maxilla {Jig- 72. 5.) are elongated, and terminated by two membranouslobes ; the maxillary palpi are 5- (not 4-) jointed ; the basaljoint being minute but distinct, the second very long and slender, andthe three terminal joints short. Compared with the maxillary palpiof the Tenthredinidae, these organs are small and weak. The labium(fig. 72. 6.) is elongated and membranous ; and it appears to me tobe entire, although Hartig figures it as deeply trifid (pi. 8. fig. IL), asin the Tenthredinidae. (Dr. Klug also describes it as " vix marginalvel potius integrum," 3Io7i. Sir., p. 12.) The labial palpi aremuch stronger than the maxillary, — thus proving the relation of thisgenus with Urocerus, — and 3-jointed. Li one of the labial palpi whichI examined in X. Dromedarius, the basal part of the terminal joint wasconstricted, and which has evidently led Hartig to figure it as 4-jointed(tab. 8. fig. 12.). The prothorax is greatly elongated, and very low,and the collar elevated, which has induced the specific names camelsand Dromedarius. The peculiar structure of the calcarious thefore legs and of the tarsi has been overlooked by all writers. The anteriortibiae are terminated by a single broad curved spur (which isthe peculiar character of Urocerus) ; although all the tibiae are statedto be terminated by two spines, by Klug, Stephens, &c. (which is theIn his lllustrntlo7is, Mr. Stephens has united Cephus with the Tenthredinidae,leaving Xiphydria and Xyela alone in the family of Xiphydriada?,HYMENOPTERA. — UR0CERID7E.character of the Tenthredinidse). On the other hand, each of thefour basal tarsal joints is furnished beneath with tito small pulvilli ; inwhich respect they differ from all the other allied genera ; althoughLatreille and Klug are silent as to the pulvilli, and Hartig states,patella fallen " (p. 369.), which is the character of Urocerus. Thestructure of the ovipositor (terebra) is also precisely similar to that ofUrocerus, and is correctly represented by Hartig* (pi. 8. figs. 13, 14,15.). The females deposit their eggs in standing trees, in whichoccupation I detected a specimen of X. Camels in the Jardin desPlantes.In 1827, A. Cooper, Esq., Rea., communicated to me the larva andpupa of X. Dromedarius, which he had discovered in willow trees. Ihave represented the larva ^tficj. 72. 7. : it greatly resembles that ofUrocerus; having six minute inarticulate thoracic legs, and a hornypoint at the tail. For various further details and figures of this insectI must refer to a separate memoir prepared at the period above mentioned,and noticed in the Zool. Journ., No. 10. (1827), but not yetpublished.The genus Oryssus Latr. (j^^. 73. l. Oryssus coronets ? ) is alsoFig. 73.exceedingly interesting in respect to its anomalous structure. Thejaws are robust, like those of Urocerus ; the maxillae and labiumnearly similar to those of Xiphydria, the labium (7777.73. 3.) beingentire, but with two slight lateral impressions ; the maxillary palpi arelong and 5-jointed {fig- 73. 2.) ; the antennae are simple, and com-slugand Latreille are silent as to the composition of this organ, hut St. Far-beauincorrectly states under Xiphydria, " oviductorii fabric eadem ac in Tenthre-dines, usus idem." — {Monogr. Tenth. p. 2.)122 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.posed of eleven* regular joints in the males (^jig> 73. 8.), but consistoften very irregular joints in the female {Jig.l'i. 9.). The anteriortibia? in the males (j%. 73. 10.) are simple, but dilated and incisedin the females fig. 73. ii.) ; in both sexes they are terminated by asingle spur : the anterior tarsi are 5-jointed in the males, but only3-join ted in the females.The construction of the thorax is represented in Jig. 73. 6, 7., inwhich the prothorax and its collar are dotted, the mesothorax notlettered, and the meta thoracic parts marked with letters — z being itspraescutum, and s its scutellum ; x are the cenchri, and y the epime-ron; the femora of the anterior, middle and posterior legs are cut off atthe base ; and the dotted part r, \njig. 7., represents the basal segmentof the abdomen. This part of the body is not pointed at the top in thefemales, as in the Urocerus and Xiphydria. The ovipositor is longand very slender, and has been described as spiral in its form ; butthis is incorrect, being strongly curved only at its base. It ordinarilyrests in a channel at the under side of the extremity of the bodjr, butis capable of being partially (as mjig. 73. 4.) or entirely exserted (asin King's Monogr. Siric, tab. 1. fig. 3.). The composition of the terebrafig. 73. 5. its extremity, copied from Hartig) is similar to that of Grocers,although far more delicate ; c representing the canal, and c c the twospiculae of the terebra. Dahlbom has separated this anomalous genusfrom the Uroceridae, and formed it into a distinct tribe, Orsini,chiefly on account of the structure of the ovipositor, the paucity ofveins in the wings, and the insertion of the antennae beneath theclypeus, close to the mouth. He also conjectures that its larva isgallivorous.These insects are extremely agile, running about the stumps oftrees with great velocity in the sunshine. Latreille and Klug supposethat the larvae subsist upon the wood of standing trees. Scopoli foundthem upon fir trees, and Latreille upon old hornbeams.The second division of the Terebrant Hymenoptera comprises avery extensive tribe of insects, for which the name of Entomophagamay be retained, on account of the habits of the majority of the species,the larvae of which are parasitic upon or within the bodies ofFabricius and Hartig incorrectly describe the male antenna: as 12-jointed ; andthe latter also describes the female antenna as II-jointed, regarding the minute insertionas a distinct joint.HYMENOPTERA. — ENTOMOPHAGA. 123Other insects. From the true aculeated Hymenoptera, to which someof the terminal species are allied, they may be distinguished by thenumber of the joints of the antennae, as well as by the structure ofthe ovipositor. There is, however, considerable diversity in the habitsof the species ; some (forming a portion of the family Cynipidce) residing,in the larva state, in galls resembling those of the gallivorous .Other species, however, belonging to the same family,are parasites. It would also appear, from some recent observations,that some of the species of Proctotrupidge are fossorial.They are characterised by having the abdomen attached to thethorax by a small portion only of its transverse diameter ; its basalsegment being often elongated into a peduncle. The abdomen, inthe females, is furnished with an elongated univalve ovipositoi-, similarin its general construction to that of the Siricidae.Latreille separated this division into six tribes, — Evaniales, Ichneu-monies, Gallicoles, Chalcidites, Oxyures, and Chrysides. These tribeswere retained by St. Fargeau, who proposed another arrangement ofthem, including the two preceding families (Encyclopedie Metho-pique,torn, x.), as follows : —I. A borer in the females. No sting.1 . Borer of two horny pieces.[Fam. 1. Serrifera. (Tenthredinides. )]Fam. 2. Spirifera. Ovipositor spiral, retractile when at rest. ( Gallicolesand the genus Oryssus. )Fam. 3. Terebellifera. Ovipositor partly lodged at rest in an externalsheath.1 Tribe. Chalcidites.2 Tribe. Ichneumonides and Evaniales.[3 Tribe. Isocrates, except Oryssus.]2. — Fam. 4. Canalifera. Ovipositor of a single horny piece. (OxyuresLatr. )II. A membranous ovipositor of a single piece. A sting.Fam. 5. Tubulifera. (Chrysides.)lean neither adopt the nomenclature nor arrangement of St. Fargeau,because neither appear to have a foundation in nature ; the precise constructionof the ovipositor in these different groups not having been correctlyascertained, whilst we have already seen that there are no groundsfor the insertion of the Uroceridae amongst the parasitic insects. Intwo respects, however, St. Fargeau appears to me to have arrived ata more natural result than Latreille: 1st, in placing the gall-fliesnext after the saw-flies (in which respect he has been followed by124< MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Dahlbom^ who thinks that Oryssus constitutes the connecting linkbetween them); and 2dly, in showing the relation of Evania and Ichneumon.How far it would be natural to place the Cynipidae at thehead of these groups, making the aphidivorous Cynipidae the connectinglink with the aphidivorous Adscitous Ichneumonss, whichshould be succeeded by the genuine Ichneumonss, and these byLacus and Fcenus, Evania conducting to the species with the wingsalmost destitute of nerves, can only be ascertained by a more preciseand general investigation of the structure of these insects than hasyet been given to them. For the present I have arranged them inthe following manner, provisionally keeping Evania distinct fromIchneumon : —I. Spiculifera. * — Terminal segments of the abdomen not forminga retractile tube ; ovipositor furnished with two delicate spiculaworking in a horny semi-canal, which is defended at rest by twooften partially exserted valves.Fam. 1. Cynipidce. — Chiefly gall-feeding insects, having theovipositor sub spiral and internal ; antennae straight, 13- to jointed.Fam. 2. Evaniidce. — Parasitic insects, having the ovipositorstraight, the abdomen attached to the dorsum of the metathorax,and the antennae straight and 13- to 14-jointed.Fam. 3. . Ichneumonidce. — Parasitic insects, having the ovipositorstraight, the abdomen attached at the extremity of the metathorax;the antennae straight, and with more than 16 joints(except in a very few minute species).Fam. 4. Chcdcididce. — Parasitic insects, having the antennaeelbowed, and generally thickened at the tips, 6- to 13-jointed ;the palpi short ; the wings nearly destitute of veins ; pupanaked.Fam. 5. Proctotrvpidce. — Parasitic insects, having the antennaemore or less elbowed, toto 16-jointed ; the upper wings vein-thedifficulty which opposes uniformity in the nomenclature of the highersections of an order is well instanced in the groups of the Terebrantia. If we employterms founded upon the habits of the different families, we must introduce thegall-flies amongst the plant-feeders (Phytiphaga) ; if, on the other hand, we employterms founded upon structure, we shall have the Uroceridae separated from thesaw-flies, and united with the Spiculifera, on account of the structure of theiroviposit .HYMENOPTERA. CYN'IPID^ 125less, or with but very few veins ; jialpi generally long andpendulous ; pupa inclosed in a cocoon.II. TuBULiFERA Terminal segments of the abdomen telescopicand retractile ; antennae elbowed. Parasites.Fam, 6. Chrysididce.The family of the gall-flies, CYNiPtD^* West. (Diplolepidae Leach),corresponds with the genus Cynips of Linnaeus (6th ed. of the Syst.Nature, 174-8, there characterised, inter alia, by " Larva intra hallam),or that of Diplolepis of Geoffrey (1762). These insects fig. 73. 12.BiBLioGR. Refer, to the Ctnipid^s.Suffer and Hermann, in Vetensk. Acad. Handll. 1762.Gerbi. Sul Modo cui produces dal' Insects le Galle, in Opusculi Scelti, torn, xviii.Antoine. Cynipedologie du Chine, Nouv. Journ. du Physiq. t. i.Boscc. Suppl. a la Cynipedolog. du Cheiie (C. Query. Tojse), Journ. d'Hist. Nat.torn, ii. p. 154.Burgsdorff, in Schrift. der Berliner Gesellsch Nature., fr. b. iv. (On the Galls of theOak and their Inhabitants.)Westwood, in Mag. Nat. Hist., vol. vi. p. 491. — Ditto, vol. viii. p. 171. — Ditto, inLoudon's Arboretum Britann., under " Oak." — Ditto, in Guerin's Mag. Zool.Ins., pi. 179.Walker, in Entomol. Mag. vol. ii. p. 117. (Figites, new sp.) p. 519. (n. sp. charms) ; vol. iii. p. 159. Sections of Cynipites.Boyer de Fonscolombe. Diplolepaires qui se trout. aux Environs d'Aix, in Ann. desSc. Nat. torn. xxvi. 1832.MM. Dea. et JJ. Vires. Hist. Nat. des Galles des Vegetate, c. (Journ. de Pharmacieet des Sc. access. No. 4. Avril, 1820.)Zacharias, in Gotheborgska Vetensk. 1778. (Cynips inanity.)Dolman, in Anal. Entomol. (Anaeharis. )Bouche. Naturgeschichte der Inserted.Hammer Schmidt. Observationes Physiologieas-pathologicae de Phantasm GallarumOrt.Curtis. Brit. Ent. sub Gen. Cynips Italia.Brandt and Ratzebitrg. Medicine. Zoologie. 4to.•f- Geoffroy introduced great confusion into the nomenclature of this family andthat of the Chalcididae, by employing for the latter the name, given by Linnaeus tothe gall-flies, Cynips, and by terming these Diplolepis. The confusion was furtheraugmented by Fabricius and the French authors. (See my article detailing thehistory of these groups in the 13th Number of the Zoological Journal.)126 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.C. gallae tincture) are distinguished by the gallivorous habits of themajority of the species ; and by having the antennae straight, and13- to 15-jointed ; the wings with but few nervures ; the palpi short >and by the construction of the ovipositor.The head is of small size, and transverse ; the thorax thick, andof an oval form ; and the abdomen much compressed, ordinarily witha very short peduncle. The antennae are inserted in the middle of theface : they are generally of moderate length and slender (those ofthe females being shorter and thicker), varying in the number ofjoints (13 to 15) in the sexes, the males having one or two joints morethan the females {jig.l'i. 16. $ ,\l. ? , antenna of Italia). The basaljoint is thickened, the second very short, and the third the largest,and in the males often incised or curved ; the labrum is very minute ;the mandibles (^fig- 73. 13. C. quercus folii *) are short but robust,with several teeth at the extremity, somewhat differing in the oppositejaws ; the maxilla (fig. 73. 14.) are elongate, horny at the base,and furnished at the extremity with a broad membranous ciliatedlobe ; the maxillary palpi are 5-jointed, the basal joint being veryminute, and the terminal one somewhat securiform. The mentum iselongate, narrow, and horny ; the labrum large, fleshy, and entire ;and the labial palpi 2- or 3-jointed, the terminal joint being somewhatoval, and pointed towards the tip i^Jig. 73. 15.). The mesothorax islarge ; the scutellum being very prominent, and often marked withseveral impressions : the wings have but few veins, the anteriorhaving two basal cells (the interior being but slightly' developed), onemarginal cell, and two or three submarginal ones ; the second of thelatter, when there are three, being very minute : the under wingshave only one strong vein. The abdomen is oval and very muchcompressed, the basal joint being the largest, the others (generallyfive in number) very short and scaling one into the other; thepeduncle is ordinarily very short {^jig- 73. 18.) ; the ovipositor hasbeen described as spirally convoluted, but its true composition hasbeen overlooked by all previous writers. Reaumur, Latreille, andBurmeister have especially attempted the description of this organ ;but in consequence of not tracing the analogies which the variousparts present with those of Sirexx, Ichneumon, Sho. , they have notsucceeded in obtaining a correct view of its construction. On late-figs.73. 13 — 21, 23 and 24. ai-e from Cynips Quercus folii.Hymenoptera. CYNIPIDyE. 127rally inspecting the abdomen of the female of C. quercus folii (fig.73. 18.), the dorsal segments will be perceived to be deflexed andextended to the ventral edge of the abdomen ; the venter beingterminated by a pointed piece {fig- 18. d, fig. 20. d) having a canalrunning along its middle, which is also produced considerably beyondits front margin in the shape of a spine : this is the terminalventral segment of the abdomen and the canal above mentioned isintended for the reception of the capillary terebra (c) and the twovalve-like sheaths (b, b). On removing the side of the abdomen(^fig- 73. 19.), these two sheaths are found to originate in two broadcurved plates (b), which are in fact the basal portion of the sheaths,the terebra itself (c) being a long and exceedingly delicate but compositeseta. Burmeister is the only author who has attempted todiscover the parts of which this is composed, and he describes andfigures it manual Transll , p. 199. pi. 23, fig. 15. 18.) as consisting(in addition to the two outer valves, his fig. «, a) of two external seas{}), b), and one central very delicate bristle (his fig. c). It appears tome,however, upon a dissection of many specimens of C. quercus folii,that the terebra is composed, like that of Sirexx, Ichneumon, Vespa,&c., of a more robust seta fig. 73. c), channelled on its under sidefor the reception of two equal and very slender bristles (e, c), whichare slightly dilated at the base, and pushed forward along the channelor gutter of the central piece, by strong muscles.With this instrument the female insect punctures* the surface ofleaves, buds, stalks, and young stems and roots of various plants andtrees, increasing the aperture by the continued action of the terebra,which is stated to be denticulated at the extremity, and throughwhich an egg is propelled into the wound of the plant, together witha small quantity of an irritating fluid, the action of which upon theplant, in some way or other, causes the production of tumours or gallsof various sizes, shapes, and colours, the interior of which being of asolid substance becomes the food of the young grub when hatched.Various theories have been proposed as to the real formation of thesegalls, with a view to trace the means which nature employs to producesuch very different kinds of galls upon the same tree from the woundsmade by insects of the same genus. Hitherto, however, for want ofdirect observations, conjectures alone (some plausible enough) haveSee Bonnet, Observ. divers sur Ics Insectes, torn. ii. p. 257. o))s. 38.128 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS,been given. (See Insect Architecture, p. 373. et seq., wherein is containeda good summary of Reaumur's Memoir with additions ; Dr.Johnston's Flora of Berwick-tipon- Tweed, vol. ii. p. 108.; ArhorettcmBritanniciirn, p. 1824.)It is to Reaumur that we are indebted for a description of a greatnumber of galls, these excrescences having formed the subject of one ofhis Memoires (torn. iii). (See also Rose, Ins. Belust. tab. 35, 36. 52,53. and 69. ; Frisch, Beschr. Ins. vol. i. pt. 2. t. 3. ; Swammerdam,Historians. pi. 45.; Vallot, Bull. Sc. Nat. Sept. 1830.)Dr. Hammersmith of Vienna has made these galls the subject ofmuch research, and has prepared drawings of more than 250 differentspecies of galls, and the insects which cause them. (Ati7i. Soc. Ent.de France, vol. ii. p. 5Q. App.) Many of these galls are spherical ;some imitating different fruits : others are hairy or tomentose, thesurface emitting numerous fibrous threads ; such is the gall commonlyfound on the wild rose, termed the bedeguar : others resemble buds,flowers, &c. ; whilst a 'ie.yv species, found upon the surface of leaves,are flat, and have the appearance of minute mushrooms. They alsodiffer as to the number of inhabitants found in each : thus, whilst inmany species a single gall supports only a single gall insect, thereare some galls (polythalamous) which serve for the residence of greatnumbers of individuals. An instance of this kind has been communicatedto me by the Rev. W. Bree, in a gall of large size foundat the root of an oak just at the surface, from which I obtained nearly1100 specimens of C. Q. radical. This gall was 5 inches long, and\\ inch broad. (This species was unknown to Reaumur, having beenfirst described by Boscc, Journ. de Physique, 1794.) Such is generallythe case with all the larger kind of galls, each inhabitant retaininga cell of its own. Some, however, of the size of an apple, found uponsome exotic species of oaks, support only a single inhabitant.The eggs deposited at the period of the commencement ofthe growth of the gall increase in size like those of the saw-flies.(Reaumur, Mem. tom. iii. p. 479.). The larvae hatched from them aresmall fleshy grubs (fig. 73. 23.) without feet, but furnished withfleshy tubercles which the insects employ in their stead. These larvaeimmediately attack the interior of the gall, without preventing its continuedgrowth ; remaining five or six months in this state. Others,however, assume the perfect state within the gall at the end of theautumn, but do not emerge from it till the following spring. (SeeHYMENOPTERA. — CYNIPID^. 129Mag. Nat. Hist. No. 15.). Some species, moreover, undergo theirtransformations within the gall, but others quit it when full grown,and enter the earth, there to become pupte fig. 73. 24.).Ratzeburg has traced the development of Cynips Rosse, especiallywith reference to his theory, that the first segment of the larva (afterthe head) corresponds with the head of the pupa, the eyes and ocelliof which are visible through the transparent skin of the back of thefirst segment immediately before the insect assumes the pupa state.nova Acta Nature. Curios, vol. xvi. pi. 9. f. 22 — 32.)The small round holes often to be observed upon the surface ofgalls announce that the insect has made its escape. Sometimes, however",these galls are found to contain a number of Chalcididae,especially of the long-tailed kinds (Callimome), the larvae of whichhave destroyed the larvae of the true inhabitants.Probably no insect has been of greater benefit to mankind than theCynips Gallte tincture Oliv. {Enc.Meth. vol. vi. p.281. ; C. scriptorKirhy, Introdd. vol.i. p. 319.), the galls of which are the common gall-nutsof commerce, growing upon the Quercus infusoria in the Levant,and which are employed in the manufacture of ink. The galls areof the size of a boy's marble, very hard and round, with varioustubercles upon the surface ; they contain but a single inhabitant,which may often be found in the interior on breaking the galls. Thisspecies resembles some of our English species which reside inglobular oak-galls in its habit of undergoing its transformationswithin the gall, leaving a great portion of the gall unconsumed.Those galls which are gathered before the insect has escaped (andwhich consequently contain most astringent matter) are known intrade under the name of black or blue galls and green galls ; but thosefrom which the insect has escaped are called white galls. (Olivier,Voy. dans Temp. Ottoman, and Travels in Egypt, vol. ii. p. 61.;Hardwicke in Asia. Rep. vol. vi. p. 376. ; M'Culloch, Comm. Diet.,art. Gall ; Stephenson and Churchill, Med. Botany, vol. iv. pi. 152. ;Athenaeum, April 15, 1837; Arboretum Brita7iti. t^. \dS\.; Yeux,3Iem. sur la Noix de Galle in Annales de Chimie, April, 1793.)Another species of these insects produces a gall the real nature ofwhich has given rise to great controversy among the commentatorsupon the Bible and Oriental literature. These galls* are as large asmoderate sized apples, which they much resemble, and are found upona low species of oak (Q. infusoria), which grows upon the borders ofVOL. II. K130 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.the Dead Sea, whence they have been named Mala dominica, Pompinsane, mad apples, &c. The existence of theseDead Sea fruits that tempt the eye,But turn to ashes on the lips" — moore")has been denied by some authors, who fancied them to be the inventionsof Eastern fable. Tacitus, Strabo, and Josephus all mentionthem ; and their nature has been described by Walter Elliot, Esq.trans. Ent. Soc. vol. ii. p. 14.), where I have collected the variousopinions which have been entertained respecting their production, andwhich is now ascertained to be owing to a species of Cynips. Olivier,followed by Mr. Lambert (linn. Trans, vol. xvii. p. 445.), consideredthese galls and the Cynips which produces them as identicalwith the gall-nuts of commerce ; but such is certainly not the case.I have, therefore, proposed the name of Cynips insane for the inhabitantof these Pomp dominica. (See further. Arboretum Brit.p. 1931.) Olivier has described another species of gall found uponthe Quercus pyrenaica which is as large as the Mala insane, which itconsiderably resembles, and which is produced by Cynips miraculousOliv., Cynips Q. Tojae Fab. (Journ. deist. Nat. vol. ii. pi. 32. andArb.Brit. p. 1843.)Another species of gall has occasioned much controversy, havingbeen regarded by many writers as a parasitical species of plant(^Gard. Mag. xi. 691.). They are small, reddish, circular, flattenedinsular scales, found on the under side of the oak-leaves, attached by avery short peduncle, smooth on the side of the leaf, but pilose externally.The Rev. W. T. Bree has termed them oak spangles(^Gard. Mag. xii. 496.). Nees von Esenbeck (^^Hym, Monogr. ii. 266.)and Reaumur were unable to form any notion as to the production ofthese galls. The former author notices that they are parasiticallyattacked by an Eurytoma, and the latter calls them "gallus en champignon,"and states that he had often found beneath the gall, specimensof a minute larva. I have repeatedly found these larvae (whichappear to me to be dipterous) in the month of September ; Ihave figured them in the Arboretum Britannicum, p. 1827. fig. 1652.Olivier {Encyclop. Methods, however, and more recently Mr. F. Smith,in a memoir, read before the Entomological Society, have ascertainedthat these galls are produced by Cynips longipennis Fab.(Dipl. lenticular Oliv.) ; but as the development of the insect doesHYMENOPTERA. — CYNIPIDJE. 131not take place until the month of March, long after the leaves havefallen, the real economy of this species had been overlooked.Cynips aptera resides in galls at the roots of the oak, beech, &c. andis infested by a beautiful species of Callimome (C. subterraneous Curtis.B. E. 552. See Bird in Ent. 3Iag. vol. ii. p. 43.) My specimens of thegalls of this species are pear-shaped, and slightly imbricated, beingattached close together by their narrow end to the slender twigs of theroot of the tree. They are monothalamous, and about one third of aninch in diameter.These different galls are found upon various species of oaks, and itis to be observed that no tree affords so many distinct species of gallsas the various species of the genus Quercus ; the leaves, in addition tothe small flat spangle galls produce globular galls of various sizes,caused by several different species ; the young shoots produce a largegall, well known to schoolboys as the oak apple, and produced byCynips terminalis ; the parts of fructification are sometimes attackedby a species, the galls of which hang on the catkins like a bunch ofcurrants; the root produces a large woody gall, inhabited by Cynipsaptera ; other galls are prickly, some are branched, and some resemblelittle artichokes. Someleaves are loaded with little rough galls, &c.C. quercus folii Z., C. q. baccarum L., C. q. infers L., C. q. petioleZ., C. q. ramuli L., C. q. cornices Z., C. q. gemmae L., C. q. pedunculiL., C. q. caliphs, and C. q. terminalis Fah.^ are all inhabitantsof the oak, their names implying the different parts they affect. Butsee Spinola {Ins. Ligur. vol. ii. p. 157.) as to the impropriety of someof these names.Of the exotic species of galls, little has been hitherto observed. M.Boscc, indeed, described sixteen species of galls, during his residencein Carolina, eight of which were found upon oaks ; but he was unableto rear any of the inhabitants : one of these galls, found on the redoak, is spherical, mutilated, and very downy ; but the moment it istouched its hairs sink down and no more assume their former position.Another gall, of the size of a pea, found on another species ofoak has the outer surface very thin, and encloses in the interior a smallball of the size of a grain of millet which rolls about, and within whichthe larva is lodged. M. Boscc opened hundreds of these galls withoutbeing able to learn the true nature of this production.Dr. Dickson, F.L.S., has communicated to me some pods of the medicinalpoppy, very much injured by the attacks of a species of thisK 2132 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.family, the thin layers between the seed vessels being converted intoa solid mass and the pods distorted. Bouche has described thisspecies under the name of C. rhocados Klug nature. Ins. \Q^.).Another species, C frumenti, is destructive to wheat, as describedby Dumont Coursier {{Mem. Bologna sur Mer, and in Wied. Archiv.fur Zool. vol. ii. st. 1.); and I have described and figured a specieswhich infests the turnips (Eucoila papa; W., in Mag. Nat. Hist.vol. viii.) ; but Mr. Walker states that the species of the latter genusare parasites.The relations of these insects with the following families have beenalready noticed. It had always appeared to me contrary to naturethat a tribe of vegetable-feeding insects should be arranged in themidst of parasites ; nor was it until I had an opportunity of ascertainingthe parasitic habits of some of the species of the family thatI was enabled to form a just notion as to the true value of the parasiticor herbivorous character of these insects. In June, 1833, I detecteda minute species (Allotria Victrix) in the act of depositing inthe body of a Rose aphis fig' 73. 25.); and I subsequently succeededin hatching specimens of the perfect insect from infested aphides.I have described the proceedings of this parasite in the 3Iag. Nat. Hist.vol. vi. p. 491. It is specifically distinct from the Cynips erythro-cephalic of Jurine, which species Haliday says also infests the Roseaphis ; whilst C. fulviceps Cti7-tis, and another, destroy the aphides ofwillows, cow-parsnip, &c. {JStit. Mag. vol. ii. p. 102.).*Mr. Newman subsequently described a species of Figites, the larvaof which is parasitic upon the larva of Syrphus ribesii (Figites syrphi,Ento7nol. Mag. vol. ii. p. 515.). Costa has also described a parasiticFigites in his Memoir upon the insects which injure the olive (bull.Sc. Nat. Sept. 1 830).Bouche has described a species of Figites parasitic upon the pupaof a species of Muscidce belonging to the genus Anthomyia (Natiirg.der Ins. p. 165.).The genus Anacharis of Dalman is distinguished by the greatlength of the abdominal peduncle, which gives these insects an appearancequite unlike that of the rest of the family. I have describedseveral new British species belonging to this genus [Mag. Nat. Hist.vol. vi). Such is also the case with Leiopteron, figured by PartyThe Chips de V Ichneumon des Pucerons of Geoffrey, vol. ii. p. 305., referred tobyHaliday {Ent. Mag. vol. ii. p. [99-) as Cynips aphidum, is one of Chalcididte.HYMENOPTERA. EVANIID^. 133amongst the Fossores, which I have prefigured with details from a specimenin the Berlin Museum, proving it to belong to this family(Guerin, Mag. Zool. pi. 179.).The curious and exceedingly rare British genus Italia is distinguishedby the long and very compressed sabre-shaped abdomenwhich is terminated in the females by a recurved slender terebrafig. 73. 22.) ; the hind legs, and especially the basal joint of thetarsi, are disproportionately long and broad ; the 5th dorsal segmentof the abdomen is furnished on each side with a spiracle. Onespecies only was known of this genus until I described a second fromthe Berlin collection, and I am acquainted with another species fromGeorgia.The family Evaniidte* (Evaniadae Leach) is of small extent, butcomprises insects of very peculiar structure, and which it will probablybe necessary to separate into other groups. They may, however,be distinguished by the following characters : — The antennae arefiliform or setaceous, not elbowed, and 13 or M-jointed ; the mandiblesare toothed on the inside ; the maxillary palpi are 6-jointed, and thelabial 4-jointed ; the wings are veined, the anterior having severalirregular cells, arranged somewhat like those of Oryssus and the Ichneumonadsciti, but the posterior are destitute of cells ; theabdomen is attached to the dorsum of the metathorax by a peduncle,which sometimes arises close to the scutellum ; the ovipositor isstraight, and sometimes exserted ; the hinder legs are the longest, withthe tibiae often incrassated. The species are parasitical.BiBLioGR. Refer, to the Evaniid^.C G. Nees ah Esenbeck. Hymenopt. Ichneumon, affix. vol, ii. (Monogr. Venial.Europ.)G. Dahlhom. Exercitus. Hymenopt., Part 6. (Lond. Goth. 12mo. 183.3. Monogr,Evan. Sue.)Latreille, in Bull. Soc. Philomat. t. ii, (Pelecinus.)Serville, in Ann. Soc. Ent. France, torn, ii, 1833. (Lacus parti. )Illiger, in Rossi Fauna Etrusca. 2d edit.Westwood, in Griff. Animal Kingd. Insects, pi. 66. (Megara. )Fabrics, Curtis, Jurine, Percy (Delect. An., art. Bras. ).K 3MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Fig. 74.Jurine, on account of the peculiar insertion of the abdomen, formedthese insects into one of his three primary sections of the' order.The genus Evania Fab. fig. 74. l. Evania appendigaster, 2 — 6.details of ditto) is distinguished by the very short and much compressedabdomen, attached by its peduncle close to the scutellum.This peculiarity, although it appears, at first sight, anomalous, is dependentupon the excessive development and thickness of themetathorax, of which the praescutum is reduced to a very slenderdorsal piece, having the posterior wings attached at its sides, themeta scutellum and meta post scutellum being confluent, although thelimits of the meta scutellum are indicated (of a triangular formand small size, terminating at the place of insertion of the abdomen)by an impression, the meta post scutellum being exceedingly developedfig. 74. 4. Dorsal, and 5. Lateral, view of the thorax) ; the me-sternumis also very remarkable, terminating in a strong furcateprocess of which the points are recurved and fitting into the posteriorcoxas fig. 74. 6.). The maxillary palpi are long and slender fig. 74.2. maxilla) ; but those of the labium larger, dilated, and irregular intheir form fig. 74. 3. labium) ; the trophi vary, however, considerablyin the different species ; the antennae (which were described byJurine as 13 or 14-jointed, according to the sex) are 13-jointed inboth sexes, those of the females having the basal joint very muchelongated. The veins of the wings vary in the different species, orrather those of the extremity of the wings are obsolete in the smallerspecies (Brachygaster Leach, Jig. 74. 7.). The ovipositor is not exserted.I have already recorded (vol. i, p. 422, 423.) all that has hithertobeen observed relative to the habits of these singular insects. AsHymenoptera. EVANIIDJE. 1^5Evania appendigaster* and its immediate allies are parasites upon thetrue Battle, Mr. Stephens does not regard them as indigenous inhabitants.Mr. Kirby mentions a species existing in a piece of amberin his possession [Introdd. to Ent. vol. iv. p. 558.).The American genera Pelecinus Latr., and Monomachus Klug,MSS., are remarkable for the great length of the abdomen in the ? ,which is very slender, and at least six or seven times as long as thehead and thorax ; the ovipositor is concealed; the males have the abdomenmuch shorter and clavate. Amongst the genera with theovipositor exserted, may be especially noticed my Australian genusMegara, having this organ nearly five times as long as the entirebody ; and the indigenous genus Fcenus Fab. fig. 74. 8. Foetus calculator,9 — 16. details of ditto), which has the abdomen long andcompressed, and gradually thickened to the extremity ; it is insertedon the back of the metathorax fig. 74. 15. dorsal, and IG. lateralview of the thorax) ; and when the insect is on the wing, it is elevatedin the air at an angle with the rest of the body, giving, with thethickened posterior tibiae, a most singular appearance to the insect.In respect to the structure of the thorax, this genus is even more remarkablethan Evania, for here the mesothoracic scutellum is producedinto a triangular piece, with two oblique impressions (forming theparaptera ?), and extending to the place of insertion of the abdomen(fig. 74. 15. 16.), so that the praescutum and scutum of the metathoraxare both apparently (dorsally) obsolete. The clypeus is tri-marginalin front, the upper lip, which is membranous and internal,having its extremity alone exposed {Jg. 74. 9.). The lip itself is veryminute, and tongue-like, but the membranous parts to which it is attachedare large (Jg- 74. ic). The mandibles in F. calculator and F. australisW. are alike, with a very strong internal tooth {Jig.T^. 11.12.).Curtis describes them as unlike each other inF.assectator. The maxillaeare short, and terminated by a membranous lobe fig. 74. 13.), andthe labium or tongue is narrow, membranous, and elongate fig. 74. 14.)The economy of F. calculator Zm?z. was observed by Bergman, who communicatedit to Linnaeus. " Habitat in Apis truncorum, florisomnisSphegisque figuli jarvis ; antennae perquirit ubi larva late, avolat,redit et import ei ovum" {Fn. Suecc. 1626); and hence LehmanIlliger cleared up the synonymy of these species in his edition of Rossi FaunaEtrusca. His names must, therefore, have the preference over those proposed byCurtis.K 4136 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.considered that the antennae were necessarily employed as actors,although they are so much shorter than the ovipositor. I have foundthis insect flying about walls in which Osmia bicornis breeds ; butwhether it is in the nest whilst in the progress of construction, orunion or in the body of the larva when hatched, that the egg is deposited,has not been decidedly observed. Latreille states that in thenight, or during bad weather, they fix themselves by their jaws tothe stalk of different plants, and are then almost in a perpendicularposition.The genus Paxylloma Brebisson (Places Curtis, Hybrizon Fallen,Jig. 74. 17. P. buccal, natural size, and 18 ditto magnified), placedby Latreille and Haliday {Ent. Mag. vol.i. p. Ses. and vol. iii. p. 22.)in this family, as well as Stephens, appear rather to belong to theIchneumon adsciti, or at least to constitute the links between themand the present family. The latter genus is placed by Latreilleamongst the Ichneumon genuini; but the veins of the wings arearranged as in some of the Adsciti, especially Cannon. Curt.I have illustrated the details of the various genera of which thisanomalous family is composed, in a memoir presented to the EntomologicalSociety, with descriptions of many species, not yet published.The family IcHNEUMONiDiE* Leach, corresponding with the greaterpart of the Linnaean genus Ichneumon, may, perhaps, be regarded asBiBLIOGR. Refer. TO THE IcHNEUMONIDJE.(Ichneumon genuini.)Gravenhorst. Biographia Inchneumonum, 8vo. 1814. — Ditto, Monogr. Ichneumon.pedestal. Svo. Leipz. 1815. — Ditto (with C. G. Nees ab Esenbeck), ConspectusGen. et Family. Ichneumon. in Nov. Act. Nature. Curios, t. ix. 1818. —Ditto, Monogr. Ichneumon. Pediment in Mein. Acad. Turin, 1820, t. xiv.Ditto, Additamenta ad Descript. Fabric. Ichn. Mus. Hubert, in Germar'sMag. der Ent. vol. iv. 1821. — Helwigia N. G. Ichneumon. in Nov. Act.Acad. Nat. Curios, t. ii. 1823. — Ichneumonologia Europa, 3 vols. Svo.Vratislav, 1829. — Ditto, Ichn. Genuine. Sp. Cornua; et Calcarata; in Beytr.zur Ent. Schles. 1829. — Dit4to, Moneta quaedam. de Sp. Tigris Ichn. 4to.Breslaw, 1829.Thunherg. Ichneumonidea, Pars i. et ii. Mem. Acad. St. Petersburg, t. viii. andix. 1824.HYMENOPTERA. — ICHNEUMONIDiE. 13Yone of the most extensive groups of insects *, distinguished (fig. 75. i.Pimpla instigator: 2-13 details of this species) by having the abdomenattached to the thorax at its hinder extremity, and between the baseof the posterior coxae ; the wings are veined, the anterior pair alwaysexhibiting perfect cells upon their disc. The ovipositor of theDalman. Pimpla Traitor in Kongll. Vet. Acad. Handll. 1825. — Ditto, Mem. onsome Sp. of Ichn. 8vo. Stock. 1826.TVentepohl. Bevis. Critica Gen. Ichn. Spec. quae Kili® in Fabric Mus. adhucsuperstition sunt. 4to., Kiel, 1825; and in Isis, vol. xxii. 1826. — Dit4to, Rev.Critica Gen. Crypt Fab. Isis, 1829. — Ditto, Zehn arte G. Ichneumon. inLund's Samml. Isis, 1829.Guerin. Pimpla Strata Mag. Zool. Ins. No. 28.LatreiUe, on Ichn. Ventilator in Bull. Soc. Philomat. t. ii. 1799.Boudier. Observ. sur divers Parasites in Ann. Soc. Ent. de France, tom. iii.Corner. Ichn. Agricolator and marius in Neue Nachr. der Schles. Pair.Gesell, 1781.Marsham, on Ichn. Manifestation Trans. Soc. Linn. vol. iii.Guerin. Voy. Coquille — Iconogr. R. An.Haliday, in Linn. Trans, vol. xvii. — Ditto, in Annals Nat. Hist. vol. ii. Oct.1838.Sfephefis, Curtis, Spinola, Panzer, Fabricius, Jurine, Say.(Ichneumon adsciti. )Nees ab Esenbeck. Ichn. Adsciti in Genera et Family. Divini, &c. Gesellsch. Nat.Freunde zu Berlin Magazin, 1811, 1816 (and in Germar. Ent. Mag.vol. i. ). — Ditto, Layton femoral in Gesell. Nat. Fr. Berl. Mag. 1815Ditto (with Gravenhorst) in Nov. Act. Nat. Curios, t. ix. 1818. — Ditto, HysIchneura. Affinity Monogr. vol. ii. 8vo. Stuttg. et Tubing. 1834.Haliday. Classification of the Parasitic Hymenopt. of Britain, which correspondwith the Ichneumon minute of Linnaeus in Entomol. Mag. vol. i. et seq.Wesmael. Monographic des Braconides de Belgique, 4to. Parts 1, 2, 3. 1835-8(in Mem. Acad. Royale de Bruxelles, tom. xi. and separately).Goeze, in Der Naturforscher, 12 Stuck. (2 Aphidii).Olivier, in Mem. sur quelq. Ins. qui attaq. les Cereales, 1813. (2 Sp. of Ici.adsciti).Boudier, in Ann. Soc. Ent. de France, tom. iii.Dahlbom. Mon. Chelonus in Kongll. Vetensk. Acad. Handll. 1833.Schiodte, in Kroyer's Naturhistorisk Tidsskrift, 1838. Heft. vi. (N. g. Copisuraviator).Curtis, Spinola, Jurine, Panzer, Fabriciwi, Say.Gravenhorst describes nearly 1650 species of European Tchneiunones genuini,and Stephens and others have added greatly to their number.MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.females is straight, and often exserted ; the antennae are nearlyalways filiform or setaceous, not elbowed, and composed (except inafew of the minute Adsciti) of more than sixteen (sometimes reachingto sixty) joints, and the pupa is enclos ed in a cocoon ; the body isFig. 75.long and narrow; the head is small and free fig. 15. 2. front, and75. 3. hind part of head) ; the eyes more or less prominent andlateral. The antennae very seldom exceed the body in length ; theyare slender and filiform, except in a very few species, which havethem more or less compressed, dilated in the middle or clavate ; theyare never elbowed, the basal joint being short, although thicker thanthe rest. In some species the males, and in others the females, aredistinguished by having a broad annulus of white beyond the middleof the antennae.* The parts of the mouth are small ; the labrumfig. 75. 4.) is very rarely entirely exserted, being ordinarily coveredby the front margin of the clypeus ; the mandibles fig. 75. 5.) aregenerally slender and curved, narrowed to the tip, where they arebidentate ; the maxillae are terminated by two membranous lobes{fig.lS. 6.); the maxillary palpi are long and pendulous, and generally5- or 6-jointed ; the labium fig. 75. 7.) is composed of a corneouselongated mentum of variable form, terminated by a generallyquadrate membranous ligula, which is entire, or at least but slightlyemarginate in some species ; the labial palpi are 3- or 4-jointed.The thorax forms an oval mass ; the collar is very short and annular ;the mesothoracic scutellum is generally prominent, and often coloureddifferent from the rest of the thorax ; the wings are of moderate size ;G. H. K. Thwaites, Esq. has informed me that he has reared two females ofCryptus bellows (Curtis, 668.), one of which had the antennae annulated and theother entirely black.HYMENOPTERA. — ICHNEUMONIDJE. 139the Stigma is large, and the costal margin is thickened, or rather thecostal and subcostal nerves are confluent, so as not to exhibit a subcostalcell. The legs are long, and formed for running ; the enchantersare inarticulate ; the tarsi long and slender, the terminaljoint being furnished between the ungues with a small obtuse .In Ophion the ungues are pectinated. The abdomen isgenerally long and cylindrical, or elongate ovate, and narrowed at thebase into a short peduncle ; on each side of which is a small tubercle,in which a minute spiracle exists. The ovipositor of the females issometimes retracted, in which case the abdomen terminates in apoint. In the other species this instrument is exserted, and occasionallyof great length, in which case the abdomen is more obtuse atits extremity. In the former species it is often difficult to distinguishthe sexes when dried, except from some other character, as theannulus of the antennae, slenderness of the body, &c. ; but in thelatter, the males {De Geer, vol. ii. tab. 29. fig. 25. m.) as well asfemales ibid. fig. 23. m.) are furnished at the extremity of theterminal segment of the abdomen with the two inarticulated stylesof which I have noticed the existence in the former families. Of thetrue construction of the ovipositor of the females I have hitherto metwith no correct description. Reaumur memoires, tom. vi. pi. 29.), DeGeer memoires, tom. ii. tab. 29.), Curtis (Brit. Ent. pi. 214.),Latreille (gen. Crust, tom. iv. p. 2.), Gravenhorst (^Ichneumolog.vol. i. p. 89.), and Burmeister (^^Manual Transll. p. 198.) have givenfigures and descriptions of this instrument and its details ; but havefailed in tracing its real structure. My figures 75. 8-13. will exhibitits structure as typically represented in one of the long-tailed species(Pimpla instigator), and which will be found to agree with that ofUrocerus and Cynips. Fig. 75. 8. represents a lateral view of theabdomen of the female of the last-named insect, exhibiting the eightdorsal arcs (numbered I to 8), the seven basal ones being spiraculi-serous, the eighth furnished at the tip with the two minute styles(a). On the under side of the abdomen there only exist sevenventral arcs (numbered 1 to 7), from the last of which arises on eachside a corneous elongated plate (i), which is the basal portion of theouter sheaths * (b, b) of the ovipositor ; the apical part of theseMr. Curtis, overlooking this basal portion, describes the sheath as arising fromthe superior angle, and al^'shorter than the ovipositor. Neither of which is correct,the basal portion of the sheaths and the eighth dorsal arc of the abdomen beinginaccurately represented in his figure as confluent.MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.sheaths varies greatly in length in the different species ; but thearticulation always takes place near the extremity of the body : wheatrest, these two demi sheaths (which are externally convex andpilose, but internally concave and polished) are brought into contact,and enclose between them the terebra or borer itself, whichis a compound instrument formed (like the borer of Urocerus) ofthree parts, the superior (c) being nearly cylindrical, and channelledbeneath for the reception of the two * slender, rigid, filamentousspiculse (c, c), with membranous edges transversely striated at the extremity(Jiff- 75. 12.) ; the union of these three pieces forms a centralpassage (as vajig. 13. being a section of the borer itself, with the tv/ospiculae in situ) for the protrusion of the egg. Fig. 75. 9. representsthe under side of the abdomen, with the different parts similarlylettered. Fig. 75. lo. exhibits a more highly magnified view of thebase of the ovipositor, showing that (c) the superior channel of theterebra originates from the base of the basal part (b) of the outersheath ;ands. 75. ll. represents the same parts beneath, c being thedeflexed sides of the superior canal of the terebra, and c, c, the baseof the two spiculae.Fig. 76.De Geer, Latreille, and Burmeister incorrectly describe the central terebraas composed of only two, instead of three, parts ; the latter further endeavouringto refer this incorrectly regarded structure to that of Sirexx (hoc. cit. sttpra).Gravenhorst even regards the central terebra as not being a composite instrument.Reaumur has given numerous figures of the female of a species of Pimpla engagedin oviposition (in which the terebra is not represented as disengaged from itssheaths), and of the details of the ovipositor, but in a very rude manner. Hisfig. 10. pi. 29. torn. vi. represents the two rows of sensations at the extremity ofthe terebra " entre lesquelles una membrane blanche est sensible," besides whichthere is an elongated slender " corps blanc, que j'ai fait sortir du bout de la barrierpar la pression." This latter must, I should presume, be membrane rather than adistinct organ.H Hymenoptera. — ICHNEUMONlDiE. 141My figure 76. l. will show the mode in which the abdomen of thosespecies with short ovipositors is bent beneath the body, in the act ofoviposition. This figure represents an Ichneumon (sp. ?) depositingits egg in the body of a young Syrphus larva, which is engaged insucking an Aphis.* In those species which have a long ovipositor,it is ordinarily porrected in a straight line during rest ; but in thosewith a short ovipositor, it is generally carried in a more or lessoblique direction, pointing upwards; but when the insect is disturbed,or in the act of oviposition, it is disengaged from the sheaths,and is directed upwards and downwards (Gravenhorst doubts itslateral motion) at every angle from the line of the body.The species are of small, or but moderate size ; their colours aregenerally black, varied with red, yellow, or white ; and the antennaeare often marked with a broad annulus of pale colour.The name of Ichneumon has been given to these insects (whichare parasitic upon other insects), from the similarity of their habits tothat which has been fabulously attributed to the quadruped of thatname, namely, that of depositing its progeny in the body of thecrocodile, the entrails of which are by degrees devoured by the parasite.Other old authors have named these insects Muscle trifles, fromthe setae of which the ovipositor is composed ; whilst others calledthem Muscae vibrantes, from the constant vibration of their antennae,whereby they are enabled in some manner to acquire a knowledge ofMay 29. 1830, I observed a Pimpla with the ovipositor about as long as thebody in the act of oviposition in a dry paling, which had been much perforated, and outof which I had just dug a black Pemphredon. The part in which the ovipositorwas introduced appeared to be quite solid. (Reaumur represents his specimensas inserting their ovipositors in a circular patch of dried clay, used to stop up theentrance to the nest of the intended victim. ) There are several very minute blackishspots, as they seemed to be, close to the place where the ovipositor was inserted,and which were probably other places of insertion of the ovipositor. When firstobserved, the insect had introduced about half the terebra into the post, the partremaining inserted being at a right angle with the body, the sheaths beingcurved, their tips being brought to the place of insertion, thus evidently strengtheningthe terebra in its operations ; the abdomen was at this time alternately turnedfrom left to right, and vice versa, whereby a brad-awl kind of motion was given tothe terebra, enabling it to penetrate the wood to a greater depth. It then alternatelypartially withdrew, and plunged the terebra into the hole thus made, asthough in the act of passing an egg or eggs, standing all this while on the tips ofthe tarsi. On cutting, however, into the post, I was not able to discover anygranivorous larva, finding only a channel of fine white pulverised wood, which hadbeen made by a previous occupier of the tube.142 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.their food, and of the objects fitted for the reception of their eggs.Some species (Ophion) are, however, less agile, not vibrating theirantennae.These insects are of vast importance in the economy of nature, bypreventing the too great increase of different species of insects,especially of the caterpillars of butterflies and moths, of which theydestroy a great number, it having been observed that a superabundanceof any species of insect is attended with an increasedproduction of its parasitic enemies.*The females exhibit a wonderful instinct f, in discovering theproper receptacles for their eggs, consisting of the eggs, larvae, orpupae of other insects, as well as spiders. Those species which havethe ovipositor short, attack exposed naked larvae and pupae ; whilstthose in which this organ is long, deposit their eggs in or upon thebodies of larvae residing in the wood, or under the bark, of trees, orindeep crevices of the bark. In such cases, as I have often observed,the ovipositor is inserted in a perpendicular direction, the two externalpieces, or sheaths, being entirely disengaged, and often raisedinto the air. (See also Reaumur, vol. vi. ; and Marsham's account ofIchneumon manifestation in Linn. Trans, vol. iii. p. 26.)Dalman, in his interesting memoir on this family, has made somecurious observations as to the comparative numbers of these parasitesand the other insects. (^Swed. Trans. 1825 ; and in Bull. Sci. Nat.Ferussac, Jan. 1828.)There is scarcely a tribe of insects which is not subject to the attacksof these parasites, although it is chiefly amongst the Lepidopterathat their ravages are confined. Amongst the Cleopatra, Timarchatenebricosa and a species of CoccinellaandCurculiohave been recordedby De Geer and Kirby. M. Audouin has obtained Microctonus terminalisr^e*?w., from the perfect Coccinella 7-punctata, the larva of theformer bursting forth and spinning its cocoon beneath the body of theMr. Dale (Mag. Nat. Hist. No 19.) gives an account of six specimens ofOphion vinula, and a specimen of Bombyx menthrasti, " hatched from the purseof Bombyx vinous, which is certainly a curious fact."f The female of the remarkable species Agriotypus aratus is stated to havebeen observed on the banks of the Clyde to descend the sides of the rocks to aconsiderable depth under the surface of the water, remaining immersed for tenminutes and upwards, and then reappear without any apparent injury, repeating theoperation several times ; these subaqueous wanderings being probably for thepurpose of depositing its eggs in some aquatic larva. {Ent, Mag. vol. iii. p. 412.)HYMENOPTERA. — ICHNEUMONID^. 143latter. M. Boudier describes two species of Braconides (S. G. Gany-chorus Hal the larvae of which burst forth from the abdomens of specimensof Barynotus elevates, and Otiorynchus ignatius, in the imagostate (which had been pierced with pins for preservation), and whichspun their cocoons beneath the body of these weevils, attaching themto the pins. I have reared Perilitus similar from Orchestra micans.Bracon Cis Bouche attacks Cis boleti. A small, pretty, spotted-wingedCryptus enters our houses to prey upon the larvae of the Ptinidae, as doalso Statius cravats and Hecabolus sulcatus ; other species (Hemi-tells creator, &c.) also frequent our dwellings, to deposit their eggs inthe larvae of Dermestidae, Anthreni, These, and other domestic insects.Amongst the Hemiptera, the Aphides in particular are subject to theattacks of numerous species constituting a genus, thence named Apicius.*The larvae of a great number of Hymenoptera and Dip-teaare also subject to their attacks, and Mr. Kirby mentionsan observation recording the occurrence of a minute species in^shna viatica. Boudier has described a species of Cryptus whichattacks the larvae of Myrmeleon formicarium ; and, which is veryremarkable, not only are those species of insects which inhabitgalls and cases liable to be infested by them, but even many ofthose parasitic larvae which are themselves inclosed within the bodyof their victim; thus, two species of Hemiteles and one of Telemachusare stated by Mr. Haliday to have been obtained from the cocoonsof Microgaster intricate {Ent. Mag. vol. ii. p. 468.). The larva ofthe Ophion moderator Fah. destroys that of Pimpla strobilellas FadeGeer mim. vol. ii. p. 863.) has recorded a singular instance ofan Ichneumon-larva infesting the outside of the body of a spider,which it ultimately destroyed ; and numerous observations have beenmade, in which other species (Pimpla oculatoria, Hemiteles salvator,Ichneumon aranearum) deposit their eggs in the cocoon-like silkenmasses inclosing the eggs of some spiders, upon which the larvae of theparasites feed and undergo their transformations within the cocoon ;and Mr. Dilwynn says, " I have frequently observed a small blackspecies successively deposit an egg in the abdomen of two or morespiders on the sand hills, and I doubt whether the spider had in anycase arrived at its maturity. On one of those occasions, I perfectlyrecollect having seen a young brood of dark-coloured spiders on CrosbieDe Geer, torn. ii. ; Harris Aurelian, Der Natiirforscher, st. 12.) Thehabits of Aphidius Rosa; have been admirably described by Haliday in Entomol.Mag. vol. ii. p. 98., and by Kirby and Spence.144) MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.]yn burrows, and that when the Ichneumon hovered over them, theyappeared alarmed, and instinctively endeavour-ed to escape (SwanseaColeopt. p. 27. ; and see Bohemian on Pimpla ovivora, in Lived. Trans.1821, SLwdBull. Sci. Nat.; Davis in Mag. Nat. Hist. No. 19.; Bouche,Naturgesch. Ins. p. 145. With the exception of those species of Aphideswhich always remain in an apterous state, and which are subjectto the attacks of the Aphidii, &c., no account has been published ofthe Ichneumonidfe attacking perfect insects, except the statement ofM. Boudier, that he had observed a small Ichneumon " cramponne surle dos de Trachyphlaeus scabriculus. II avait introduit satarriere entreles litres et I'abdomen par Uranus" (ann. Soc. Ent. de France, 1 834,p. 322.), and a paragraph I have met with in an American Journal,in which it is asserted, that a female Ichneumon deposits its eggs inthe body of the winged grasshopper, the interior of which is at lengthentirely consumed; "and, at the proper season, hundreds of grasshoppersin this condition may be found with just strength enough remainingto flutter to a tree or fence, and with a dying effort to fix their hookedfeet so firmly as to retain their position long after death." I believeit has not been decidedly ascertained whether the species of theseinsects confine their attacks to precise species of caterpillars, &c,, orwhether the same species occasionally attacks others ; the questionhas, however, repeatedly been proposed (Bree in Mag. Nat. Hist.No. 23.).* The majority of these insects deposit their eggs in thelarvae of other insects ; but various instances are collected by Kirbyand Spence, proving that they also attack the eggs, and more rarelythe pupae ; thus Cryptus compunction Fab. deposits its eggs in thepupae of butterflies. In the Insect Architecture, p. 195., it is statedthat an Ichneumon (Ophion luteum) had deposited its eggs in thecocoon of a puss moth ; but this is, I apprehend, a misstatement, as thatinsect oviposits in the larva of the moth. Hitherto, no species of thisfamily has been observed which is not parasitical. Mr. Curtis, indeed,published a species of Alysia (A. apis), of which the larvae arestated to have been found feeding upon the parenchyma of celeryleaves at the end of September (B. E. 141.) ; but he subsequentlyGreenhorn (in Mag. Nat. Hist.) asserts that Microgaster glomeratus attacksboth Pontia brassicae, and Arctia caJEe ; but he had not evidently investigatedthe species of the parasite. Bouche more minutely describes M. glomeratus asattacking several allied species of the white butterflies, describing other species asdistinct which infest Pieris cratajgi (M. viridis), Arctia casas (M. casa), andParis dispar CM. liparidis). Naturgesch. der his. 'p. 151.HYRrENOPTEHA. — ICHNEUMONID^. 14?Sascertained that this insect is parasitic upon a species of Nephritis,which is found in that situation. ibid. Add. vol. vii). M. Audouin,however, has shown me the details of the history of a species whichhe had reared from a larva, which he was led to believe fed upon thepith of a reed in which it was found, since no traces of any insectupon which it could have subsisted were to be seen ; but this observationdoes not appear to me sufficiently conclusive.In Corns India Review (Nov. 1836.), an account has been publishedby Mr. Baddeley, of one of the Adsciti which inhabits the gallson the leaves of Ficus racemosa in India, caused by a Cecidomyia,and in which it is asserted that the Ichneumon and Cecidomyia-larvsB "live independently, and feed upon the vegetable juices withoutdetriment to each other ; although, at the first, the Ichneumon larvalives and grows for a certain time at the expense of the Cecidomyialarva. The former, however, subsequently acquires herbivoroushabits, feeding in concert on the juice of the interior of the gall; inthis occupation it continues to grow without detriment to the otherinmate. The natural history of the two species appears to have beenvery carefully traced and figured, with numerous details, leading tothe belief in the correctness of this statement.The development of these parasites* within the bodies of otherinsects was for along time a source of much speculation amongst theearlier philosophers, who conceived it possible that one animal hadoccasionally the power of being absolutely transformed into another ;thus, Swammerdam records, as a " thing very wonderful," that 5^5 fliesof the same species were produced from four chrysalides of a butterfly,so that the life and motion of these seems to have transmigrated, intothose of the 54?5 others." (Hill's Trans, of the Bibl. Nature. p. 122.)The eggs of the genus Ophion are of a singular form fig. 76. 7.)being somewhat bean-shaped, and attached near one end to a long, slender,and curved peduncle, by which they are attached (unlike the majorityof the eggs of this family, to the surface of the body of the larva ofCerura vinula, the puss moth) ; when the eggs are hatched, the larvaretains itself in this situation, the extremity of its abdomen beingretained within the shell of the egg fig. 76. 8.), whereby they areenabled to suck the juices of their victim (De Geer, Memoires, torn. ii.tab. 29.)-]- Gravenhorst first noticed {Ichn. Eur. ii. 151. and 222.),See observations under the section Fossores, astothecorrect application of this term.f Reaumur (Mem. vol. ii. pi. 34. f. 4, 5.) has represented a caterpillar, whichVOL. II. LliG MuUEKN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.that the females of various species of the genus Tryphon (T. penguinsand tartarus) were furnished near the extremity of the abdomen onthe underside with a variable number of small pear-shaped or uniformvesicle-like bodies, of a white or straw colour, being more obtuse anddarker-coloured at the tips, of which he says, " ova esse videntur."Subsequently Haliday communicated to Curtis specimens of the latterinsect, " with a sketch of the larva?, for such they are, and not eggs,"in different stages ; and he found as many as eighteen of them attachedto one insect fig. 76. 2,) : " at first they are all smooth, pear-shaped,and of a shining opaque waxy tint {fig- 76. 3.), but in a few days theyappear as represented at fig. 76. 4., which is the underside ; at thisstage its voracious powers developed themselves, and I find the oldestgenerally making a meal of his next neighbour." He observed twomotions in the mouth, one an opening and shutting of the mandibles ;the other, a general dilatation and contraction of the membrane ofthe mouth. The observations of De Geer enable us to judge of thetrue nature of these bodies respecting which Curtis (B. E., 399.) hasmade some remarks. It is evident that the insect, probably in theagony of death, had extruded its already developed and impregnatedeggs, without being able to place them in their true locality, whencethey remained attached to the abdomen of the parent, the larvaeshortly afterwards hatching (as in Ophion), and feeding, for want ofits own food, upon its congeners. Dr. Hartig has still more recentlypublished an interesting memoir on the pedunculated eggs of variousIchneumonidtB archie. fur Nature. vol. iii. tab-i.), exhibiting theabdomen of Tryphon cancer with a very great number of eggs attachedto its extremity beneath ; Tryphon caucasus in the act of depositing apedunculated e^^ {fig- *<'6. 5., 76. 6., showing the passage of the eggdown the ovipositor) ; the singularly pedunculated e^^ of Sphincterserotinus and Priscus testaceous fig. 76. 9.), together with theegg hatched, with the head of the larva exposed {fig- 76.10.), and withthe larva itself detached from the eggshell fig. 76. ll).feeds on the stems and head of a species of thistle, to the exterior surface of thebody of which a small parasitic larva is attached, being evidently a small Ichneii-monition larva, the head of which is described as having " deux species de comes,"and as being destitute of hooks or teeth. De Geer has described an Ichneumonlarva, found on the outside of the body of a spider, which it destroyed, and hasfigured a larva of Cerura vinula, on the surface of whose body are numerousminute naked larva?, apparently of a species of INIicrogasler, some of which havespun cocoons. (Mem. vol. i, pi. 23. f 17.)HYMENOPTERA. — ICHNEUMONID^. 147The larvae of these insects fig. 76. 12.) are destitute of feet, having asoft, white, fleshy, and nearly cylindrical body, with lateral fleshy tubercles,generally slightly curved and narrowed at each extremity ; thefirst segment, or the head (fig. 76. 14.), furnished with two distinctround points in those larvae which I have examined, resembling ocelli,beneath which is a transverse fleshy upper lip, and two obliquelydeflexed horny mandibles, very small, slender, and acute : beneaththese is a curved fleshy lobe of three parts, formed by the ilion ofthe dilated maxillae and labium. Reaumur has rudely represented theseparts (Men. torn. ii. pi. 33. f. 4.) ; but he describes the head as beingconcealed by a sort of " chaperon charnu " (fig. 3. cc.) which I have notrecognised in my various larvae of this family. The figure given by Bonnetof the head (fig. 76. 15.) of the larva of Ophion luteum agreeswith my observations (Posthh. Mem. pi. 24. fig. 7.)* Those larvae whichreside, like the intestinal worms, within the bodies of caterpillars(sometimes in society), as the Microgasters, which infest the caterpillarsof the white butterflies (fig. 76. 16.), carefully avoid touchingthe vital organs of their victims, feeding only upon the fatty matter :when, however, they have attained their full size, and are ready toassume the pupa state f , they pierce the skin of the larva, which soondies, spin for themselves cocoons beneath its body (or within thecocoon which it had formed for its own grave), and undergo their transformations.Such are the habits of the minute species of Micro-masterwhich attack the common cabbage-butterfly, and which depositagreat number of eggs in the same caterpillar, so that the parasiticlarvae, when hatched, live in society (Reaumur, Mem. torn. ii. pi. 34.) :j: ;whereas many species deposit only one, or but very few eggs, in thebody of a caterpillar. The larvae of other species do not destroytheir victim in its larva state, but allow it to become a pupa, in thebody of which they undergo their transformations, not making theirDe Geer's figures of the head of the larva exhibit the acute mandibles, but thefleshy lips are of different forms to those described above. (Mem. vol. i. pi. 34.f. 11. and 12.f M. Audouin has described a small species (Ophion Dositheas), the larva ofwhich continues to feed upon the caterpillar of the Dosithea after it has burst forth ;and which partially employs the skin of the caterpillar in constructing its owncocoon. (Ann. Soc. de France, 1834, p. 417.):j: The Rev. W. Bree and Mr. Newman have published some observations onthis genus ( Mass. Nat. Hist. No. 23. , and Westwood in Ditto, No. 25. ) ; Mr.Newman noticing a filiform appendage attached to the tail of the larva of the Microgaster,which he suggests may serve as an umbilical cord for taking food.L 2148 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.appearance until after they have become perfect insects. Ratzeburg,in Nova Acta (vol. xvi. pi. 9.), has figured the larva and pupa of He-milesluteator, with the view of showing that the head of the pupais formed from the two first segments of the larva, representing theeye of the pupa as visible through the skin of the second segment ofthe larva. In my unpublished memoir upon Trichiosoma lucorumand its parasites, observed ten years ago, I had not only noticed thiscircumstance, but had observed that the fifth and following segmentof the larva, immediately before assuming the pupa state, is contracted ;but on carefully examining the insect in this state, it is evident that itis owing to the increased development of the head of the inclosed pupa,that an alteration has taken place in the relative position of the anteriorsegments, which cannot be considered as a proof that the head ofthe pupa had occupied two segments instead of one. My figure 76.13. represents another larva (preserved in spirits), ready to undergo itstransformation to the pupa, showing the head of the latter disengagedwithin the skin of the larva, and occupying the second segment of thebody, the antennae extending into the first segment.The larvae of the majority of these insects spin a silken cocoon, in whichthey pass the pupa state; these cocoons are sometimes found in a masstogether, and are often enveloped in a general covering of yellow or whiteglossy silk (which has been incorrectly stated by some authors to bespun by the dying caterpillar for the covering of its parasites, althoughit ordinarily spins but a few threads for supporting itself by a girdle roundthe body), forming a large oval mass, whichmay often be observed uponrailings, walls, stems of plants, &c. Such are the habits of Micrometerglomeratus Rose, and some allied species (Reaumur, Mem. tom. il.tab. 33. and 35. fig. 1, 2. 6.; and T. H. [Gen. Hardwicke], in Mag.Nat. Hist. No. 11. incorrectly named Ichn. ovulorum). In one speciesthe cocoons are arranged in a symmetrical manner, like the cellsin a miniature bee-hive, without any external covering (Reaumur, Mem,tom, ii. pi. 35. f. 7, 8., representing the cocoons of Microgaster alterius).My figure 76. 17. represents a mass of fifty-two of these cocoonsarranged symmetrically, discovered by Mr. Ingpen, which appearedto have been attached on one side to a sprig, and from which theinsects had escaped both at the top and bottom, by cutting open thecircular lid of each cocoon. In a species of Cryptus, of which I haveobserved the transformations, the cocoon is long, cylindric, and roundedat each end ; and I distinctly noticed that it was composed of threeseparate layers, the two interior being very shining, and of a gummyHYMENOPTERA. — ICHNEUMONID^. 149membranous texture, and each of them formed of a distinct elongatedcap at each end of the cocoon. This formation was found to exist inseveral of the cocoons. Some cocoons are entirely white or yellow, andcomposed of glossy silk which can be wound off; but others arevariegated and banded with black, of which Reaumur has figured variousspecies {{Mem. torn. ii. pi. 35. and 37.), minutely describingthe process of formation. Other cocoons are suspended by a finethread to leaves or twigs, sometimes three or four inches long*;and Reaumur, who described two kinds, has observed that one ofthem is evidently the parasite of the professional caterpillars,as he found them by dozens in the neighbourhood of the nests ofthose caterpillars ; and that the other cocoon, when detached from thetwig, sprang to a distance of several inches, the inclosed larvae probablycontracting its body, or perhaps bringing the two extremities ofthe body together, and then suddenly letting them go, in a mannersimilar to the motions of the common cheese-hopper. De Geer obtainedlarvae of a species of Perilitus (Zele Curtis), which formedsuspended cocoons from the caterpillar of Zygsena filipedulae (mem.tom. ii. tab. ^i. f. 11. 13.); and Curtis reared a species of Perilitus(P. ventilator Latr., Ephippium Curt.) from a cocoon suspendedfrom the nut fig. 76. 18.); and see Latreille's Memoir on Ichneumonventilator, the last-named species in Bull. Soc. Philomat. 1799, tom.ii. p. 138. Some few species, however, especially amongst the Adscitido not construct cocoons when their peculiar habits render this unnecessary.Such, for instance, is the case with the Aphidii, whichundergo their transformations within the indurated skin of the Aphis,of which they have devoured the interior. The spherical shape of thecase thus formed accords with the curved attitude of the full-grownlarva, and of the pupa developed from it (Haliday, Ent. Mag. vol. ii.p. 225.). In the majority of the true Ichneumonidae, BraconidcE Stephens,and others, — the pupa is not bent double, and the cocoon is more elongated.Ratzeburg figures the pupa of Hemiteles luteator as bent double ;and this is probably the case with all those species which oviposit byextending the tip of the body beneath the fore-legs. In the Mag.Nat. Hist. (vol. viii, p. 171.) I have described one of the Adsciti(Cannon nigricans) produced from pupae found in the sheathing leafof the flowering stalk of the common barley. The pupa (fig. 76. 19.Reaumur has made no observation as to the mode of construction of this curiouscocoon. It seems, however, most probable that the larva having first suspended itselfby a thread, commences the formation of its cocoon whilst remaining suspended.L 3150 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.pupa of Pimpla instigator) bears a great resemblance to theimago, except in having the limbs laid along the breast. Inthose species with an elongated ovipositor, it is curved backwards,and laid along the back, sometimes extending to the head (De Geer,Mem. torn. ii. tab. 29. f. 6, 7.). M. Boudoir has made some curiousobservations of the different situation of the male and female pupaof a species of Cryptus within the cocoon of Bombyx quercus(ann. Soc. Ent. de France, 1836, p. 358.) In the genus Chelonus, thefemale, according to Dufour (as cited by Haliday, Ent. Mag. vol. v.p. 213.), produces her young, not in the state of eggs, but of adultpupae. The larva of Chelonus (Rhitigaster) irrorator, however, accordingto De Geer, is parasitic upon that of Noctua Psi. (Wesmaelsays " noctuelle pyramidal '' incorrectly.)The perfect insects are found flying amongst trees and plants,and especially frequenting the heads of umbelliferous flowers, whencethey derive a great portion of their nourishment, which consistsmerely of the nectar of those flowers * (Fabricius, Gen. Lis. p. 114. ;Gravenhorst, John. Europ. vol. i. p. 95.). I have observed that theyare very fond of licking the leaves of plants besmeared with honeydew. Some species whose females are furnished with a very longovipositor, are found on the trunks of trees, stumps of wood, &C.5evidently searching for the granivorous larvae, in which they deposittheir eggs ; whereas those which have short ovipositors seek external-feedinglarvae for the reception of their eggs. From the circumstancethat these insects in the perfect state are not ordinarily observed preyingupon other insects, it may be inferred that the accounts recordedin the old authors of their voracious propensities, applied to somespecies of Sphegidae rather ian of Ichneumonidae. When taken inthe fingers, they immediately disengage their terebra from its sheath,and attempt to sting, causing a painful irritation for the moment, ifthey puncture a tender part, but which so quickly passes away, that itis evident no very powerful poison can be introduced into the wound.They fly with considerable agility ; and I have noticed that some ofthe smaller species during flight reflex the extremity of their antennae.Some of these insects when handled emit a powerful, and byno means pleasant scent. M. Wesmael has described a remarkableGynandromorphous specimen, having the head and thorax, with theE. W. Lewis observed Pimpla stercorator devour a leaf-rolling caterpillar of thelilac, which it had the instinct to dislodge by pricking the roll of the leaf with itsovipositor. (Mac. Nat. Hist. vol. vi. p. 414.)HYMENOPTERA. — ICHNEUMONID^. 151organs attached thereto, of the female sex (Ichn. extensorius), whilethe abdomen and its appendages are masculine (I. luctatorius), in theBull. Acad. Set. Bruxelles, vol. iii. 1836. Reaumur (memoires, torn. vi.mem. 9., torn ii. mem. 11., &c.), De Geer (Memoires, tom. i. passim,and tom. ii. pi. 29, 30.), Kirby and Spence (Introdd. vol. iv. chap. 44.),Bouche (Naturffeschichte des Insect), Loser (in Trans. Amer. Phil.Soc. vol. V. 1802), Rose {Ins. Bel. vol. ii. Bomb. Vesp. tab. 4—6.),Disderi (in Transact. Turin Acad. vol. ii), Goeze (in Der Naturforscher,vol. v.), Frisch and Godart (in various of their plates), and Drewsenand Bore (in JViegmann's Archiv. fur Nature. vol. ii. No. 1. translatedin The Naturalist, 1837), have given many details relative to thenatural history of different species of this family.In the last Linnaean edition of the Systema Natura; seventy-sevenspecies were described as appertaining to the genus Ichneumon, dividedinto seven sections, of which all except the last were founded upon thecolour of the scutellum and antennae, the last being thus described, "minute,antennae filiformibus, abdomen ovate sessile " (vol. ii.p.938.). Thespecies introduced into this section (except I. Aphidum, globatus, andglomeratus) belong to the families Chalcididse and Proctotrupidse. Fabricius,Jurine, and Latreille (in his earlier works) proposed the separationof various genera from the mass of true Linnaean Ichneumonss,which by degrees became restricted to the group as above characterised;the families Evaniidae, Chalcididge, and Proctotrupida; having beenestablished upon species most of which had at first been regardedas Ichneumonss. In the joint memoir of Gravenhorst and Nees abEsenbeck, published in 1818, the Ichneumonideous genera were firstdivided into two stirpes — the Ichneumon genuini and the IchneumonAdsciti ; these two stirpes being further divided into numerousgenera ; the Adsciti being primarily divided into two groups namedBracones and Bassi (the latter name being very inappropriate, thegenus Bassus belonging not to this group but to the genuine Ichneumon,and which Stephens accordingly changed to Alysiidae).* Fallensubsequently (1823) divided the family into two groups, correspondingwith the Genuine and Adsciti of Gravenhorst and Esenbeck, but characterised,— 1. " alls area secular instructs," and 2. " alis area seculardestitute." Latreille, in his later works, and Stephens ( Catal.) formedthe Ichneumonss into three primary divisions, answering to the Genuine,Nees ab Esenbeck, in his Monographice (1834), retained these two groups,terming them Ichiieumonides Braconoidei, and Alysioidei.L 4152 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Bracones, and Bassi of Gravenhorst and Esenbeck, and founded principallyon the variations in the number of joints of the palpi, a characterwhich has since been proved to be of too slight a value amongstthe Adsciti. Mr. Haliday, in his systematic distribution of the Adscitifenton. Mag. vol. i. p. 261. 1833.), divided them primarily thus : —Abdomen sub pectus incurvated. G. Aphidius.** Abdomen baud penitus incurvated.1. Areola antics disci contigiia complete. G. Sigalphus, &c.2. Areola antics disci remota vel income Microgaster, Bracon, Alysia,plea. Agathis, Leiophron, &c.Mr. Stephens {Illustr. Brit. Ent. vol. vii. p. 117. 1835.), retainingthe number of joints in the maxillary palpi as the leading character,has separated the Ichneumonidae into four families : 1. Ichneumonida;,2. Baroniae (max. palpi 5-jointed); 3. Alysiidje (m. p. 6-jointed); and4. Aphidiidae (m. p. 4-jointed). Still more recently, Mr. Haliday (sent.Mag. No. 23. 1838) has divided them into five families, including,1. Evaniidae; 2. IchneumonidtB ; 3. Agriotypida; 4. Baroniae; and 5.AphidiidfE, founded upon the nature of the connexion between the 2 andS dorsal segments of the abdomen, and the outer discoidal cell of thefore-wings. On reviewing these arrangements, it appears to me that itwill be far more natural to retain the binary division of Ichneumongenuini and adsciti ; and such is the opinion also of my friend M.Wesmael, who characterises the former (Ichneumonides) by havingtwo recurrent nerves, and the latter, which he names Braconides, byhaving only one recurrent nerve.The sub-family Ichneumonides comprises the largest species of thefamily; and is not only distinguished by having two recurrent nerves,but also by having the nerve which separates the first cubital or sub-marginalcell from the external discoidal cell, either entirely or nearlyobliterated, whereby these two cells become confluent. No genuineIchneumon with perfect wings has yet been described in which thisstructure does not exist. Moreover, the second cubital or sub-marginalcell (the area speculations of Fallen) is very greatly reduced insize, being sometimes petiolated, but often entirely obsolete. It is inthis minute area, or in the space which it should typically occupy, thatthe second recurrent nerve is inserted : M. Wesmael also adds theexistence of an articulation between the second and third dorsal segmentsof the abdomen.Amongst the Ichneumonides may be noticed the genera Pimpla, inwhich the ovipositor and its sheaths are often greatly elongated, beingHYMENOPTERA. ICHNEUiMONID^. 153in some exotic species three or four inches in length ; Ophion Fah.,having the abdomen greatly compressed and sabre-shaped ; Euceros *Grav. and Joppa Fahr., having the antennae dilated in the middle ;of the former genus males only have been observed ; and Hellwigia,(for which I am indebted to Dr. F. Klug) having the antennaestrongly clavate at the extremity in both sexes. The interesting genusAgriotypus Walk. fig. 75. U. A. aratus <? , for which I am indebtedto F. Walker, Esq.) is remarkable for its long curved petiole to theabdomen, spotted wings, and spined scutellum ; the radial cell is short,whence, as well as in the form of the abdomen, it appeared to Latreilleto form the connecting link between the Ichneumonidse and ProctorIts palpi and the cubital cell of the fore-wings, however,evidently prove its affinity with the true Ichneumonidse ; although Mr.Haliday, on account of the want of articulation between the secondand third dorsal segments of the abdomen, has formed it into a distinctfamily : but this latter character is proved by such generaas Chelonus, Sigalphus, &c., to be but of secondary importanceamongst the Ichneumonidas.The sub-family Braconides (Ichneumonides Adsciti Esenb.), on theother hand, is characterised by having only one recurrent nerve, whichunites with the nerve, (almost always present) extending betweenthe first cubital and extent-discoidal cells ; the second sub-marginalcell being often as large as the preceding, and not receiving a recurrentnerve, and the non-existence of articulation between the secondand third dorsal segments of the abdomen. In Agathis and someMicro and Microcosm the nerve between the first cubital and cell is obliterated, as in the genuine Ichneumonss.M. Wesmael divides the Braconides as follows : —A. Endodontes. Having the teeth of the mandibles directed inwardly. Themandibles meeting together when shut. Divisible into1. Polymorphi. Clypeus entire, abdomen 6- to 7-jointed, posterior part of thevertex convex, second submarginal cell (when present) large.2. Cryptogastri. Clypeus entire, posterior part of vertex convex, abdomendorsally presenting not more than two transverse sections, second submarginalcell (when present) large.From the similarity of this name to Eucera, another Hymenopterous genus,I have proposed to alter it to Eusebius. The species of this genus are extremelyrare, and I am, therefore, happy in being able to state the history of Mr. Curtis'sspecimen of E. crassicornis, which was reared by the late Mr. Blunt from Achatespiniperda, as that gentleman informed me some time before his decease.154 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.3. Areolar. Clypeus entire, vertex more or less emarginate behind, abdomen6- to 7-jointed, second submarginal cell (when present) very small.4. Cydostomi. Clypeus deeply notched, leaving a circular aperture between itand the jaws, abdomen generally 6- to 7-jointed, second submarginal cell(when present) large.B. ExoDONTEs. Having the teeth of the mandibles directed outwards, the mandibles,when closed, not touching each other.Mr. Haliday, who has been so kind as to furnish me with the genericsynopsis of the Ichneumon Adsciti, added as a distinct sub-familythe Aphidii and allied genera, which have the articulation betweenthe second and third abdominal segments flexible. I, however, regardthem as a group equivalent with Wesmael's other sections, and whichit might perhaps be more natural to arrange either before or after thePolymorphi, with which they are united by Wesmael. This might bedone by inverting the arrangement of these sections, so that the Aphidii,which are the least perfectly organised of all the Ichneumonidse,might be retained at the end of the family.The habits of the Ichn. Adsciti or Braconides," as well observed byHaliday {Ent. Mag.\o\. i. p. 482.), ''so far as ascertained, pre{Enting nobroad distinction from the rest of the family," I have thought it mostadvisable to treat of the economy of the entire family at once, withoutintroducing that of each under the descriptions of the two sub-familieswhich would have required much repetition. Many of the generaexhibit various interesting peculiarities of structure, as, for instance, thepartial or complete coalition of the dorsal segments of the abdomen inChelonus ( ^^. 75. 18.), Sigalphus, Rhitigaster, &c. (fig. 15. 17.); thegaping mandibles of Alysia fig. 75. 15.) ; the rostrated front ofAgathis (fig. 75. ig.) ; the anomalous antennae of Streblocera JVestw.(fig. 75. 19., 75. 20. wing of ditto) ; the paucity of joints of theantennae in some of the Aphidii and other aberrant genera ; the veryelongated ovipositor and variegated wings of many Bracones ; and theexistence of a stigma on the front margin of the posterior wings of themales in Heterospilus and Hecabolus.The family Chalcidid^* West. (Cynipsera Latr. Genera, Ptero-malini Dalm., Diplolepariae Spindle), is composed of a very greatBiBLioGR. Refer, to the Chalcidid^.Sivederua, Beshrifning, §-c., in Vetensk Acad, nya Handll. 1785. (Pteromalus. )Kirhy (n. sp. Eulophus), in Linn. Trans, vol. 14. — Ditto, in ditto, vols. iii. iv. v.(Various species.)HYMENOPTEUA. CHALCIDID^E.Fig, 77.number of parasitic species distinguished by their generally veryminute size fig. 77. i. Chalcis nigrifex Silver, C. shapes Fab. neeBoyer. Obs. sur un Ver, qui se trouve dans interior des Pepin de la Pomme, Bull.Soc. Philomat. t. iii.Spinola, in Annal. du Mus. d'Hist. Nat. torn. xvii. 1811. (Essai Nouv. Classificationdes Diplolepaires. ) — Ditto, in Insecta Liguriae. — Ditto, in Guerin, Mag.Zool. 1837. (Contra.)Dolman, Forsook till Appalling, &c. (Classif. of Pteromalini of Sweden, in Kongll.Vetensk. Acad, nya Handling. — 1820-1822, and separate, Stockholm, 1820.Ditto, in ditto, 1815. various detached species. — Ditto, in Analecta Entomological.( Again. )Bohemann, in Kongll. Vet. Acad. Handll. 1833. 1835.Boyer de Fonscohmhe. Monogr. Chalcis. Gallo Provincial, in Ann. des Sc. Nat. torn.xxvi. 1832.Nees ah Es€nbeck,'H.ym.eno]it. Ichneumon. Affinity Monogr. vol. ii, 1834.Walker. Monographiaia Calcium, in the Ent. Mag. vol. i. to v. — Ditto, in theAnnals of Nat. Hist. 1838. (Cirrospilus.) — Ditto, Monogr. Chalciditum,1839.Ljimgh, in Kongll. Vet. Acad. Handll. 1823. »Panzer, in Der Naturforseher, pt. 24. (4 sp. Chalcis. )Toilette, in Mem. Sav. Etrang. a I'Acad. des Sciences, t. ix. (Leucospis. )Bluff, in Der Gesellsch. Nature. fr. zu Berlin Mag. vol. vi. (Leucospis.) — Ditto,in Ehrenberg Symbols Physics, Decay 4. 1834. (Leucospis, Chalcis, andDirhinus).Schrank. Entomol. Beitrage, in Curios. Nature. Berlin, 1780. (Leucospis andCallimome. )Gravenhorst, in Beitrage zur Entomol. Schles. 1829. (Cynips Penes, andBlastophaga. )Treviranus, Sur I'lnsecte qui hablte les Figures, in Linnaean, torn. iii. 1828.Westwood on the Chalcididae in Zool. Journ. t. iv. 1828. No. 13. — Ditto, in Guerin,Mag. Zool. Ins. pi. 4. (G. Cerocephala.) — Ditto, on Leucospis in Entomol.Mag. No. 7, 1834. — Ditto, in Phil. Mag. August 1832, June 1833, Nov. 1833,June 1837. — Ditto, in Mag. Nat, Hist. March 1833, Sept. 1833, Nov. 1833,March 1835, May 1837, July 1838. — Ditto, in Proceed. Zool. Soc. April1835. — Ditto, May 1835. — Ditto, in Entomol. Mag. July 1837 Ditto,156 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS,Lmn., C. prioratus Curt), brilliant metallic or variegated colours,elbowed antennae, short palpi, nearly veinless wings, and naked pupae-thehead is transverse ; the face large, and often longitudinallynotched for the reception of the basal joint of the antennae ; the eyeslateral, and in a few species of a very large size (Macroglenes inherent(Jiff. 77. 2 — 7. under side of the head, and details of Leucospis gigas) :the antennae are short, often thickened towards the tips, and composedof a small number of joints, varying from six to thirteen ; thebasal joint is long and erect, the antennae being elbowed and deflexedat its extremity ; the three terminal joints in both sexes are oftencompactly soldered together : these organs often vary very considerablyin the sexes (^ff- 77- 8. ant. of Cheiropachus ? , 77. Q. antennaof Trichogramma evanescent, Westw.). The labrum is minute fig.77. 3.), and often concealed ; the mandibles are broad, horny, and generallyterminated by several teeth {Jiff. 77. 4.) ; the maxillae areelongated with a large suboval membranous terminal lobe {Jiff- 77. 5.and 77. lO.) ; the maxillary palpi are very short, and more or less filiform,never composed of more than 4 joints, of which the basal jointis often very minute, and the terminal joint the longest, thickest, andclothed with longer rigid setae. The mentum is long and narrow, thelabium terminated by a large rounded membranous lobe, and thelabial palpi short, and 2- or 3-jointed {Jiff. 11. G. labium of Leucospis,77. 10. maxillae and labium of Pachylarthrus $ ). The Thorax forms anoval or elongate-oval mass ; the collar is generally distinct, and eithertriangular or transverse-quadrate ; the mesothoracic scutum is large,often with a distinct oblique impression on each side separating theparapsides * ; the mesothoracic scutellum is generally very large androunded, the meta thoracic prsescutum and scutellum being also distinct{Jiff. 11' 17. thorax of Cleonymus depressus above). The anteriorwings are almost veinless, although in certain positions the situationin Griff. An. Kingd. Ins. pi. 77. — Ditto, in Boyle's Himalaya. (Dirhinusn. sp.)Holiday, in Entomological Magazine, vol. i.Bouche, Naturgesch. der Insecten.Christmas, Fabricius, Curtis, Panzer, Zetterstedt (Ins. Lapp), Said (Joiirn. Boston N.II. Soc. vol. i. ), Party.Mr. MacLeay alludes to this peculiarity in Chalcis, and considers that thescutum of the mesothorax is thus proved to be typically composed of three pieceswhen at its maximum of development. (zool. Journ. No. 18. p. 158. n.)HYMENOPTERA. — CHALCIDIDJE. 157of the obsolete veins is indicated by lines indistinctly marked ; ordinarilya strong subcostal vein running parallel with the anterior marginextends about half the length of the wing, where it unites with thecosta, along which it is continued for a short distance, and then sendsforth a short vein, generally thickened at the tip, and which descendsinto the disc of the wing in an oblique direction. In some speciesthis descending vein is very short and thick, as in Magastigmus ;in others it is emitted close to the union of the subcostal veinwith the costa ; and in the Aphelion, &c., it is wanting. Thelower wings have only a short subcostal vein. The abdomen isof varied shape both in the different species and in the sexes of thesame species : it is ordinarily 7-jointed in the males, and 6-jointed inthe females, the basal joints being the largest, sometimes attachedby means of along narrow peduncle (as mjig. 11. i.) ; whilst in otherspecies it appears quite sessile, although in reality connected with thethorax by a very short narrowed portion of its base. The ovipositoris generally concealed, and not longer than the abdomen. In others(especially in Callimome, <S:c.) it is very long and exserted. It isstraight, and originates at a considerable distance from the apex ofthe abdomen on the under side fig. 77. 15. abdomen of EulophusNemati J ) ; its composition is precisely similar to that of the Ich-pneumonia, consisting of two lateral valves {JiQ' 77. 15. b, and h bbeing the articulated extremity, which in Callimome J (fig 77. 20.)is greatly elongated, forming the sheathes of the ovipositor), inclosinga nearly cylindrical borer, channelled on the under side (fig. 77. 16. c),and furnished with two delicate spicula (fig. 77. 16. cc). Fig. 77. 14.represents the extremity of the abdomen of Cheiropachus quorumWest. $ . The fore-legs are generally simple, but the posteriorpair are sometimes varied in their form ; in many they are also simple;but in others (Chalcis, &:c. fig. "il. \.) the femora are incrassated,and toothed beneath, and the tibiae have a corresponding curve. Insome genera (Eupelmus, Encyrtus, <S:c.) the intermediate legs aresingularly formed, the tibiae being thickened and furnished with a broadand long spur internally serrated, the tarsi being broad {fig- 77. 12.Ectroroa W.), the mesosternum being also considerably developed.The tarsi are 5-jointed fig. 11. ii. fore-leg of Cheiropachus quad-rum? ), except in Eulophus and the allied genera, in which theyhave only 4 joints (fig. 11. 13. fore tarsus of Eulophus Nemati If),and are terminated by a large pulvillus. The incrassation of the hind158 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.legs does not (as in the Halticse, &c.) indicate saltatorial powers;Chalcis, &c., not being able to leap, whilst many of the small specieswith simple legs leap well ; but it is amongst those which have thelarge intermediate tibial spur that we meet with these powers best developed,the Encyrti, &c., being able to leap to an extraordinary distance.The sexes of many of these insects are distinguished by varioussingular modifications of structure, independent of the more slenderform of the body, and of the antennae of the males : thus in the malesof many Eurjtomse, &c., the joints of the antennae are nodose, andfurnished above with Long hairs : the females of Cratomus have theheads of a very large size, being much broader than the thorax ; Chei-ropachus Westiv. has the posterior femora of the males, and the anteriorof the females fig. 77. n.) thickened; Cerocephala Westiv.has the head of the male curiously tricornuted. In MesopolobusWestiv. the maxillary palpi of the males are furcate, the third jointbeing externally prolonged ; and the middle tibiae have a small triangularlobe on the outside ; in Platymesopus Westiv. the middle tibiaeof the males are dilated. The males of many Eulophi and other generahave beautifully branched antennae. In Dicladocerus Westiv. (Frontispiece,vol. i. Jiff. 4.) and Eulophus dicladus (Say, Journ. Boston N.H. Soc. vol. vi. p. 273.) the antennae of the males are 2-branched; inEulophus they are 3-branched ; in Tetracnemus Westiv. they are4-branched ; in Pentacladia Westiv. they are 5-branched ; in Rhinocerosthey are 7-branched ; and in some male Thoracanthae, 9-branched.The maxillary palpi of the males of Pachylarthrus Westiv. are terminatedby a very large globular joint fig. 77. lO.) ; and the Rev. A.Matthews has recently discovered several curious species in whichboth the maxillary and labial palpi are thus constructed. Some of thespecies of the Pteromalides and Encyrtides are apterous, which isalso the case with the females of my genus Theocolax„ A curiouspeculiarity exists in one at least of these apterous species, which hasbeen noticed by no previous author, and of which I am not aware ofany analogous case in the order, namely, Chorus intus M^e*^?^. (En-cyrusi. Dalm.), which, although ordinarily found in an apterous state,was discovered by me in considerable numbers, in the hot autumn of1835, with wings.These insects, which are generally of the most splendid metalliccolours, and of which the majority do not exceed a line or two inHYMENOPTERA. — CIIALCIDID^. 159length, are parasitic upon other insects in their early states* : some,from their minute size, are reared within the eggs of other insects(ex. gr. Pteromalus ovulorum, and bifasciatus, Chrysolampus tristesCjnips Bombycum FonscoL, &c.) ; but the majority infest other larvaeor pupas. They are especially destructive to Lepidoptera ; but theyequally attack the species of some of the other orders — Cleopatra,Hemiptera, Orthoptera, Hymenoptera, and Diptera. Perilousmicans was always observed upon posts perforated b}' Lyctus canal i-cultus and Hister picipes by Dalman ; and I have observed Peri-lampsaugustus on palings perforated by Anobia. Cheiropachusquorum feeds upon the larva of Hylesinus oleiperda according toFonscolombe, and upon Lycurgus ; and C. pulchelius upon Lycurguspiniperda. (Cooper, hi Ent. Mag. vol. ii. p. 116.) Eulophus chry-someone Es. (Pterom. gallarum Fonscolombe) was reared from the pupaof a Chrysomela by the latter, and Pteromalus galerucae from theeggs of Galeruca calmariensis. Mr. Curtis has reared a species fromEndomychus coccineus ; and M. V. Audouin has obtained Encyrtusflaminius Dalm. from Coccinella 7-punctata. Esenbeck also rearedtwo individuals of Eupelmus annulatus from the pupa of Hydrocephalus12-punctatus. (^^Hym. Mon. vol. ii. p. 76.) Pteromalus curculio-noisesBoucM feeds upon the larva of Gymnaetron villosulus.Many species of Encyrtus, and those of my genus Oesophagus,infest the species of Coccus. Pteromalus phidias Bouche attacksAphis grains ; M. Audouin has reared Mesosela elongata Wlk.from Aphides of the sweet pea ; and I have reared Agonioneurussubflavescens West. from those of the lime. Pteromalus apud isrparasitic gregariously in the nest of the mason bee. (Zee Geer, t. ii.tab. 30. f 29. 31.) A brood of Encyrtus varicornis was obtained byEsenbeck from a cell of Eumenes coarctata. (^^Hym. sion. vol. ii.p. 219.) Reaumur has described and figured {JSIem. tom. vi. pi. 20.fig. 2., and pi. 21. fig. 3.) a species of Chalcis, which is parasitic inthe nests of the American wasp (Epipone nidulans), and which heregarded as the female of the wasp. Latreille incorrectly gives it asC. annular, which is parasitic upon the pupae of American Phalaena.It is the C. pyramids Fab. ; and some specimens discovered by Mr.Sails have enabled me to communicate a figure and description of theEsenbeck .says of Pteromalus salicis, that it not only inhabits the galls of Salixaurita, but "quod sane miranda, etiam genere part suo videtur."■}■ Fonscolombe obtained five or six specimens of his Pteromalus ? atoms froma single egg of a Lepidopterous insect : and see Bonnet, Memoires, Obscrv. 36.160 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS,species to the Entomological Society. I have repeatedly capturedMonodontomerus obsolete flying about and entering the holes inwalls made by Osmiae for their nests, in which they were evidentlyabout to deposit their eggs ; and such is the account of their habitsgiven by Fonscolombe. (C.ce?iea.) An exceedingly interesting specieshas been communicated to me by M. Audouin, which he discoveredto be parasitic in the provisioned nests of Odynerus, Anthophora,and Osmia. The male has most singular antennae, and minute rudimentsof wings, so that it does not quit the cell ; but the female,having been there impregnated, is enabled, by means of her full-sizedwings, to seek other cells for her progeny. The species has not yetbeen described. Eurytoma plumage III. is parasitic upon the parasiticlarva of Microgaster liparidis Bouche (nature. Ins. vol. i. p. 166.) ;and Pteromalus Braconidis ^02<eAe infests the parasitic larvae of Rogaslinear.Eupelmus Syrphi Bouche (Ceraphron *S'.) infests the larvae ofSyrphus Ribesii and balteatus. {Nuturg. Ins. p. 175.) Pteromalusmicans Oliv. is parasitic upon Dipterous insects which attack thewheat. (Olivier, Premiere Mem. stir quelques Insectes qui attaq. lesBeguiles, 1813.) Many species infest the larvae of gall-formingCecidomyias, as the Eulophus cecidomyianus Bouche, and Eulophuserica L. Dufour. (Ann. Sac. Ent. de France, 1837, p. 91.) Thelarva of Spalangia nigra is parasitic upon the pupa of Musca domestica,devouring the intestines. The Ceraphron destructor of Say,which is parasitic upon the Hessian fly in America, is evidently oneof the Eulophides, from the structure of the antennae and wings, asrepresented in his figures. (Journ. Acad. N. H. Sac. Philadelphia,1817.) M. Audouin has communicated to me specimens of a curiousgenus, allied to Salmon, which he extracted from the egg-case of aspecies of Mantis, sent from the Isle of France by M. Julien discarding.I have also received from Dr. Klug another allied species,obtained from the egg-case of a Brazilian Mantis.The attacks of species of these insects upon the egg-case of Blattahave been alluded to in vol. i. p. 423.The species of the genus Chalcis vary very materially in the nature ofthe insects which they attack: thus, whilst C. xanthostigmaZ>«/««. wasreared fi-om the pupa of species of Hylotoma, C. flavipes was obtainedfrom the pupae of Lepidoptera by Fonscolombe, and C. annular fromthe pupae of American Phalaena by Dr. Plug. Dr. Klug describes aHYMENOPTERA. — CHALCIDID^. 161species, C. albinus, from the pupa of Euboea Chryslppus (Sym.Phys. Ins. pi. 37. f. 9.); and I have described another species, ofwhich twenty-one specimens were obtained from a pupa of an EastIndian Euboea. (sent. Trans, vol. ii. p. 5.) Say obtained Chalcisamoena from the pupa of a Thecla (sojourn. Boston Nat. Hist. Soc.vol. i. p. 271.); and Giorna, C. minute, from Zygtena filipendulae ;whilst C. pyramids infests the nests of Epipone nidulans.Some species, especially those having the ovipositor long and exserted(G. Callimome), deposit their eggs in various kinds of galls*,formed by Cynipidte, Cecidomyia, &c. ; their progeny attacking andsubsisting upon the larvae inclosed within. Thus, a beautiful speciesof Eulophus (E. Nemati Festive), although having a concealed ovipositor,deposits its eggs in the galls of Nematus gallicola ; the parasiticlarvae attaching themselves to the outer surface of the body of theirvictims. It is generally, however, tvit/im its body that they take uptheir abode : thus, Pteromalus puparum undergoes all its transformationswithin the bodies of the caterpillars and chrysalides of somespecies of butterflies, bursting forth out of the body of the latter fin vast numbers in the winged state. De Geer records the curiouscircumstance, that male parasites alone were produced, in considerablenumbers, from one leaf-rolling caterpillar, and only femalesfrom another (Mem. i. 583.) ; and Kirby and Spence (who erroneouslyregard this species as identical with Pteromalus puparum, inwhich they have been followed by Mr. Walker, JEnt. Mag. iii. 204.)hence conjecture, that, as in the Queen Bee, the eggs producing thetwo sexes were arranged separately in the ovaries. De Geer, however,regarded it as accidental ; and such must evidently have beenthe case; for out of one chrysalis of Vanessa article I have obtainedat least 20 males and 36 females of Pteromalus puparum ; and Mr.Several species of Eurytoma having been observed to be attached to differentkinds of galls (but evidently for the purpose of feeding upon the real inhabitantthereof), Esenbeck considered that genus as more properly belonging to the familyCynipidffi hym. Monogr. vol. ii. p. 39.).t Kirby and Spence (ramrod. vol. iv. p. 223. ) state, that Callimome Parum commitsits eggs to the chrysalis of the butterfly (Vanessa utica) ; the moment thiscaterpillar quits its skin to assume that state, while it is yet soft, they pierce it, andconfide to it their eggs. Referring to De Geer, "vide supra" [or vol. i. p. 583.];adding, " De Geer and others have supposed that this sane species attacks theCocci and CoccinelLi? ( Ibid. p. 883. ) ; but this probably is an erroneous supposition."There is apparently some error in these references, as I can find no such passages inDe Geer.VOL. II. M162 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Walker obtained 82 males and 26 females from one chrysalis. I havealso reared both sexes of Eulophus Nemati from larvae infesting thesame individual ; and Dalman mentions an instance in which morethan a hundred individuals were produced from a single Lepidopteralarva, of moderate size. These parasitic larvae have, of course,the same instinct as those of the Ichneumonidae, not to touch the vitalparts of their victim until the last.Other species, whilst still larvae, burst out of the body of the caterpillarbefore it has assumed the pupa state, and attach themselveseither to the exuviae of their victim, or to the adjacent foliage, bymeans of a glutinous secretion, as in the species of Eulophus observedby Geoffroy (Hist. Ins. vol. ii. ; Reaumur, 3fem. tom. ii. pi. 36.f. 9, 10. ; De Geer, Mem. tom. ii. tab. 31.; Kirby, in Trans. Lin. Soc.vol. xiv. Euloph. damicornis; Say, Journ. Boston N. H. Soc. vol. i.Eul. basaltes ; Vallot, in Ani. Soc. Ent. de France, ISS'i, p. 64. Append.Eulophus).Some species are recorded to be parasitic upon other parasiticinsects: thus, Chrysolampus suspense Es. perforates, first, the bodyof Aphis rostrum, and secondly, the body of the enclosed parasite,Aphidius varius, destroying the latter ; and Mr. Nevvman has describedthe economy of a species of Pteromalus (P. omnivorus Wlk.),which, in like manner, attacks the internal parasitic larva of Exoristalarvarum. mag. Nat. Hist. No. 25. vol. v. p. 252.)The larvae are minute ajiodal grubs, generally of a whitish colour,and fleshy consistence ; of an elongate-oval form, attenuated at theposterior extremity, and with slight indications of articulation. Fig.77. 18. represents the larva of a Callimome, after Rose, ands. 77- 21.that of Eulophus Nemati fVestw.The larva of Spalangia nigra is described by Bouche as being of anovate form, but fusiform when extended ; white, soft, with a verytransparent skin, showing the intestines. The head is small, ratherrounded, situated at the obtuse end of the body, and retractile withinthe thoracic segment, which is very irregular and variable in its form.On the under side of the body each segment has two pellucidtubercles, forming the substitutes of a double row of legs. (Nature.Ins. p. 173.)The pupee of this family are especially interesting, from exhibiting amuch nearer approach to the obtected pupae of the Lepidoptera thanis made by any other Hymenoptera. The general form of the bodyHYMENOPTERA. CHALCIDID.E. 163is that of the imago ; but the Urbs are closely laid upon the sides andbreast, to which they appear to be firmly soldered (fig. 77. 22. pupaof Eulophus Nemati, fig. 77. 23.). The pupa of those species whichhave the ovipositor long and exserted, have this instrument bent overthe back (fig. 77. 19. pupa of Callimome, fig. 77. 20.). The pupa isordinarily black or brown, although at first of a pale fleshy white.Mr. Haliday {Ent. Mag. No. 8. p. 225.) states that some of the violatedPteromali (Microgasteridse Wlk.) have the pupa bent double;but these do not inflict the abdomen in oviposition.The majority of these insects pass the inactive period of their existencenaked, and not enclosed in a cocoon. Esenbeck, however,states, in the general characters of the family, '■^ Pupa vel nuda, veltela laxiori involuta, chartacea" (hymen. Ichn. Aff. Monogr. vol. ii.p. 6.) ; and in a subsequent page he describes the proceedings ofEuplectrus albiventris W. (Microterus albiventris Spin. ; Elachertusa. JEsenb. ; Euplectrus maculiventris West. olim ; Spalangia flavipesFoHscol. ; Pteromalus bicolor Saved. (?) ; Eulophus b. Walker), whichspecies infests the caterpillar of Noctua trapezina, out of which thelarvae burst forth and spun a white thread, in which they inclosed theexuviae of their victims, and beneath which they then underwent theirown transformations. (^^Hym. Mon. vol. ii. p. 136.)M. Boyer de Fonscolombe (to whom I am indebted for specimensof the majority of the species described by him) has also forwardedto me drawings of this insect (under the name of Spalangia flavipes)in the larva and imago state; the former being represented as externallyfeeding upon a large Lepidopterous larva. His description ofthis larva differs somewhat, in regard to its habits, from that given byEsenbeck. It is as follows : — " Larva erucarum corpore extentfirmiter extrema sua parte affix, apoda (ut mihi visum) ovato-sub-gibbon, transverse plata, ore non distinct, griseo-virescens, sic cumerica credit, cam palatin consumers ; ad metamorphosis fills aliquotseries longiusculis crisis inordinate involving."Mr. Haliday also describes the economy of Corunna cravat, whichis parasitic upon one of the Aphidii, which is parasitic upon an Aphis.The larvae of the first-named parasite, not content with the coveringwhich protects the Aphidius to its final change [namely, the driedexuviae of the Aphis], when they are full fed, leave the cavity, andspin a white silken web between the belly of the Aphis and the leaf,and in this they undergo their transformation. {Ent. Mag. vol. ii. p. 99,)M 2164! MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.In the perfect state, they are abundantly met with amongst theforage and herbage of various kinds. They are easily taken with asweeping-net, and should be captured in quills or pill-boxes, killed inboiling water, and arranged, with the limbs extended, on gummedcard-paper.Amongst the exotic species are especially to be noticed thosecomposing the genus Leucospis Fab., which are the giants of thefamily, having the anterior wings longitudinally folded when at rest ;the abdomen of the females (sig. 77. 7.) compressed, with the ovipositorrecurved over the back when at rest, with a spiracle at each sideof the fifth joint; the hind femora incrassated and dentated beneath.The species, of which several are natives of Southern Europe, arevaried with black and yellow, somewhat resembling small wasps : theabdomen of the males is 3-jointed, and of the females 5-jointed.The female of L. dorsigera Fab. is stated by Latreille to deposit itseggs in the nests of some species of Mason Bees ; whilst that of L.gigas is stated to oviposit in the nests of Wasps : but the curious observationsstated by Latreille (N. Diet. Hist. Nat. xvii. 513.) to havebeen made upon its history by the Comte de Saint Fargeau have notyet been published. This gentleman has, however, communicated tomean account of the mode of its oviposition : the female elevatesitself on the tips of its tarsi upon walls close to the nests of theMason Bees ; and by degrees, it depresses the ovipositor, andbends it forwards beneath the body and between the legs, protrudingit beyond the head, and inserting it into the nest. This account,therefore, proves the incorrectness of the suggestion of M. Biguet,conveyed in a letter to M. Giorna (calendars Entomologist, p. 118.),that, from the dorsal position of the ovipositor, it is most probably inthe nests of the common Earth Wasp (the cells of which are open on theunder side) that it oviposits. (For descriptions of the species of thisgenus, consult King's Monogr. above referred to ; Walker, in Ent.Mag. vol. ii. p. 20. ; Fonscolombe, Spinola, Fabricius, Jurine ; myMemoir in Exit. Mag. vol. ii. p. 213., and a monograph forwarded byme to Dr. Klug for the 2d part of his Jahrbucher, containing descriptionsof thirty six species ; Ahren's Fauna, fasc. 2. ; and Say, inBoston Journ. of Nat. Hist.)The genus Thoracantha Latr. consists of various exotic species havingthe mesothoracic scutellum very greatly developed, and extendedover the abdomen, concealing the wings when at rest, as in theHYMENOPTERA. — CHALCIDIDiE. 165Scutelleridae. I am acquainted with upwards of twenty species ofthis genus, some of which are the most remarkable insects of theorder, and of which I am preparing a monograph.The genus Again Dalm. is remarkable for the large size of theflattened head, and the triangularly dilated basal joint of the antennae,which are terminated by three thickened joints, forming an elongatedmass. The collar is greatly elongated and depressed, thus nearlyapproaching the Cleopatra, and rendering the type of this genus (A.paradoxes Dalm.^ one of the most singular of Hymenopterousinsects. (MacLeay, in Zool. Journ. No. 18, p. 166.) It inhabitsSierra Leone ; and a specimen of it has been recently presented tothe British Museum. This genus is closely allied to some singularinsects which are employed in the Levant in the process of caprification; the insects being induced to deposit their eggs in the seed-vesselsof the wild figs, which, being the earliest, are subsequentlyplucked, and placed in the neighbourhood of those of a later growth 5when the flies, escaping from the former, immediately introducethemselves, covered as they are with the fecundating powder, intothe eyes of the latter ; thus impregnating them, and causing them tocome to perfection earlier than they otherwise would do. Such is theaccount of the process given by some authors ; but Lindsey (PennyCyclop, vi. 273.), Decandolle (Physiol. Beget. p. 580.), Treviranus (inLinnaean, 1828^ with figure of the insect), and other vegetable physiologists,attribute the earlier ripening of the otherwise later crop, andthe opportunity thus afforded to the fig-growers in the Levant toobtain a double crop in a season, to the well-known fact, that fruitbitten by insects ripens sooner than others, the wound (and not an actof impregnation) appearing to act as a stimulant to the local action ofthe parenchyma. (See also Linn. Amen. Acad., and Hasselquist,Iter in Palestinam.^ The species of insect employed for this purpose isthe Cynips penes Linn. (G. Blastopliaga Gravenhorst)^ and Sycamore.I have also received from Dr. Klug another species " ex incubusegypt," which I have described in a memoir upon these insects,under the name of Sycophant crassipes. I am also indebted to Dr.Klug for a species of larger size, allied to Chalcis, and especially toSalmon Dalm,., also obtained from Egyptian figs.In the works of Reaumur {JSIimoires, torn. ii. mem. 11., and tom. iii.mem. 12.), De Geer memoires, tom. i. and ii), Rose {Abhandl. Ins.vol. ii. tab. 3., and vol. iii. tab. 53. and 69.), Frisch, Godart, Christius,M 3166 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.and other early authors, we find various species of this family described,and their economy detailed ; but, generally, the species are so vaguelydescribed, that it is impossible to determine them with precision.Geoffroy first proposed the genus Cynips (distinguished from theGall Flies, or Diplolepis) for the reception of the smaller species withsimple legs ; and Swederus subsequently, in the Swedish Transactions1 784', established another genus under the name of Pteromalus.Latreille and Illiger added to these genera; but it is to Spinola thatwe are indebted for the first attempts at a more perfect arrangement.More recently, Dalman and Bohemian in Sweden, Fonscolombe inFrance, Nees Von Esenbeck and Bouche in Germany, and Walker,Curtis, Haliday, and myself in England, have devoted much attentionto these minute tribes ; Mr. Walker having described nearly 1200British species.Spinola employed as his chief characters for the distribution of thisfamily into sections, first, the number of joints of the antennae, andsecondly, the form and mode of attachment of the abdomen ; both ofwhich, it must be admitted, are characters of too slight value. Dalmanadopted the form of the antenna;, legs, and veining of the wings ;whilst Latreille employed those of the form of the hind legs, collar, andmandibles. Mr. Walker, on the other hand, by attaching too great importanceto the form of the stigma and its branch, and the form of theabdomen and its attachment to the thorax, has formed a number offamilies, such as the TorymidEc, Miscogasterida?, Ormoceridae, Cleon<Src., which I have not thought it necessary to retain. Withthe exception of a few genera, osculant and anomalous, the family',after the removal of Scelio, Teleas, &c., which evidently belong to theProctotrupidae, is naturally divisible in the following manner: —1 . Collar transverse quadrate.A. Hind femora incrassated. (Subfam. i. Chalices. )B. Hind femora simple. (2. Eurytomides.)2. Collar less evident, more or lees narrowed in front.A. Antennae with more than eight joints.a. Middle legs simple. (3. Pteromalides. )b. Middle legs strongly spurred. (4. Encyrtides. )15. Antennas with not more than eight joints ; tarsi with less than five joints.(5. Eulophides. )These subfamilies are connected together by many very interestinglinks; as, for instance, Pleuropaehus costal, Tetracnemus diversand several other genera which I have described, form variousHymenoptera. PROCTOTRUPID^.points of connection between the Encyrtides and Eulophides ; whilstEupelmus and some allied genera, in like manner, connect the Ptero-malice and Encyrtides.The family Proctotrupid^* Stephens (Codrlni Dalman; PilotsFallen ; Oxyuri Latreille) consists of an extensive assemblage ofminute species, scarcely any of which exceed a quarter of an inch inFig. 78.length ; having the fore-wings either entirely destitute of fig. 78. lo.fore-wing of Diapria), or with but very few, veins, the posterior pairbeing also helpless. The body is generally longer and more slenderthan in the Chalcididae fig. 78. l — 7. Proctotrupes brevlpennis Latr.BiBLioGR, Refer, to the Proctotrupid^.Shaw, in Trans. Linn. Soc. vol. iv. (Ichneumon punctum. Mymar.')Kirbj/,m Trans. Linn. Soc. vol. iv. (Ichneumon Tlpulaj. Plafijgaster.)Klug, in Weber's Beitrage zur Naturkunde, vol. ii. 1810. (Pristocera. )JDaZ?na?i, in Swed. Trans. 1818, and in Analecta Entomol. (Dryinus. )Ljungh, in Weber's Beitrage zur Naturkunde, vol. ii. 1810. — Ditto, in SwedishTrans, 1823.Haliday, in Entomol. Mag. No. 4,Walker, in Ent. Mag. No. IS. ( Paymaster. ) — Ditto, in ditto. No. 14. (Teleas, &c.)Ditto, in ditto, No. 20. (Gonatopides. Dryinus.)JEsenbeck. Hymenopt. Ichn. Affix. Monogr. vol. ii. 1834.Say, in Annals Lyceum Nat. Hist. New York, vol. i. — Ditto, in Journal of BostonNat. Hist. Soc. vol. i. p. 3. 1836.Westwood, in Taylor's Phil. Mag. August 1832, June 1833, November 1833. —Ditto, in Trans. Entomol. Soc. vol. ii. p. 56. (Calyoza and Caloteleia). —Ditto, in Mag. Nat. Hist. Sept. 1833. Nov. 1833. — Ditto, in Proceed. ZoolSoc. April 1835, and May 1835.Latreille, Curtis, Jurine, Panzer, Fahricius, Spinola. 'As the genus Proctotrupes was proposed in the Precis des Caract. Gen^r. in1796, it must have priority over Jurine's name Crus.M 4168 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.and details). The antennae are variable in length, being in the malesof some species nearly as long as the body (as fig. 78. 16. Mymarpulchellus (J ) : they consist of from 10 to 15 joints, the basal jointbeing the longest, and not carried upwards ; the antennae, althoughoccasionally elbowed at the extremity of this joint, never being somuch geniculated as in the Chalcididae: the three terminal joints are notcompactly soldered together, and the front of the head is not impressedfor the reception of the basal joint. The antennae of the females areordinarily shorter than those of the males, with the terminal jointsoften thickened fig. 78. ll. antenna $, 12. ditto $ Paymaster).The labrum is minute (fig 78. 2.) ; the mandibles are longer than inthe Chalcididae, variable in form, but in the majority they are somewhatsickle-shaped, and notched at the tip : in Proctotrupes they areentire and acute (fig. 78. 3.); the maxillae are terminated by a largethin membranous lobe (fig. 78. 4.) : the maxillary palpi are variablein the number of their joints from three to six ; they are often, however,long and pendulous, much longer than the labial palpi, and filiform orsetaceous ; the mentum is horny or leathery, and compressed ; the labiumis entire, and often retracted within the channelled inside of thementum in dried specimens ; the labial palpi are short, and generally3-jointed, the terminal joint being the largest fig. 78. 5.). The eyesare entire, the ocelli generally 3 in number. The thorax is of an oblongform, with the divisions ordinarily well defined, the regular in somespecies being very large : the wings are ordinarily ample ; but in somespecies they are wanting, or only rudimental*; the posterior in somespecies are furnished at the base with a small lobe. The legs are longthe femora often slightly clavate, the anterior bite furnished with aterminal curved spur, which is sometimes bifid, the basal joint of theanterior tarsi having a deejT incision at its base inside, which is serratedfig. 78. 8. from Cinetus). The tarsi are 5-jointed, except in thegenus Iphitrachelus Hal., in vehicle they are 4-jointed. The abdomenis generally of an ovate-conic form, with five, six, or seven distinctsegments ; this part of the body is terminated in some species by acurved, elongate, conic, and acute ovipositor (as \nfig. 78. l.) ; whilstin others the ovipositor is retractile within the extremity of the abdo-Jurine (^Nouv. Metfi. Class. Ili/menopt. p. 304.) has expressed the opinion thatthese individuals had pulled off their wings like ants after the period of swarming;having observed some specimens which had only " des restes de ces parties," and thatthe entirely wingless ones were neuters ; but these " restes " of wings never exhibitany signs of mutilations, and as the species are not social, they cannot be neuters.HYMENOPTERA. — rROCTOTRUPIDiE. 169men, and formed, according to Latreille, of two valves composing atube, and inclosing the true needle-like ovipositor : in the former theovipositor appears at first sight simple, but is most probably formed oftwo valves closely united together, two sutures being perceivable. Inthe Gonatopides, Bethyllus, &c., the ovipositor is affirmed by Esenbeckto be converted into a true sting. My figures 78. 6. and 7. representthe composition of the ovipositor in Proctotrupes brevipennis. In78. 6. the two demi-sheaths are partially extended, showing the ovipositor,which is defended by them when shut together. In 78. 7. thevarious parts are entirely separated, b and b representing thedemi-sheaths, c the ovipositor itself channelled on the under side, andc c the two spiculse playing in this channel, and which it will be seenare thus the representatives of the parts delineated with the sameletters in the figures illustrating the Uroceridae, Cynipidee, and Ich-pneumonia.Many of these insects are exceedingly active, running and flyingwith great agility ; but few are capable of leaping. They are of veryminute size, some being so minute as to be visible only to the nakedeye when creeping up the glass of windows opposed to the light(Ichneumon [Mymar] atoms Linn. ; Ichn. punctum Shaw, Trans.Linn. Soc. vol. iv. pi. 18. f. 1. Mjanar Monas, Terms, &c.). Theircolours are ordinarily black, varied with pitchy or brown. They maybetaken in great numbers upon grass and other vegetables in thesweeping-net. Some frequent hot sandy situations, as Gonatopus *,Epyris \, &c., whilst others are found upon aquatic plants (as Thornsolidus Es., metallicus Hal). I have observed that some specieshave a curious habit of alternately raising and depressing the abdomenwhen standing still upon hot sand-banks. They are parasites, butthe transformations of very few species have been observed. La-trifle,indeed, supposed that, as many of them are found on the groundand upon low herbs, their larvae reside in the earth. It is, however,more probable that they deposit their eggs in other insects residing insuch situations.I have occasionally taken Gonatopus in damp situations, but generally in exposedhot sandy localities. Mr. Haliday generally finds it on the sand hills of the coast,and Mr. Paget in similar situations near Yarmouth. (See his A'a^ Hist. Yarmouth,Appendix.) •f I have repeatedly taken Epyris niger flying over hot sand-banks, both atCoombe Wood and near Bingen on the Rhine, just in the same manner as fossorialHymenoptera.170 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.In a few instances which have fallen under my observation, thepupa are inclosed in a cocoon.*I have reared one of the small species of Megaspilus Westtv. (Ce-apronCarpenter Curt.) from Aphides from the bean. AndBouche has described another species of Ceraphron (C. Syrphi*i), thelarva of which is long and white, with the parts of the mouth brown,and which infests the pupa of Syrphus Ribesii and balteatus.nature. d. Lis. p. 175.)The species of Paymaster are serviceable in checking the overproductionof some of the minute Tipulideous insects which infest thecetaceous plants, such as Cecidomyia. Mr. Kirby (linn. Trans.vol. iv. and v.), has detailed the habits of two species of this genus,PI. Tipulae, which is found on the glumes of the wheat in July, whereit deposits its eggs in the larvae of the Cecidomyia Tritici ; and PLinherent, which is found in June depositing its eggs in the values ofthe corolla of the wheat, the larvae, when hatched, probably attachingthemselves to the larvae of the same insect. PI. pragmatic SchranJiinhabits the panicles of Arundo pragmatic, evidently with a similarobject. I have reared two species of Paymaster, which are parasiticripon the gall-making Cecidomyia^ of willows, and observed that theircocoons, which are very thin and membranous, are attached togetherin a mass, and covered by the thin skin of their victim, the segmentsof which are slightly visible across the surface fig. 78. 14.) ; andBouche has described a Diapria, which is parasitic on the larvae ofCec. Artemisia (D. Cecidomyiarum).The Canon Schmidberger has published a very detailed account ofthe habits of Inostemma Boscii, under the name of Die paradoxeBirn-Wespe, in Kollar's work upon obnoxious insects ( Veranda. .in JVien, vol. v. 1837), asserting that it feeds uponthe young fruit of the pear, and is certainly not parasitical, althoughhe had observed the transformations of one of these gall midges inDe Gee' has figured a minute black species with dirty white legs, which hereared from minute cocoons attached together side by side, found in the burrow of thelarva of one of the pear-leaf miners. The figure has somewhat the air of anEncyrtus ; but the purse are naked in that genus. Can it be a Paymaster ? or isit one of the Eulophides, as the antennae seem to imply? {{Mem. tom. i. pi. 30.fig. 14 — 17.) He has also figured on the same plate another minute black specieswith a large black stigma, which infests the larvae of rose-leaf miners. The antennaare described as very long and multi articulate, which would prevent this frombeing a Megaspilus, although the size of the abdomen is too large for a Microgaster(pi. 30. fig. 21.).Hymenoptera. — PROCTOTRUPIDJE. 171the same fruit. I am enabled to give the systematic name of this curiousinsect described by Schmidberger, having received specimens ofboth sexes from him through Messrs. Kollar and Loudon.The species of Teleas and its subgenera are parasitic on the eggsof other insects, especially in those of Lepidoptera. Zinannius alsoobserved one of the species depositing its eggs in the eggs of oneof the Cimicidse (Schrank, No. 761.). M. V. Audouin has alsoreared several minute species of Teleas from the eggs of Pentagonornate, as well as from the eggs of Lepidopterous insects.The type of this genus is the Ichneumon ovulorum Linn. (LeasLinnaeus Esenb.^, which Linnaeus and De Geer obtained from theeggs of moths. Another species, confounded with the preceding (T.ovulorum Esenbeck), was also reared by Goethe and Esenbeck fromthe eggs of moths (Gastropacha castrensis). Bouche observed thefemale deposit an egg in each of the eggs of a brood of Bombyxneustria. He describes the larva as elliptical, white, shining, rugose,subincurved, and one-third of an inch long (nature. Ins. p. 177.).Mr. Haliday, regarding the Ichneumon ovulorum Linn, as a My-mar,observes upon that group, " The females oviposit in the eggs ofother insects, from which the tiny parasite emerges only in the perfectstate, a single butterfly's egg often nourishing the transformation ofman' individuals." {Ent, Mag. vol. i. p. 342.)A species of the same genus (Teleas truncated Es. ii. 288.) wasreared by Esenbeck from a gall of Cynips Quercus Gemmae. Thesame author considers that the Diaprige are parasitic upon the larvaeof the Tipulida; terrible, whilst those of Belyta, Crus, Cinetus, &c.,which are often found in fungi in the autumn, are parasitic upon thelarvae of the Tipulidae fungicolse ; indeed he reared Proctotrupes paulusfrom Boletus circinans, which was much infested by the larvaeof a Mycetophila. hym. Mon. vol. ii. p. 316. 3.53.)Mr. Haliday has given a very interesting account of the habits ofthe genus Bethylus, which buries the larvae of some species of Tinea,which feed upon the low tufts of Rosa spinosissiraa, dragging themto a considerable distance with great labour and solicitude, and employing,in the instance recorded by Mr. Haliday, the bore of a reedstuck in the ground instead of an artificial funnel, for the cells whichshould contain the progeny of the Bethylus, with its store of provision.{Ent. Mag. No. 7- p 219.) Fig. 73. 17. B. fuscicornis, 18. mandible,19. antenna of ditto.172 Woden CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.This family exhibits a singular diversity of structure in many ofthe species, and of which we meet with nothing analogous throughoutthe order. Thus, in the subfamily Mymarides, the wings are ornamentedwith very long marginal bristles ; and in two of the species(Mymar pulchelluSj^?^. 78. 16., and a species discovered by the Rev.A. Matthews), the fore-wings are very long, consisting only of a longlinear branch, dilated and spatulate at the tip. In some species of thePlatygasterides, Plat. (Inostemma Hal?) Boscii Jurine, &c. {fig-78. 13.), the basal segment of the abdomen of the females is furnishedwith a thick curved horn, which extends over the back of the thoraxand head (and which Le Clerc de Laval thought was the sheath ofthe ovipositor, but evidently incorrectly). Some of the species haveone or more of the basal joints of the antennae singularly nodose o*"dilated, and in the genus Diapria the males have all the joints nodoseand beautifully verticillated (fig. 78. 9.). In the genus Gales Curtis(Psilus cornutus Panzer) the head is produced beneath into a longrostrum, formed by the elongated mandibles ; and in some specimensof this genus the anterior wings have a notch at the extremity. Suchis the case in one given to me by Latreille under the name of Psiluscornutus ; and Say has described a genus with similar wings under thename of Copper. (boston Joiirn. Nat. Hist vol. i.). In Gonatopus *the females fig' 78. 15. G. pedestris) are apterous, with the thoraxsingularly constricted, and the anterior tarsi (as well as in the femalesof Anteon) are terminated by curious large reflexed claws, whichopen and shut like those of a lobster, which Esenbeck (who formsthese insects into a distinct family, Drained, on account of the structureof the sting-like ovipositor) thinks may be used to enable them to seizeand retain hold of insects to be by them carried into their alreadyprovisioned nests.From this great diversity of structure, the present family necessarilypresents many points of relationship with other groups. ThusLatreille, in his earlier works, followed more recently by Esenbeckand Boyer de Fonscolombe, introduced the genera Paymaster, Scelio,and Teleas into the family of Chalcididaef , chiefly on account of thepaucity of joints in the palpi. Mr. Haliday, in like manner, regardsMr. Haliday has published an account of a curious encounter which he witnessedbetween Gonatopus pedestris and some ants. {Ent. Mag. No. 7.)-f- Latreille evidently considered that these genera ought naturally to belong to theProctotrupida?, as we see by his observation, Gen. Cr, §-c. vol. iv. p. 30.HYMENOPTERA. PROCTOTRUPIDiE. 173the Mymarides as more nearly allied to the last-named family than tothe present, relying on the structure of the thorax, and the positionof the petiole ; which, however, pre{Ents a marked peculiarity. {Ent.Mag. No. 4. p. 343.)Proctotrupes, in the tubular form of the terminal joints of theabdomen, approaches the Chrysididas ; whilst Bethylus (MalusJur.^ has the veins of its wings similar to those of Hedychrum, butinits habits it is more analogous to Stigmus amongst the FossorialAculeata, to which it is asserted to belong by Haliday {Ent. Mag.No. 3. p. 276.) and Walker (Ditto, No. 20. p. 411.). Some species,in the apterous condition of the females (Gonatopus, Scleroderma),resemble some of the Mutillidce, as Methoca and Hermosa ; whilstPristocera, Epyris, and some undescribed genera, make a very closeapproach to Meria and Tiphia amongst the Fossores.Regarding the Mymarides as belonging to the Proctotrupidse, onaccount of the diversity of the antennae in the opposite sexes, and ofthe absence of veins of the wings (thus resembling Diapria, the familywill comprise the six following subfamilies, corresponding with thedivisions proposed by Mr. Haliday in the Entomological Magazine,vol. i. p. 269. : —1. Mymarides. Head transverse areolate ; antennae inserted above themiddle of the face, ^ long, slender, and elbowed, ? clavate ;mouth destitute of palpi ; wings narrowed, densely ciliated, witha very short subcostal nerve.2. Platygasterides. Abdomen sessile, depressed, first segment notcampanulate; antennae elbowed, toto 12-jointed, inserted nearthe mouth.3. Ceraphrontides. Abdomen subsessile, campanulate, terminal andventral segment carinated ; antenna; elbowed, inserted near themouth ; wings nearly exareolate.4. Gonatopides. Abdomen convex, not campanulate, last ventralsegment carinated; antennae porrected, 10-jointed; hind wingslobed ; mandibles toothed.5. Proctotrupides. Abdomen subsessile, campanulate ; antenna; corrected,12-jointed, inserted beneath the front; maxillary lobebipartite.6. Diapriides. Abdomen petiolated, capitulated ; antennae insertedin the front, tito 15-jointed ; maxillary palpi long, 5-jointed.174-MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.The family Chrysiuid^ *, or ruby-tailed flies (corresponding withthe Linnaean genus Chrysis), is distinguished by having the abdomenattached to the thorax by a very short peduncle, and composed ofonly three, four, or five segments ; the remainder being transformedinto a tubular, retractile, telescopic-formed apparatus, the extremityof which is furnished with a minute sting, or ovipositor ; the anteriorwings have but few veins, and the posterior are nearly veinless. Theunder side of the abdomen is concave, and capable of being applied tothe breast ; so that, when alarmed, the insect rolls itself up into a ball.Fig. 79./UThe body is more or less oblong, shining, and punctured fig. 79.1 — 9. Chrysis ignita, and details) ; the head is transverse above (fig.79. 2. face) ; the upper lip is more or less distinct, and ciliated infront ; the mandibles are long, subtrigonate, simply incised in Chrysis,and varying in the number of teeth with which they are furnishedin other genera (fig. 79. lo. mandible of Cleptes) : the maxillse areBiBLioGR. Refer, to the Chrysidid^.Le Pelletier Comte de Saint Fargeau, in Ann. du Mus. d'Hist. Nat. torn. xi. 1806.(Monogr. ChrysididiE with figures.) — Ditto, in Encyclop. Method, torn. x.p. 8. 49,'?.Dahlbom. Monographiaia Chrysididum Special. Lond. 1829. — Ditto, in ExercitationesHymenopt. parts 2. and 3. 1831. (Monogr. Chrysididum Special.)Skuckard, in Entomol. Mag. No. 17. (Monogr. British Chrysididae. )Curtis. Brit. Entomology, 2d Edition of No. 1. (Chrysis.)Coquehert. Illust. Iconogr.Klurj, in Waltll. Reise nach Spanien. — (Ditto, in Ehrenb. Symbol. Phys. pi. 45.not yet published.)Spinola. Insecta Liguriae, vol. i. and ii.Fahricius, Panzer, Rossi, §'c".HYMENOPTERA CHRYSIDIDJE. 175terminated by a large pilose outer lobe, the inner lobe being smallerand slightly produced fig. 79. 3.). The maxillary palpi are 5-jointed;the mentum is somewhat goblet-shaped, the labium membranousand more or less exserted, with the sides turned up in dried specimensfig. 79. 4.) : the labial palpi are short, and 3-jointed. Theantennae are filiform fig. 79. 2.), elbowed at the extremity of thelong basal joint, and composed of 13 joints in both sexes fig. 79. li.antenna $ , 12. ditto ? of Cleptes). The thorax is oblong, and somewhatcylindric, the segments of which it is composed being stronglydetermined, the collar and mesothoracic scutellum being large andtransverse, the mesothoracic scutum with well-defined parapsides,and the metathorax being produced on each side at the extremityinto a spine. The upper wings are furnished with one marginal orcostal cell, which is often unclosed at the extremity, and the terminalveins are more or less indistinct ; thus closely resembling Bethylusand Anteon : the hind wings are almost veinless. The legs are weak,and of moderate length, the anterior pair in the females not beingciliated {fig.79.i3. fore-leg of Cleptes $ ). The abdomen is more or lessoblong-ovate, convex above, and concave beneath ; nearly rounded orsemicircular in Hedychrum, in which its extremity is entire ; whilstin Chrysis it is terminated by a series of denticulations, and the lastsegment is further distinguished by a transverse row of deep punctures.In Chrysis it appears to consist of only three segments ; but inParnopes the males have four, and the females three, abdominal segments; and in Cleptes the males have five, and the females four,joints. The other terminal retractile segments are capable of beingprotruded nearly to the entire length of the abdomen fig. 79. 5.),and are furnished at the extremity in the males with the organs ofgeneration, and in the females with a minute sting-like ovipositor*,defended by two compressed semi-cylindrical styles, of the same lengthas the ovipositor itself. My figure (79. 6.) represents the under sideof the extremity of the body, with the terminal segments exserted.In fig. 79. 7. the extremity of this apparatus is more highly magnified,and exhibits the basal portion {b) and the terminal portion {b b) ofthe two valves, and the ovipositor enclosed between them (c). Fig,Latreille and especially Dahlbom describe this instrument as a sting ; but it isunconnected with glands secreting a poisonous fluid, although the insect is able topuncture the flesh when handled.176 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.79. 8. represents, still more highly magnified, the appearance of thelast-mentioned organ, exhibiting, at c, the deflexed sides of the channelledovipositor, and at c c, the two spiculae enclosed in the canal onits under side ; whilst Jig. 79. 9. shows all these parts extended, anddistinguished by the same letters as have been employed in theexplanation of the construction of the ovipositor in the precedingfamilies. The composition of the ovipositor itself has not been attemptedby Latreille and Curtis ; and the account given of its constructionin Cleptes (namely, an aculeus, with one lanceolate valvebeneath), by the latter author, must be erroneous. De Geer moreminutely investigated its structure (3Iem. torn. ii. pi. 28. f. 19, 20, 21.,and pi. 29. f. 1, 2.), and proved its analogy with the true sting, whichhe figured, with its details, in the former of these plates.These insectSj'al though but of small or moderate size, are amongst themost splendid of our native species, being adorned with brilliant metallictints, blue and green being the usual colours of the head and thorax, andfier' copper-colour, or ruby, that of the abdomen*: hence they havebeen called the humming birds amongst insects. They may be observedduring the hottest sunshine flying and running M'ith great vivacityover walls, palings, sand-banks, and occasionally upon flowers, especiallyof the Umbelliferous (Kirby, Linn. Trans, vol. iv. p. 196. note), andupon the leaves of trees. They are constantly in motion, keeping theirantennae in perpetual vibration, varying from tapping the surface of theobject on which they are placed, to an almost imperceptible tremor.In their economy there is some reason to believe that these insectsdiffer from the preceding, and that they more especially deserve thename of cuckoo-flies; the females not depositing their eggs in the bodiesof other insects, but taking an opportunity to deposit them in the nestsof different bees, and other fossorial Hymenoptera, during the periodwhen the latter are provisioning their nests for the support of theirown progeny, which is thus starved by the intruder being first hatchedand devouring the supplies of food. Thus I have constantly found ourlargest British species in company with Odynerus antilope (see myarticle on the habits of this insect, in the Trans. Ent. Soc.\(A. i.)^ ofwhich it is doubtless the parasite, but which does not appear to offerthe slightest molestation, deterred, possibly, as Latreille suggests, byA piscatorial friend tells me that these insects are famous baits for fishing ; theircolours, perhaps, being attractive to the fish.Hymenoptera. — CHRYSIDIDjE. 177the splendour of its coat of mail*; whilst C.bidentata frequents theburrowing places of Epipone spinipes, in company with that insect,especially on Barnes Common ; whereas, were it the object of theChrysis to deposit its eggs in the larvae of those insects (which ofcourse would not be produced until some time afterwards), the appearanceof the two insects in the perfect state would not be simultaneous.Dahlbom describes the larvae of this family as somewhat resemblingworms, and destitute of feet {Exercit. Hymenopt. p. 21.). I am indebtedto Mr. E. Rudder for some particulars relative to the commonspecies of Chrysis, which that gentleman reared from larvae found incells filled with Aphides, formed in the pith of an elder twig stuck intothe ground. In this case, I apprehend, the nests were those of aspecies of Pemphredon, or some allied genus, and the Chrysis wasparasitical in the nest : the mode in which the larva fed upon theAphides (of which there were at least sixty in each cell) was observedby him ; but it might certainly have been the larva of themaker of the nest which was thus occupied.Mr. G. R. Waterhouse has also informed me that, in December,1827, he found, in digging into a rotten post which had holes in it, atCoombe, several specimens of Chrysis ignita in the burrows ; and ondigging further he discovered a continuance of the burrow, in whichwere several cells filled with the skins of Aphides, no larva or pupabeing present ; so that it is not improbable that the Chrysides had beenreared in these cells. De Geer discovered one of the species of thisgenus — his C. micans — in a resinous gall formed upon the pine ; whencehe was led to believe that its larvahad been parasitic upon the caterpillar,which had been inclosed within it, because he found at the bottom ofthe hollow interior of the gall an empty cocoon, formed of a loose webof silk (which the Chrj'sis had pierced in order to make its escape),and also the exuviae of the caterpillar which had disappeared. A correspondentof the Entomological Magazine (J. B. No. 25. p. 477.)reared specimens of C. bidentata and neglect, in company with solitarywasps, from cells found in the earth, attached to the stump of atree. Another correspondent of the same Magazine (Delta) assertsthat Chrysis cyanea deposits her eggs in the cells of ChelostomaLatreille informs us that he had observed Chrysis ignita lurking about the cellsof Philanthus apivorus, in order to deposit eggs in the nest of the latter, which, afterperceiving the design of the Chrysis, chased it away. mon. Fourmis, p. 320.)Walckenaer states that the same species enters the burrows of Cerceris ornata, whichare stored with a supply of a species of Halictus. {{Mem. Halictus, p. 42.)VOL. II. N178 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.florisomne (a solitary bee); and that the larvae produced from the eggsof the former feed on the larvae of the Chelostoma, and undergo theirmetamorphoses in the cells prepared for these last * (sent. Mag. vol. i.p. 387.) Saint Fargeau, however, who has more carefully examinedthe economy of these insects, states that the egg of the Chrysis doesnot hatch until the legitimate inhabitant has attained the greater partof its growth as a larva, when the larva of the Chrysis fastens on itsback, sucks it, and in a very short time attains its full size, destroyingits victim. It does not form a cocoon, but remains a longtimein the pupa state. [Enc. Methh. torn. x. p. 9.)In the 21st Number of the same Magazine (p. 77.) has been noticedthe discovery of Hedychrum bidentulum, which appears to be parasiticupon Psen caliginosus ; the latter insect had formed its cells in thestraws of a thatched arbour, as many as ten or twelve cells beingplaced in some of the straws. " Some of the straws, perhaps aboutone in ten, contained one, or rarely two, of the Hedychrum, placed indiscriminatelyamongst the others." Walckenaer, in his Memoirupon Halictus (p. 33.), informs us that Chrysis [Hedychrum] lucidulawaits at the mouth of the burrows of these bees, in order to depositits eggs therein ; and that when its design is perceived by the bees,they congregate together and drive it away.M. le Comte de Saint Fargeau states, that the females of Hedychrumsometimes deposit their eggs in galls, whilst H. regnum oviposits inthe nest of Megachile muraria ; and he mentions an instance in whichthe bee, returning to its nearly finished cell laden with pollen paste,found the Hedychrum in its nest, which it attacked with its jaws;the parasite immediately, however, rolled itself into a ball, so that theMegachile was unable to hurt it ; it, however, bit off its four wingswhich were exposed, rolled it to the ground, and then deposited itsload in the cell and flew away, whereupon the Hedychrum, now wingless,had the persevering instinct to crawl up the wall to the nest, andthere quietly deposit its egg, which it placed between the pollen pasteand the wall of the cell, which prevented the Megachile from seeingit. {Enc, Methh. tom. x. p. 8.)The passages connected with this history, published in 1833, in conjunction withothers which appeared in the same work, recall to mind the existence of feelingswhich I am happy to say have long ceased. The date of my memoir upon theChalcididse, published in the Zoological Journal, and the amount of materials knownto have been collected by me upon that family, and still intended for publication,are sufficient to show that they ought never to have been entertained.HYMENOPTERA. CHRYSIDIDtE. 179The species of the genus Cleptes vary considerably in the coloursof the opposite sexes, whence the males of the type have been namedsemiauratus, and the females aurata. I have found this insect veryabundantly in gardens at Chelsea, in July and August, flying over andcreeping upon the ground and low plants. Of the other Britishspecies, Saint Fargeau observes, " J'ai vu le Cleptes nitidule longerbeaucoup son tuyau autres d'une larve de Tenthrede, et le pousservivement centre elle. Quoique lui eut fallu pour cela recourse sonabdomen et dirge ce tuyau entre ses pattes en avant de la tete,Operation entire fut Affaire d'une seconde." And in the EncyclopediaMethodique (torn. x. p. 9.) he adds, <' J'ai vu une femelledu Clepte semidore entrer successivement a reckons dans les trousqu'avoient formes en s'enfon^ant en terre un grand nombre de larvesd'une Tenthredine qui avoient vecu sur unmeme propeller. Lannersuivante je jouis a cette meme place d'un spectacle fort brillant ; uncertaine de males et quelques females de cette espfece, couroient danstous les sens sur le petit espace de terrain ou les larves de Ten-threadingsentient coaches, et refletoient toutes les couleurs des pierresprecious. Ce spectacle se renouvela pour moi plusieurs jours desuite de dix a onze heures de matin ; ces individus dispersion aprfescette heure, et je pense que ceux que je voyois chaque jour soientnouvellement echos dans cet endroit."The exotic insects of this family are by no means of common occurrence; indeed, Mr. Swainsonon, who collected the insects of thisorder assiduously during his travels in Bi-anil during several years,informs me that he discovered only one species of the typical genusChrysis. Some Indian species are very brilliant (I)onov. Ins. Ind.)^as are also those of the genus Stilbum, which is widely dispersed,some species being found in Australasia, India, Africa, the South ofEurope, &c. The genus Parnopes Latr. is remarkable for havingthe maxillae and labium greatly elongated, forming a long and slendertongue fig' 79. 14.), applied beneath the breast ; and the maxillaryand labial palpi are nearly obsolete and 2-jointed. Latreille annalesdu Museum, tom. ■aXv^^.nd Bulletin Soc. Philomat. 1811.) and SaintFargeau {Encycl. Mtth. tom. x. p. 8. and 497.) have detailed theeconomy of this genus, the type of which is found in France, andwhich deposits its eggs in the nests of Bembex strata. Accordingto the more recent observations of the last named author, the femaleParnopes enters backwards into the nest of the Bembex (thus evil2180 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.gently showing its object to be to deposit its eggs therein). It isprobable that it only then deposits a single egg, as generally a singlelarva of the Parnopes is only found, and which is engaged at the beginningof the spring in sucking the larva of the Bembex, upon theback of which it has fastened itself.These insects are extremely interesting in regard to their relationswith the other tribes of Hymenopterous insects, being, as Latreilleobserves ( Consist. Genei\ p. 76.), " sur les confins des deux sections "[Terebrantia and Aculeata]. Mr. MacLeay considered them as alliedto some splendid parasitic and exotic bees (divorce Entomb part 2.p. 429.) ; and hence Mr. Stephens arranged them after the bees, succeededby the Chalcididae, &c. which are supposed to be most nearlyallied to the Strepsiptera ; and Mr. Curtis brit. Ent. fo. 724'. Jan.1839) considers that Cleptes, in the minute size of the labrum, formsthe link between this family and such species of Chalcididte [still misnamedCynipidae by Curtis] as have the labrum distinct, althoughsmall ; (Chalcis [Sisera] and Perilous) ; and he further states thathe has lately received a most remarkable metallic bee from America,which will prove, he expects, that there exists a strong affinity betweenthe Andrenida^ and Chrysididae.It is not indeed improbable that a close relation may exist betweenthese insects and some of the parasitic bees ; and indeed Parnopes, inthe structure of its maxillae and labium fig. 79. 14.), and almostobsolete palpi, seems to confirm this ; but I agree with Latreille inthinking Cleptes allied to Bethylus, and with Shuckard in consideringthem as related to Tiphia, Meria, &c. : indeed, the Epyris aurichalceaof King's MSS. from Cuba, and E. Carcelii West., a remarkableinsect in the collection of M. Serville, brought from Palestine by thelate M. Carcel, evidently confirm this relation.The second general section of the Hymenoptera, corresponding withthe ACULEATA of Latreille, the H. Ovitithers of St. Fargeau, andH, Monotrocha of Hartig, is distinguished by the females (and neuters* of such species as live in society) having the organ of oviposi-It is now generally admitted that these neuters (as they have been miscalled),both amongst the bees, wasps, and ants, are individuals of the female sex, which,from the peculiar manner in which they are nourished, become abortive, and acquirehabits totally dissimilar from those of the true females. This has long been knownto be the case with the bees ; the neuters possessing the power, when deprived oftheir female (or queen), of transforming a larva into a queen, which, under ordinarycircumstances, would have produced a neuter bee, or worker ; and Huber, theHYMENOPTERA. ACULEATA. 181tion converted into a sting, connected with poisonous glands ; composedof a slender horny acute dart, channelled beneath, and inclosingtwo spicula, which are retro-serrated at the tips, and connected at thebase with a poison bag* in both females and neuters, and also withthe ovaries in the females. This organ is defended, when at rest, bya pair of lateral plates, articulated in the centre, and forming togethera kind of scabbard, or sheath, as in the Terebrantia. My fig. 79.15 — 20. represent the details of the sting of the common wasp. ■Fig. 15. exhibits the terminal segments of the abdomen laid open, andexhibiting the sting in situ ; s p is the terminal spiracle of the abdomen;b, the basal, and b b, the terminal parts of the lateral sheathsof the sting ; c being the sting itself, and c the basal muscles of thespiculae ; the dotted part of this figure shows the action of the sting,admirable historian of the ants, has confirmed this, having observed an occasionalsexual intercourse between the males and workers, which was, however, followed by thedeath of the latter, their organisation not allowing them ordinarily to bring forth eggs:although in certain cases the workers have even been recorded to produce male eggs,the instinct of the males having thus proved them to be of the opposite sex. It is onlyamongst the social tribes that these imperfectly developed females are found ; andwhen we consider first, the necessity which exists for the performance of the multitudinouslabours of the community ; and second, the immense numerical excess ofthese neuters over the females (which latter it will be remembered are merely normallyperfect animals), we cannot but be struck with surprise at the remarkableinstinct evinced by these insects, which compels them by an artificial process torender the greatest part of the community abortive. It is true that the neuters, whichare for the most part the feeders of the society, are not the parents of the objects oftheir charge ; whence we might at first entertain the notion that they cannot possessthe sense of philoprogenitiveness in its full extent ; but their laborious assiduity insupport of the community, together with other circumstances, contradicts such asupposition.This poisonous secretion emitted by the sting is soluble in water, but not inalcohol, and separable from the former in the state of white powder ; and, whenthe latter is added, giving a slight red tinge to paper stained with vegetable blue(Kirby and Spence, vol. iv. p. 139.); and Dr. Bevan states, that, if a humble-bee bemade to sting litmus paper, the colour is changed to a bright red. Hence,Fontana ( On Poisons, vol. i. p. 265. ) considers that it is mixed in a very small degreewith an acid, and not with an alkali : so that spirit of hartshorn is one of the mosteffectual remedies against the stings of these insects. Its effects are produced whenintroduced into a wound made by a needle, thus proving that it is not the stingitself which causes the pain. If a bee be made to strike a piece of glass with itssting, and leave a drop of poison, the latter, under the microscope, gradually producesoblong pointed crystals. (Bevan, Honey Bee, 2d ed. p. 331. ; and see alsoBlot, in Mem. Soc. Linn, de Calvados, vol. i. in which, the nature of the poison andits effects in the different families is treated upon in detail. )N 3182 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.detached from its sheath. Fig. 16. represents the same parts, butseen from beneath. 7^?^. 17. exhibits the sting detached, includingthe two spiculae in situ. Fig. 18. is the sting, or rather the channelleddart, grooved beneath for the reception of ( figs. 19. and 20.) thetwo spiculae, separated from the dart, and retro-serrated at the tip.The lettering of these parts being the same throughout, and correspondingwith the letters explaining the figures of the same parts inthe preceding families, will clearly show the analogies between thesting and the ovipositor. Latreille (gen. Or. tom. iv. p. 51.) and St.Fargeau (Hist. Nat. Hym. p. 80.) expressly state that the eggs arenot excluded by the sting, and that this organ is only composed of twosetse, one being inclosed in the other ; had they, however, consultedSwammerdam's 18th and 19tli plates, they would have perceived that,in both these respects, they had fallen into error. Indeed, when it isremembered that the ovipositor or terebra is but the external outletof the ovaries and oviduct in the preceding tribes, and that the analogiesbetween it and the true sting are unquestionable, as now illustratedin my various figures, we are, as it seems to me, warranted inconsidering that the eggs do pass through the sting in the act of opposition; and this, indeed, is expressly asserted by Dr. Bevan (honeyBee, p. 319. 2d edit). Hence the account given of this operation bySt. Fargeau hist. Nat. p. 90.), and considered by him as the chiefground for the primary division of the Hymenoptera, cannot be correct." La ponte n'a point d'organe exterior et visible ; Uranus de lafemelle est susceptible de s'ouvrir argument; lors de cette ouverture,il laisse apercevoir un large cavite, au fond de laquelle est unorifice, qui est celui de I'oviducte. L'ceuf sorti de I'oviducte parcet orifice, tombe dans la cavite angle (figure par Reaumur, tom. v.pi. 29. f. ].) ; et celle-ci s'ouvrant, le laisse glisser le plus souvent ala place," &c. It appears to me that the whole account here given ofthis operation is gratuitous. The orifice at the bottom of the analcavity, considered as that of the oviduct, has, as far as I can ascertain,no existence but in the theory of St. Fargeau. I can find no noticetaken of it by Swammerdam and Reaumur ; indeed, the latter copiesthe figure given by the former of the internal organs of the female.The antennae are almost invariably simple, and, with very few exceptions,are formed of thirteen joints in the males fig. 81. 13, 14.),and twelve in the females {fig.Sl.Q.); the palpi are filiform, themaxillary having ordinarily six, and the labial four, joints ; but thesenumbers vary in the tribes of bees and ants. All the wings are veined,Hymenoptera ACULEATA. 183and exhibit several perfect cells. The abdomen, united to the thoraxby a longer or shorter peduncle, is composed of seven joints in themales (^^. 81. lo), and six in the females (fig. 81. i.).These insects are generally of a moderate or large size. The larvaehave no legs, and are subvermiform, or grub-like, in their form. Inthe fossorial families, and in some of the wasps, they are nourished incells prepared by the parents, in wood, sand, earth, &c. ; and feedupon larvae or perfect insects, stored up for their support by the females.In the ants, the larvae are kept in masses, not being inclosedin separate cells, but in a large and general nest, and fed by workerswith the juices of fruits, vegetables, animals, &c. In the typical wasps,they are arranged singly in cells, in beautifully constructed combs,being fed with animal or vegetable juices by the females or workersfrom time to time. In the solitary bees, the food consists of a supplyof pollen paste, laid up by the parent insect in the solitary cell inwhich the larva resides ; and in the social bees, the larvae are, as inthe wasps, inclosed in separate cells in regular combs, and are fedby the workers with honey.With respect to the general economy of the Aculeata, two groupsexist; namely, 1. those species which live in society, having individualsof the neuter sex ; and 2. those which are solitary in theirhabits, and consist only of males and females. This is surely a farmore natural distribution than that primarily employed by Saint Far-beau,from the nature of the food, namely Phytiphages and Zoo-pagesvide ante, p. 36.). When, however, we consider that manybees and wasps are solitary nest-makers, and many others parasites,and that all these are unprovided with neuters, there is reason todoubt the propriety of the adoption of such a principle of distribution,and to believe, on the other hand, that an arrangement founded uponthe general structure of the different groups is the most satisfactory :and Latreille, having proposed several modes of distribution of thissection, founded upon such structural considerations, I have not hesitatedto adopt this principle, and have accordingly employed the arrangementproposed in his most valuable work, the Genera Crustaceorum,sc. ; in which he divides it into two subjection : 1. the Prae-tones,or sand-wasps, ants and wasps, including the families Sphegimae,Maronites, Bembecides, Scoliette, Mutillariae, Fosmicariae, Vespareae,and Matrices ; and 2. the Anthophila, or bees, comprising the and Apiariae. In the Regni Animal, he has raised the For4184 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.micarife and MutillariEe into a third subsection, named Heterogyna(from the apterous condition of some of the individuals), placed atthe head of the section; and the Vespida) into a fourth, named Diplo-pera (from the folded fore wings), immediately preceding the bees.With Mr. MacLeay, I can, however, scarcely think the folding of thewings in the wasps to be a character of sufficient importance to warrantthe establishment of a distinct subsection equivalent with theothers.The subsection PRiEDONES has been divided by Latreiile into threegroups: namely, 1. the Fossores Z,«<r. ; 2. the Heterogyna (includingthe Mutillidaj and Homicide) ; and 3. the Diploptera, or wasps. Theterm Fossores, employed for the first group, is not, however, sufficientlyprecise, since many of the bees and wasps are equally fossorial. Iwould, therefore, propose in its stead that of Insectivora, as all thespecies feed in the larva state upon other insects. The Heterogynaought to be restricted to the ants ; the apterous condition of the femaleMutillidae, which are in all respects Fossores, not being sufficientto warrant their introduction in the same group as the ants ; forwhich, as the females are winged, it will be necessary to employanother name. I therefore divide the Pra^dones into the three followinggroups :1. Insectivora. Fore wings not folded. Larvae solitary, feeding onother insects. (Linn. gen. Sphex and Mutilla.)2. Scales. Fore wings not folded. Larvae social. (Linn. gen.Formica.)3. Diploptera. Fore wings folded. Larvae, in the social species,separately enclosed in cells. (Linn. gen. Vespa.)The natural arrangement of these groups is, however, very difficult.Latreiile, in his late works, has placed Formica at the head of theAculeata, with which is arranged Mutilla, followed by the Fossores;commencing the latter with the Scoliidae, and terminating with theCrabronidae, passing by some of the latter (as Cerceris) and the wasp-genus Ceramius KL, to the solitary wasps. Inhis Genera Crustaceorum, c^c, he, however, placed the ants, wasps,and bees in juxtaposition ; a step which appears to me to be so advantageousthat I have adopted it in the following pages.*The consideration that the Neuropterotis Termitida? agree in so many particularswith these Hymenopterous groups, is a strong argument against the adoption of theHYMENOPTERA. — Fissures. 185The first of these three groups, Insectivora*, or the FossoresLatr., comprises the different families of sand and wood wasps, andcorresponds for the most part with the Linnaean genera Sphex andMutilla, distinguished by having the wings generally developed inboth sexes (some of the Mutillidse excepted), without the existenceof individuals of the neuter sex, and which consequently are solitaryin their habits. The legs are formed for walking and burrowing only,and are not fitted for collecting pollen, the basal joint of the posteriortarsi not being enlarged; the wings are never folded, the tongue isnever thread-like nor lance-shaped, and the body is not clothed withhairs fitted for the transport of pollen.In general the females excavate cells in the ground, or in posts,&c., in which they deposit, together with their eggs, various larvae orperfect insects, and sometimes spiders (according to the species),which are destined for the support of their progeny when hatched.Occasionally the insects composing this store are first stung to death,and then buried : but sometimes they are only slightly stung, so thatthey continue half-alive, to be killed by the larvae when hatched.These larvae are white worm-like grubs, destitute of legs, which wouldbe an incumbrance to them in their narrow cells. When full grownBiBLioGR. Refer, to the Insectivora or Fossores.Van der Linden. Obser. sur les Hym. europe de la Fam. Fouisseurs, in Mem.Acad. Sc. et Belles Lettres, Bruxelles 1827, pt. ]., 1829, pt. 2.; and ditto,separately, 1829. 4to.Shuckard, in Trans. Ent. Soc. vol. i. A few Observ. on Habits of IndigenousAculeate Hymenoptera Ditto, vol. ii. p. 68. (Description of n. sp.) — Ditto,An Essay on the Indigenous Fossorial Hymenoptera, London, 1837. 8vo.Dahlbom. Exercitationes Hymenopterologic£e.Mossi, Christius, Jurine, Pcrtij, Spinola, Panzer, Savigriy (Egypt), Saint Fargeaii(Enc. Meth.).habitudes morales" of these tribes, as of primary importance in effecting their distribution(proved by the identical method of forming their cells). Some of thelatter (Odyneri) are so closely allied to the sand wasps, that they might with evengi-eater propriety be termed folded-winged Insectivorous Pra3dones than solitary Di-plotters.The economy of the social ants, on the other hand, notwithstanding theirsociality, is so different from that of the social wasps, that it may, perhaps, be ultimatelyquestioned, whether it would not be more naturally adopt a classification,founded upon the affinity of the sand wasps and solitary wasps; placing the Scoliidseand Mutillida? at the head of the former, rather than break this affinity by placing theants between them.186 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.they spin a cocoon, in which they pass the pupa state. The perfectinsects are generally very active, and fond of the nectar of flowers,especially those of the Umbelliferous. They delight in the hottest sunshine,flying and running over sand banks exposed to the raid-daysun, and keeping their wings in continual agitation ; their sting isexceedingly powerful, and in the large exotic species a wound from itmust be attended with dangerous results.We are indebted to Saint Fargeau for the notice of an interestingpeculiarity in the structure of these insects, indicative, to a certainextent, of their economy, which he has described in the EncyclopedicMethodique (torn, x.), in a memoir upon the genus Macromeris, inGuerin's Mag. de Zoologie, and in others upon Gorytes and Crabro,in the Annales de la Soc. Ent. de France. Having observed that thespecies which form their own nests are distinguished by having theanterior legs, and especially the tarsi, furnished with strong spines,and the posterior tibiee denticulated or spined, he correctly consideredthe former of these characters as serving for burrowing, and thelatter for carrying the prey ; and he was thence induced to regardthose species which have no spines or ciliie on the anterior andposterior legs, as incapable of burrowing and provisioning a nest, andconsequently as parasites, depositing their eggs in the nests alreadyprovisioned by other burrowing Hymenoptera.* It does not, however,appear to have been yet observed at what particular period (withreference to the real inhabitant of the cell) the parasite is hatched ;nor whether it merely contents itself with feeding, cuckoo-like, uponthe food destined for the supply of its fosterer, which is thus starvedto death ; or whether, on the contrary, it devours the latter, although,perhaps, it is most natural to suppose that it would do both. Anentomologist of our country, who has studied the fossorial Hymenopterain the true spirit of scientific inquiry — W. E. Shuckard —St. Fargeau hist. Nat. Hym. p. 6.) draws a very proper distinction betweenthose parasites which, like the cuckoo, realise the true sense of the word parasite, andthose which prey upon or in the bodies of other insects, as the Ichneumonidse, &c.which are often also called parasites. St. Fargeau proposes to call them " carcasses."This term does not, however, sufficiently indicate them as living withinthe intestines of the victim, upon which they are exercising their cannibal propensities.Latreille had indicated this diversity by calling a tribe of parasite beesCucullinje ; but, as St. Fargeau observes, the term parasite is the proper name forsuch species, sanctioned by well-known and immemorial use. The Ichneumonida2have been called " Cuckoo-flies" by some English writers, (and in p. 82. I haveadopted this expression), but it is not sufficiently precise.HYMENOPTERA Fissures. 187has disproved a portion of St. Fargeau's theory, by observing, thatalthough the sand borrowers have spined legs, others which aredestitute of spines burrow in wood.* ( Trans. Ent. Soc. vol. i.) Thereason for this appears to me obvious : the sand borrowers have needof powerful brushes to enable them to make their way through thefine loose particles of sand, whilst the wood borrowers must haverecourse to their strong, broad, and multidentate mandibles. f Mr.Shuckard has further objected to the supposed use of the spines ofthe hind legs for carrying the prey, regarding them as applicable tothe formation of the cells, or for the closing of its mouth ; in supportof which latter opinion he has given an instance in which he hadcaptured one of these insects with the hind tibige thickly coated withclay. It is to be observed, however, that in those Aculeate Hymenopterawhose proceedings have been observed, the materials for closing thecells are carried by the jaws. I have also published a memoir stillfurther limiting the theory of Messrs. St. Fargeau and Shuckard (inthe Annales Soc. Ent. de France for 1836), having observed the rareBritish species Miscophus bicolor at Coombe Wood, and a species ofPompilus on the Drachenfels, both of which are destitute of spines onthe fore legs %, in the act of burrowing in the sand ; and having furthernoticed a female of Pompilus petiolatus, which has simple fore legs,engaged in carrying her prey by the help of her jaws and fore legs,and not by the help of the hind legs. Cerceris Ista, on the other hand(whose proceedings I have described in the Trans. Ent. Soc. vol. i.p. 203.), although furnished with strong posterior tibial denticulations,carries its prey with its four fore-legs, the hind legs alone beingextended.St Fargeau himself appears indeed to have been aware of the limitation necessaryto be thus imposed on his theory, for in his memoir on Crabro he speaks of thepresence or absence of spines on the anterior tarsi, indicating that these insects " tramdans la terre ou dans la bois." ann. Soc. France, 1834, p. 692.)■j- The variation in the forti of the mandibles is not, however, conclusive as to thedifferences in economy ; for in several of the Crabronidae, which are distinctly wood-borders,the mandibles, as observed by Mr. Shuckard, "are merely bidentate at theirapex. May not this disparity arise from the different nature of the wood they areinstinctively led to form their nests in ? for I have always found that the insects withthis shaped inaudible make their cells in siibputrescent and soft woods, chiefly decayingwillows. " ( Essay Foss. Him. p. 12.)\ The theory of St. Fargeau ought moreover to apply ,to the solitary wasps,Odyneri, &c., which are truly fossorial, as well as to the Fossores ; and yet thefemales of Odynerus have simple tarsi, but are not parasites, provisioning theirown nests. (See my notice of the habits of Odynerus Antilope, Terms. Evt. Soc.vol. i. p. 78.)MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Fig. 80.With a view to illustrate this subject more completely than hashitherto been done I have given in jig. 80. a series of illustrations ofthe structure of the anterior and posterior legs of various species,whose economy has been discovered, and which it will be seen varyvery considerably inter se, so as to have led Saint Fargeau to adoptthe theory above noticed. I have also added figures of the mandiblesof the different species in question, although the precise share whichthese organs take in the economy of the several insects has not beenclearly noticed : the figures marked t 1 represent the anterior tibiaand tarsus, t 3 the posterior tibia, and m the mandible Fig. 80. l.represents these details in Crabro cephalotes $ , a ivood-boring species; and in which the anterior tarsi are but very slightly armed withshort thin spines : the hind tibiae are very strong and rough, with shortthick spines. Fig. 80. 2. represents the same 'parts in Pemphredonunicolor, also a ivood boring species, having the anterior tarsi veryslightly spined, but furnished on one side with long curved hairs ;the hind tibiae have only four minute spines on the margin. Fig. 80. 3.are from Gorytes mystaceus ; the fore legs being still less spined,and the hind tibiae quite simple. This species I have selected, asbeing that which led Saint Fargeau to establish his theory, consideringit a parasite. It is, however, as Mr. Shuckard and myself havediscovered, a predatory species ; and that gentleman states that he hasseen it enter a sand bank with its prey. Mellinus arvensis {Jig- 80. 4.)has stronger and longer spines to the fore tarsi, and the hind tibiahas a marginal row of short spines. This is common in sanely districts,its prey consisting of Diptera ; but it has not been observedto burrow, unless indeed Reaumur's figure, subsequently noticed, beintended for it. Fig. 80. 5. represents a more decidedly fossorialHYMENOPTERA. — Fissures. 189species, Gorytes 4-fasciatus Fah., at least judging from the armatureof the legs ; but its economy has not been observed. Fig 80. 6. exhibitthe legs of Miscophus bicolor, observed by me to burrow in sand ;the fore legs are, however, very sparingly armed with short simplespines, and the hind tibiae nearly simple ; and Jig. 80. 7. are details ofCerceris arenaria, a true sand burrower ; having the fore legs verystrongly ciliated, and the hind tibiae armed with many short strongspines. Other figures, illustrating the fossorial structure of the legs,will be found under the family Sphegidae ; in which also will be foundthe details of Ceropales maculata, a species having perfectly simplelegs, and regarded as a parasite.Although there is much general similarity in the habits of the trulyfossorial species, there is considerable diversity in the details of theirproceedings : thus, whilst Oxybelus conveys its prey by means of itshind legs, Pompilus and Ammophila walk backwards, dragging itwith their mandibles. " Astata, Tachytes, Psen, Crabro, Mellinus, andCerceris, fly bodily and directly forward with it in their mandibles,assisted by their fore legs." (Shuckard, 1. c.) From my own observations,each species appears ordinarily to confine itself to its ownparticular prey. Instances are on record, however, in which considerablediversity in the prey of the same species has been observed :this probably arose from the female not being able to discover herlegitimate prey ; thus Serville and Saint Fargeau state that Bembexrostrata indifferently collects the species of Eristalis, Stratiomys, andthe larger Muscidae ; but it may be regarded as the ordinary rule,thateach species confines itself to its peculiar prey : thus, numbers of thesame species of fly or larva are found in the same cell, although thismust sometimes be a matter of difficulty ; as, in the case recorded byReaumur (torn. vi. p. 272.), where numbers of individuals of a speciesof Anthrax, "plus rares qu'aucune des [touches] precedents," werefound " dans autres trous ;" and in other cases mentioned to me bythe Senator Van Heyden, of Frankfort, and M. Audouin, in whichnumbers of the very rare Ogcodes gibbous had been thus stored upby one of these insects for its young.* The prey is, moreover, veryvarious, comprising insects of nearly every order ; the Coleopteraf,Reaumur also figures (torn, vi.pl. 27.) cells separately filled with numbers ofspecimens of a Chironomus ? Tetanocera ? and Thereva ? •j- Mr. Shuckavd states that he knows only one instance in which a Coleopterousinsect is subject to the attacks of these Fossores ; namely, Strophosomus, one of theCurculionldce, preyed upon by Cerceris arenaria. Lixus Ascanius, and several otherCurculionidae, are preyed upon by several other species of Cerceris. (See infra')190 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Homoptera, Homoptera, Lepidoptera, Hymenoptera, Diptera, andspiders, contributing to the support of this tribe : and insects in thelarva, pupa, and imago states are employed for this purpose. Thenumber of individuals enclosed in each cell varies according to thesize of the species, and of the progeny for whose support it isburied: thus, whilst Ammophila subulosa buries a single Lepidopterouslarva, as many as fifty or sixty Aphides are shut up in a single cellby other species.The Insectivora or Fossores are divisible into the six followingfamilies: 1. or 9. Crabronidae; 2. or 10. Larridae ; 3. or 11. Bem-beside; 4. or 12. Sphegidae ; 5. or 13. Scoliidae ; and 6. or 14. .The latter family, although placed by Latreille with theants in his section Heterogyna, naturally enters the same group asScolia, Tiphia, &c. ; the female Mutillae being evidently apterousFossores, rather than solitary ants : indeed, the supposed males ofone of the Mutillideous genera Methoca have until very recently beenregarded as a distinct genus belonging to the Scoliidae. In some ofthe works of Latreille three other families are added, namely, theNyssonii, separated from the Crabronidae, the Pompilidae from theSphegidae, and the Sapygidae from the Scoliidae. In regarding themmerely as subfamilies, I adopt the views of Latreille's GeneraCrustaceorum, &c.The family Crabronid^ * Leach, with which I also unite the Nys-sonidae Leach, have the head generally large fig. 81. l. CrabroBiBLioGR. Refer, to the Crabronid^.Scheven, in Der Naturforscher. St. 20 (palmated species of Crabro.)Lepellelier de Saint Fargeuu. Mem. g. Gorytes, in Ann. Soc. Ent. de France, torn. i.Ditto, together with M. Brulle, Monogr. g. Crabro, in Ann. Soc. Ent. deFrance, 1834.Latreille. Note of Habits of Philanthus apivorus. Bull. Soc. Philomat. torn, ii.,1 799, and in the Hist. Nat. Fourmis.Thunherg. Note on Trypoxylon figures in Vetensk. Acad, nya Handll., 1808. —Ditto, Monographiaia Philanthi, Nov. Act. Upsal, vol. vii.Brulle, in Ann. Soc. Ent. de France, torn, ii., 1833 (n. g. Nephridia.)Shuckard, in Trans. Ent. Soc. vol. i. and ii. fut supra.)Sch'dffer. ( Crabro libraries) Abhandl. von Insect. No. 11.Sclireher, in Der Naturforscher, 15 St. and 20 St.Kettel, in Isis, 1828 (Crabro parisians. )Patricius, Spinola, Panzer, Jurine, Rossi, Bridle (Morea), Savigny, (Egypt).Hymenoptera. — CRABRONID^.Fig. 81.^p^vagus ; 2 — 10. details of ditto, 2. the head seen in front), and nearly-squarewhen viewed from above, and sometimes broader than thethorax ; the upper Hp is generally transverse, small, and but slightlyprominent (^^.81.3.); the mandibles have the outer margin butslightly curved, and not with a deep incision on the outside nearthe base, as in the Larridae : they are narrow, and vary in the numberof their terminal teeth fig. 81. 4. 5.), being sometimes entire; themaxilla {fig- 81. 6.) and labium fig. 81. 7.) do not unite to forman elongated snout; the antennae fig. 81. 8. 5 Q- S '■> ^^' S ditto ofCrabro cribrarius, 14. ^ Crabro tibialis) are straight, or somewhatelbowed, often gradually incrassated, the joints being short andclosely united together. The collar is less elevated than the mesothorax,and very short, its sides not extending to the base of thewings. The legs are of moderate length; the anterior tibiae have a dilatedspur, pectinated on the inside ; and the basal joint of the foretarsi has a corresponding notch, which is ciliated. The abdomen isof variable form, being in some species attached to the thorax bymeans of a long peduncle. The number of the submarginal cellsvaries from one to four.This family is of considerable extent, and comprises insects ofmoderate size, often closely resembling wasps in their appearance andcolouring, and of great activity ; they are especially fond of settlingon the broad leaves of plants exposed to the sun.This family may be divided into two subfamilies, the Carronadesand Nyssonides. In the former the head is large and square ; the antennaeoften thickened at the tips ; the abdomen either oval or elliptic,being largest in the centre, but sometimes it is clavate, the base being192 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.narrowed into a peduncle. In the early works of Latreille, some ofthe genera arranged in this subfamily in the generic synopsis wereplaced with the Nyssonidaj and Larridae ; the chief difference betweenthe two families, given in the Considerations Generates being the largesize of the head in the Carronades. In thus uniting them with theother Carronades, I follow the arrangement of the Regne Animal.The species of this family are varied in their economy, the samegenus occasionally comprising species which are apparently parasites,as well as others which form their own nests ; at least if we regard thearmature of the legs as indicative of these habits. Such, for instance,is the case in the typical genus Crabro, which St. Fargeau has separatedinto eleven genera, founded primarily upon the presence orabsence of chloe in the fore-legs of the females. Other charactershave also been selected, which certainly appear too trivial, even insome cases separating the sexes of the same insect, as suggestedby Mr. Shuckard essay, p. 121. and 142.). This genus comprisessome singular modifications of form, especially in the males, some ofwhich have only 12 joints in the antennae fig. 81. 9.), offering a remarkableexception to the characters of the Aculeate division. St.Fargeau is evidently correct in regarding these individuals as maleswith anomalous antennae rather than as females with 7-jolnted abdomensfig. 81. 10.), as they were considered by Wander Linden.Crabro lapidarius, fossorius L., vagus Linn. fig. 81. i.), and othersforming St. Fargeau's genus Silenus, exhibit this peculiarity, severalof the joints being notched beneath in the males, as well as C. Phi-landholderPanz. (subterraneous Fab), C. aratus Panz., and othersforming the genus Ceratocolus St. F., in which they are entire, asthey are also in C. (Thyrsus St. F.) vexillatus Pz., in which theidentity of the male sex is proved by the fore-legs. St. Fargeauasserts the same of C. tibialis Fab., Pz. j but this is inaccurate, themale antennas (although very irregular and notched) being decidedly12-jointed fig. 81. 14., and see my Observations in Trans. Ent. Sac.vol. i. p. 204. tab. 22.). Mr. Curtis described the labium as varyingconsiderably in the two sexes, being very short in the females, but aslong as the palpi, and sub cylindrical in the males. In recent specimens,however, which I have dissected of C. cribrarius and vagus, the labiumof the females fig. 81. 7.) is longer than the palpi, dilated at the tip,and furnished on each side at the base with a minute laconia, at leastin the latter fig. 81. ii). This genus is further remarkable forHYMENOPTERA. — CRAERONIDiE. 193having the ocelli in some of the species arranged in a slight curve, andnot in a triangle ; and the anterior tibiae in the males of some of thespecies are singularly dilated into a broad horny plate.* In Crabrotibialis Pz., the basal joint of the anterior tarsi is also furnished witha broad wing-like membrane, overlooked by St. Fargeau and Brulle,who form this insect into the genus Corynopus, incorrectly statingthat the anterior tarsi of the males are simple.The species whose economy has been clearly traced make their cellsin wood, boring into palings, posts, Willow-stumps, &c. (C. lycurgusShk.). Crabro cephalotes, one of the most ferocious and predatory ofthe group, has simple anterior tarsi, but the posterior tibiae are spurred.This species, according to Mr. Shuckard, employs its mandibles informinga cylindrical cell in decaying trees, passing the particles of woodbeneath them, and ejecting them behind by means of the spines withwhich the posterior tibiae are armed. C. cribrarius, according toLatreille, provisions its cell with the larvae of a small Pyralis, whichfeeds upon the oak (Tortrix chlorine) ; but Mr. Shuckard statesthat it, as well as C. satellites, employ Diptera for this purpose, as isalso the case with other species. I have captured C. (CrossocerusSt. F.) leucostoma;, burrowing into rotten wood, and also carrying itsprey, which consisted of a specimen of Anthomyia pluvialis 3Ieig.\ ;and I am indebted to Mr. Pickering for specimens of a nest found inrotten wood, covered with the remains of blue-bottle flies, from whichI reared Crabro vagus, the larva of which is white and fleshy, with ascaly head bent under the breast, the extremity of the body being alsoincurved (Jig. 81. 15. larva of the natural size, 16. ditto magnified,seen from beneath, 17. ditto seen laterally). It is destitute of legs, butthe segments are dorsally provided with a transverse elevated ridge,In Crabro cribrarius S ( fig 81- this dilatation is covered with small membranoustransparent dots, which, as Latreille observes hist. Nat. xiii. 321.),gives it the appearance of being pierced, as indeed it was supposed to be by solander,who thought it was used by the males as a riddle through which the pollenof flowers was passed, the finer particles only serving for the impregnation of theplant ! De Geer, however, disproved this notion by figuring the limb correctly.(A/t'm. tom. ii. tab. 28. f. 2, 3.)f Bouche has described the larva of this SYiec'ies (Naturffesch. d. Ins. p. 178.), aswell as that of Stigmus (Diodontus minutus Fab). Reaumur's fig. 14. pi. 27. vol. vi.reared from cells filled with flies resembling house flies (fig. 1. k.), is apparentlya small yellow-spotted Crabro, it being stated that its fore-wings " ne se clientjamais." In Insect Architecture (p 52.) it is erroneously stated to belong to thewasp-genus Eumenes.VOL. II. O194< MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.which, doubtless, serves them instead of feet. Theclypeus and upperlip are distinct and transverse (fig. 81. is. front of head; 19. dittosideways) ; the mandibles horny and tridentate, the maxillae and labiumshort, and formed of fleshy lobes soldered together without any palpi ;the labium having three minute tubercles, the central one being evidentlythe organ from which the silken threads are discharged for theformation of the cocoon. Exclusive of the head, the body is composedof thirteen segments, (numbered in my figures from 1 to 13,) the firstand second of which are furnished at their posterior lateral marginswith a pair of spiracles ; and the 4-th, 5th, 6th, 7th, 8th, 9th, 10th, and11th have also a pair of spiracles placed on their anterior margins,so that there are twenty spiracles in the whole. The larvae, when firstI examined them, were enclosed in an oblong-oval case of a thin capriciousappearance, and of a pale reddish brown colour (fig. 81. 20.), tothe outside of which the remnants of the flies, which had served forthe support of the larvae, were attached. It is proper to state, in consequenceof an observation made by Mr. Shuckard in a note to Burmeister'sManual Trans, p. 357., that both sexes of the Crabrowere reared by me from larvae precisely agreeing in the number oftheir segments. (See Trails. Merit. Soc. vol. ii. p. 127.)M. Walckenaer states that there are three species of small Crabswith the face silvery, which constantly endeavour to enter parasiticallyinto the cells of Halictus, two of which he names C. punctatus and C.crassipes. (3Iem. Halict. p. 35.)The genus Trypoxylon Latr., at once distinguished by its reniformeyes (fig. 82. 9.) and long abdomen, was considered by Saint Fargeau(^E7ic. Methh. torn. yi. p. 749.) as parasitic ; and consequently that itsname, given to it in allusion to its wood-boring habits, was inapplicable.TheLinnaean account of its habits, as observed by Bergman (Syst. Nat.,vol. ii. p. 943.), is, however, substantially correct, as I have clearlyproved by some facts published in the Trans. Ent. Soc. vol. i. p. 205. ;although, from having repeatedly seen it enter the burrows of otherinsects, I was at first induced to adopt the notion of St. Fargeau. Itsobject, however, I subsequently found was evidently to make use ofthe holes of other insects commenced in wood-work, by first enlargingand then plastering them with a coating of fine sand. The prey ofT. figures is a small spider, which appears to me to be the young ofEpeira diadems. Mr. Kennedy blond. and Ed. Phil. Mag., Jan.1837) also observed it carrying spiders, varying greatly in size, intoHYMENOPTERA. — CRABRONID^. 195holes in posts and straws in a thatch ; placing them in cells separatedfrom each other by a double partition of clay ; a single egg beingplaced in each cell, attached to the abdomen of a spider, near the bottomof the cell. Sometimes as many as twelve or more spiders, ifsmall, are placed in one cell. The female makes a buzzing noisewhen constructing the clay partitions. Trypoxylon clavicerum is similarin its habits, but it does not leave any space between its cells.Mr. Shuckard also mentions that the former had been observed in theact of depositing a small round ball or pellet, containing about fifty individualsof a species of Aphis, in a hole in a post, pre-occupied by anOdynerus ; but surely some error must have crept into this statement.(See further on the habits of this genus, Shuckard, Essay, p. 116. ;St. Fargeau, Enc. Meili. torn. x. p. 750. ; Curtis, B. E. p. 652. ; andThunder, in Swedish Trans. 1808.)Pemphredon lugubrious (P. unicolor Jure), according to Latreille andShuckard, provisions its nest with Aphides (and see Curtis, fol. 632.).The latter author states that he had never seen it make its own cell,but which he considered very probable, from the structure of its jaws ;and Mr. Kennedy states that P. lugubrious Fab. burrows in decayedwood, and throws out the sawdust, depositing Aphides, which is alsothe case with P. unicolor Panzer. P. minutus, however, is foundonly upon sand : its anterior tarsi are simple, but the posterior tibiaeare spined. P. insignia is considered by Mr. Shuckard to be aparasite.Mr. Kennedy has published an account of the habits of Diodontusgracilis and corner, both of which provide Aphides for the food oftheir progeny, carrying them in the mouth into cells in the holes ofposts. He also discovered the cells of Stigmus troglodytes V. L. inhollow straws of a thatch ; the cells being filled with minute insects,which appeared to be the larvae of a Thrips, as many as fifty beingfound in one cell. St. Fargeau, on account of the structure of the legs,considered this to be a parasitic genus. {Enc. Mei. tom. x. p. iOS.)I have observed Mellinus arvensis burrowing in sand banks. Mr.Shuckard says that its prey consists of Diptera*, especially Muscidse ;Mr. Curtis attributes to the females of this genus an economy which has notbeen noticed in any other Fossorial Hymenoptera, namely, that of carrying dead fliesto the young larvae when hatched, for the latter to feed upon. He indeed recordsthe observation, that he had observed a female Mellinus flying about with a largeblue fly (probably Musca vomitoria), which it afterwards drew into its burrow, ino 2196 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.and Kirby and Spence state that it selects the smaller flies, includingthe troublesome Stomoxys calcitrans. (^Introd. to Ent. vol. i. p. 263. )Panzer, however, records its preying upon an Aphis. I regard Reaumur'sfigures 13 — 17. pi. 26. torn. vi. as representing this species; itscells being filled with Dipterous " mouches," its fore wings not beingfielded, and its abdomen peduncled. In Insect Architecture (p. 53.)the cocoon of this insect, copied from Reaumur, is stated to be thatof " a carpenter wasp, composed of sawdust and wings of insects ;"but incorrectly, Reaumur expressly stating that its cells were foundin the sand (torn, vi. p. 269.).Gorytes Latr. is another genus, comprising species varying considerablyinter se, in respect to the armature of the legs, whence St.Fargeau has divided them into numerous genera, as in Crabro. Themore recent observation, however, in this country, of the habits ofsome of the species, supposed to be parasites, in consequence of theabsence of ciliae, or spines, is sufficient to prove the impropriety ofsuch a step. In June, 1837, I observed the female of G. mystaceusengaged in protruding her legs and sting into a patch of the frothysecretion caused by the larva of Aphrophora spumaria, without, however,being able to dislodge the occupant. Subsequently I saw itsimilarly occupied with a drop of water, evidently mistaken for thefroth : it then tried another patch of the froth, but unsuccessfully ;but I shortly afterwards observed it with a larva of this insect, whichit carried beneath its body by the help of its middle legs. Mr.Shuckard has also captured it, as well as his G. Fargeii (G. campestrisSt. Farg.'), with a similar prey.The species of the genus Psen (P. ater Fab.\ according to Mr.Shuckard, nidificate in sand ; whereas those of his genus Mimes (P.equestris and bicolor) appear to be wood borrowers, and provisiontheir cells with the larvae of different species of Homopterous insects.Psen stratum has been observed by Mr. Kennedy to make its cellsspite of its struggling ; hut I much doubt if the Mellinus had at that time evendeposited its eggs. M. Du Camel also was of opinion, that the females of the insectfigured by Reaumur, torn. vi. pi. 26. fig. 16. (which I regard as a Mellinus) fed theiryoung daily with flies (Ahem. torn. vi. p. 269.) ; but Reaumur gives no assent to suchobservations. Latreille indeed says (Hist. Nat. Ins. torn. xiii. p.313. ), " C'estsurtoutdes mouches que la females donnent a leurs petits," but the preceding paragraphproves that they are deposited with the eggs.HYMENOPTERA. — CRABRONID^.in the straw of a thatch*, providing them with Aphides, as many as ahundred of which were found in some of them. The egg is white andsemitransparent, and is attached to the abdomen of an Aphis, at thebottom of the cell. (blond. and Ed'mb, Phil. Mag. Jan. 1837.)Fig. 82,The beautiful genus Cerceris Latr. is distinguished from all theother British species by the contraction of the segments of the abdomeni^fig' 82. 7. (? , 8. 5 .) The males have a long moustache on each side ofthe clypeus, just above the base of the mandibles, as figured by Savignyin the great work on Egypt ; who also represents some species as havingthe face produced in front into a short nose, and the labium on each sidearmed at the base with slender saragossa. There is considerablediversity in the habits of the species. Walckenaer has given us a minutedetail of the economy of C. ornata, which forms its nest in footpaths,and other situations exposed to the sun, to the depth of aboutfive inches, but in a tortuous direction. The provision which this insectlays up in store for its progeny consists of different species ofHalictus (H. generator Walk. and a small green species), whichabound in the same situations ; three individuals of the former andone of the latter being enclosed, in a half-dead state, for the supplyof one larva. (Mr. Shuckard mentions H. rubicund, fulvo-cinctus,and leucozonius; and Walckenaer adds, that when, at the close of theseason, the Halictus generator becomes scarce, the Cerceris will takePsen? caliginosus? is recorded in the Entomological Alayazine (No. 21.) tomake its cells in straws of a thatch, each straw containing as many as ten or twelve ofthe larvae : the statement, however, that in the month of August many of the strawsfrequented hy them were filled with a sweet glutinous substance, seems to contradictthe opinion that these insects were the legitimate inhabitants of the straws.o 3198 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Other species*) The larva is described by the latter as possessingtwelve segments, exclusive of the head and an anal tubercle (makingfourteen segments in the whole). The head, which the insect movesabout in all directions, has two small black tubercles on the lower partof the face, which appear to be eyes, but different from the ocelli ofthe imago ; it is destitute of antennas : the labrum is separated by aline from the clypeus ; the lower lip is elongated, cylindrical, swollen,protruded beneath. [This protruded part, I apprehend, is the truelabium and the lateral parts.] The maxillae [or, rather, the mandibles]are cylindrical ; and in the middle they are enclosed betweenthe labium and upper lip. The last segment of the body is terminatedby a small and very curious pointed cone. When full grown, itspins an oval and slender cocoon, of a pale colour, thickened at oneend, and provided with a small brush of black hair, which is used infixingthe cocoon in the ground. (memoire sur les Achilles solid. malice,p. 44'.)Other species of the genus provision their nests with species ofCurculionidae. Of these I have published i^Trans. Ent. Soc. i. p. 203.)an account of the habits of Cerceris arenaria Linn, (lata Fah. Curtsywhich makes its burrow in sand, and provisions it with a species ofStrophosomus (one of the Curculionidae), which during flight itcarries by means of its four fore legs, its hind legs being extended.According, however, to the Entomologists Bemerkungen (Brunswick,1790, p. 6.), other short-snouted weevils are employed by this species,such as Pachygaster picipes, caucus, &c. Cerceris aurita, accordingto Latreille (annales du Museum, torn, xiv., and Bull. Soc. Philomat.1810), employs the destructive Lixus Ascanius and other weevils ; andM. Boscc has described two other species of this genus (mandates(T Agriculture, torn. Vi. p. 89.), which select other species of the samefamily. St. Fargeau also states that they have the instinct to capturethese beetles at a time when their elytra are soft, from having beenbut recently disclosed.M. Walckenaer has also described a cocoon which he discovered inthe ground, covered with the debris of multitudes of a species ofChrysis, and which he considered had probably served for the food ofthe larva of one of these insects.We are indebted to Latreille for a most interesting account of theeconomy of Philanthus triangular Fab., apivorus Latr. (published inMr, Curtis states that it is with the dead bodies of the Andreiiffi that they provisiontheir nest; but this is incorrect. (brit. Ent. 269.)HYMENOPTERA CRABRONIDiE. 199his Hist.Nat Fourmis, p. 307.). This species burrows in hot sandy situations,and provisions its nest with hive bees* ; a single individual ofwhich after being stung is deposited with an egg ; and, as each depositsfive or six eggs, the number of bees destroyed must be at least equal tothat, if not more considerable, which is most probable; and Latreillecounted as many as fifty or sixty females occupied in making theirburrows in a space of ground 120 ft. long. The proceedings of thisfine species do not materially differ from those of the Cerceris. Themandibles of the larva are described as two " crochets triangulairesplats, courses, convents, trees durs, bruns, approaches a leur base, etrecovers par un advancement, en forme de bee."I am indebted to M. Percheron for the cocoon and pupa of thisspecies : the former is ten lines long, flask-shaped, and formed of asingle thin pellicle, thickened and black at the narrow end.The second subfamily Nyssonides (Nyssonidse Leach) have the abdomenof an ovoid-conic or conical form, being broadest at the base,and never attached to the thorax by means of a long peduncle. Thehead is of moderate size, with the antennae filiform, the basal jointbut slightly elongated, and the mandibles are not strongly notched onthe outside at the base.The species of the typical genus Nysson appear to nidificate inthe sand, but their prey has not been observed.The genus Oxybelus Latr. is remarkable for the armature of itsthorax, the scutellum (of the mesothorax) is simple, and the metaphorpraescutum is armed at the sides with lobes, and the base of themeta thoracic scutellum with a spine fig. 82. 12. 13.) The descriptiongiven by Curtis, Shuckard, &c., is not sufficiently precise. Thecommon species, O. uniglumis Linn, abounds, in the summer, uponthe flowers of umbelliferous plants ; and Mr. Shuckard states that thefemale has a peculiar mode of carrying and holding its prey, whichconsists of Dipterous insects, whilst opening the mouth of its burrowor forming a new one. It is a bustling little creature, and I haveobserved that it uses its two fore legs in making its hole with thegreatest rapidity, moving them alternately, and soon scratching theburrow sufficiently deep to cover itself.Mr. Curtis adds, that it most commonly places an Andrena in its cell (BritEnt. No. 273.) ; and Mr. Shuckard essay, p. 248.) says, that it is recorded to preyupon species of the genus Halictus, thus evidently erroneously confounding it withCerceris ornata.o 4200 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Astata Latr. affords an example of the confluence of the eyes in thecrown of the head in the males (fig. 82. 6.). A. hoops Schr. (A. victorCurt , abdominal Panz. Latr.) is the only British species fig. 82.1. 9, 2. labrum, 3. mandible, 4. maxilla, 5. labium). It is exceedinglyactive, and its flight is very rapid. The males seem to selecta spot on the ground, or, more especially, bits of dry horse-dung,on which they sit for a length of time ; but, on approaching them,they dart off, making a large circle, and then fly back to the samespot, chasing flies, &c., away, should they approach : when alightedthey turn themselves round once or twice, as if to make a completesurvey, and then remain still for a time. 1 have captured it with itsprey, which consisted of the pupa of Pentatoma dissimilar ? ; but Mr.Shuckard states that he always found it to consist of the larva of P.bides, and that Mr. Curtis took it with the larva P. praying. Mr.Curtis, however, states that it was the pupa of P. praying or of P.dissimilar. The former gentleman also states that Mr. Smith had capturedit carrying off Epeolus variegated ; and he has also informed methat he caught one carrying a spider, which it had killed with its sting.The family Larrid^* (Jig. 82. 14. Larra Ichneumoniformis ;15 — 18. details of its mouth) is closely allied to the preceding family,but differs in the mandibles {Jig- 82. 16.) having a deep notch on theouter margin near the base ; the labrum {Jig- 82. 15.) is but slightlyexserted, or entirely concealed by the clypeus ; the maxillary lobesfig. 82. 17.) are rather large, and the labial laciniae distinct fig. 82.18.) ; the abdomen is either ovoid-conic or conical, broadest at thebase, and not annexed to the thorax by means of a peduncle ; thecollar is small, and does not extend backwards to the base of thewings ; the legs are of moderate size, those of the females generallystrongly ciliated for burrowing. This family is of small extent, andthe species of which it is composed are of small or but moderate size.They are ordinarily found in sandy situations, but the precise eco-BiBLioGR. Refer, to the Lakrid^.BrtdU, in Ann. Soc. Ent. de France, torn. ii. (Nephridia)]Shuckard, Trans. Ent. Soc. vol. ii. (Monogr. Prison.)The general works of Fabricius, Rossi, Spinola, King (Symbb. Pliys.), SavignyTEgvPte), fir?<Zfe'(Morea), §-c.HYMENOPTERA. BEMBECID.^. 201nome of very few of the species has been hitherto observed. Manyof the species of the typical genus Larra Fab. exhibit a splendidsericeous coating, and are further distinguished by the two upperocelli, which are large, and tortuous in their form (Savigny, Egypt).The species of the allied genus Tachytes Panz. (Lyrops Illig.) aregenerally captured in sand-banks. L. pompiliformis is stated by Mr.Shuckard to provision its nest with the larvae of a small Lepidopterousinsect. The rare British species Miscophus bicolor Jur. (hitherto, Ibelieve, taken by no other collector but myself) also frequents sandbanks,in which I have observed it burrowing (see Trans. Ent. Soc.vol. i. p. 203.), although its legs are almost destitute of spines orciliae {Jiff' 80. 6.). The beautiful and equally rare Dines pectusJur. is remarkable for the curious convoluted antennas of the males.The exotic genus Palaces is at once distinguished by the constrictedsegments of its abdomen. Savigny has figured several very singularallied insects egypt. Hymenopt. pi. 11.), in one of which the maxillarypalpi are quite anomalous i^fig- 82. ic), the fifth joint beinggreatly dilated, and terminated by two large oval masses attached tothe joint by a short peduncle. It may possibly be the effect of disease,as a figure of a palpus of the ordinary form (fig. 82. 11.) is added bySavigny. The mandibles in this species are very slender and entire,both externally and at the tip.The family Bembecid^ * (fig. 82. 19. Bembex rostrata) is also ofsmall extent, corresponding with the genus Bembex of Fabricius, andchiefly distinguished by the structure of the mouth. The labrum istriangular and exserted ; the head is transverse, the eyes extendingto its posterior margin ; the mandibles are acute, with a tooth on theinside ; the maxillae have the terminal lobe well developed, beinggreatly elongated in the typical genus fig. 82. 20.) ; the labium isalso elongated, forming in Bembex a very long tongue {fig.S'i. 21.),BiBLioGR. Refer, to the Bembecidje.Dufour, Memoir on Stizus, Annales Soc. Ent. de France, Jess.Eschscholtz, Entomographien.The general works of Fabricius, Perty, Spinola, Say, King, Rossi, Saving(Egyptee), Bridle (Morea), §-c.202 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS. •with two long lateral laciniae. The collar' is minute, not extendinglaterally to the base of the wings ; the body is elongate, and posteriorlyacuminated, smooth, and generally varied with black andyellow; the legs are short, or but of moderate lengthy and the anteriorare generally furnished with strong cilia. They are of a moderatesize ; some few, however, are nearly as large as any known Hymenoptera.They are generally inhabitants of hot climates, and areextremely active in their movements, flying from flower to flower, andmaking a sharp humming noise ; many of them emit a rose-like scent.They appear only in summer.No species of this family has hitherto been proved to be adecided inhabitant of this country, although Donovan has figured aspecies of Bembex (B. octo-punctata, S/if. Ins. vol. xiv. pi. 474-.).The type of this genus is B. rostrata (Apis rostrata Linnet which isan inhabitant of the central and southern parts of Europe. It isabout the size of a wasp. This genus is remarkable for having thelower parts of the mouth (the maxilla and labium) produced into along trunk or proboscis, like that of the bees. The female burrows inthe sand to a consider-able depth, burying various species of Diptera(Syrphidffi, Muscidas, &c.), and depositing her eggs at the same timein company with them, upon which the larvae when hatched subsist.When a sufficient store has been collected, the parent closes themouth of the cell with earth. The history of B. rostrata has beendetailed by Latreille in the Aiuiales du Museum tom. xiv. ; and Bull.Soc. Philomat. 1810, 1811 ; and by Messrs. St. Fargeau and Serville{Encycl. Methh. tom. x. p. 497.). According to the latter authors, theBembex is subject to the parasitic attacks of Parnopes carne (oneof the Chrysididse), as above described. An anonymous correspondentin the Entomol. Mag. (vol. iii. p. 464.) states that B. rostrata constructsits nests in the soft light sea-sand in the Ionian islands, andappears to catch its prey (consisting of such flies as frequent the sand ;amongst others, a bottle-green fly) whilst on the wing. He describesthe mode in which the female, with astonishing swiftness, scratches itshole with its fore legs like a dog. Bembex tarsata, according toLatreille, provisions its nest with Bombylii.The genus Stizus appears to form a connecting link between thisfamily and the Scoliidag, with which latter it agrees in the malesbeing armed with one or three acute points at the extremity of thebody ; the lower parts of the mouth are not produced into a longHYMENOPTERA SPIIEGIDJE. 203proboscis. M. Leon Dufour has described some peculiarities exhibitedin the structure of the intermediate legs and antennae of themales of this genus (Ami. Soc, Ent. France, 1838, p. 276.), as well asthe structure and uses of the spines at the extremity of the bodyof the males. I possess a remarkable species of this genus fromthe Cape of Good Hope, given to me by Dr. Klug (S. alternate KLMss), in which the base of the abdomen is armed on the under sidewith a strong curved horn. *The insects composing the family SphegidjE-j- (including the Pom-filiae)are distinguished from the preceding by having the collarlaterally dilated and extending as far as the base of the wings ; thelegs are very long, the posterior pair being often more than twice aslong as the head and thorax ; the antennae are filiform or subcutaneousand long, composed of elongated joints, those of the females beingoften convoluted and scarcely serrated ; the body is long, with theabdomen often attached to the thorax by a long peduncle ; thelabrum is seldom exserted ; the mandibles are elongate, curved,narrow, and acute at the tips, and not notched on the outside at thebase ; the eyes are entire ; the legs are in general eminently fossorial,The same character exists in a specimen of Bembex anonodonta Say, sent meby Dr. Harris, of Massachusetts.•}- BiBLiOGR. Refer to the Sphegid^e.Klug, in Neue Schriften der Gesellsch. Nat. freund. zu Berlin, vol. iii. (^Sceliphroti,Ammophila.)Dahlbom. Monographiaia Pompilorum Suecia; Lund. 8vo. 1829. — Ditto, Mono-graphicSphegidum ( et Pompilorum) Suicide, in Exercise. Entomol. 1831-32.Kirhy. Ammophila, n, g. Insects in Trans. Linn. Soc. torn. iv. 1798.Lepelletier, Corne de Saint Fargeau, in Guer. Mag. Zool. Ins. 29, 30. (Macromeris).Ditto, 33. (Sphex Latreillei). — Ditto, 34. (Sphex Thunbergii.)Meyer, on Pepsis lutaria, in Germar Mag. der Ent. vol. iv. p. 409.Holiday, in Trans. Linn. Soc. vol. xvii. (G. Chirodamus.)Schiodte. Pompilidarum Dana; Dish. Syst. Havniae, 1837. 8vo.Shuckard. Essay Fossores. — Ditto, in Trans. Ent. Soc' vol. ii. p. 72. (Exerts. )Fahricius, Klug (Symbb. Phys), Coquehert, Drury, Savigny (Egyptee), Shuckard,Jtossi, Spinola, Panzer, Perty (Brazil), Br-ulle {Morca).MODERN' CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.the anterior tibiae and tarsi being strongly ciliated, and the posteriortibiae fined in the females.Some of these insects, inhabiting tropical climates, are amongst thelargest of Hymenopterous insects, the wings measuring not less thanfour inches in expanse. They are exceedingly active and very restlessin their motions, and may often be seen upon sand-banks, &c. runningalong with their wings in constant vibration. Their sting is verypowerful. They are considerably varied in their colours, and a fewof them are splendidly metallic.Latreille in some of his earlier works divided this family into two,the Sphegides and Pompilides. In his Genera Crustaceorum, however,as well as in the second edition of the Regne Animal, they constitutedbut a single family. I therefore regard them as subfamilies.Fiff. 83.The first subfamily Sphegides has the collar narrowed in front,forming an elevated piece or node ; the first segment of the abdomen,as well as occasionally a part of the second, is contracted into anelongated peduncle ; the fore wings always exhibit three perfectsubmarginal cells, and the commencement of a fourth terminal one.Of these insects, Ammophila Kirby, and Pelopseus Fab. are both remarkablydistinguished by the extreme slenderness and length of theabdominal peduncle, which, especially in the latter, is not thicker thanafine pin. The genus Ammophila fig. 83. l. A. sabulosa ? •,Jjg- 2 — 13.details of this species), as the generic name imports, was establishedby Mr. Kirby in an interesting memoir published in Linn. Soc. Trans.vol. iv. and is further distinguished by the great elongation of themaxillae and labrum fig. 83. 2. represents the front of the head ;Jig. 83. 3. the labrum ; ^^. 83. 4. the mandible ; Jig. 83. 5. the maxillawith its apical lobe reflexed ; Jig. 83. 6. the same with the lobeextended ; Jig. 83. 7. the labium, with the ligula partially withdrawnHymenoptera. SPHEGID^. 205into the tube of the mentum ; Jig. 83. 8. the same entirely exserted ;fig. 83. 9. the anterior fossorial tarsus ; fig. 83. 10. the base of theposterior tarsus with the ciliated tibial spur \ fig. 83. il. the abdomenof the female seen sideways, showing that the ventral arc of the firstsegment is anteriorly transformed into a complete cylinder, formingthe first apparent segment of the peduncle). The species inhabitsandy districts, in which A. sabulosa Linn, (vulgaris Kirhy) forms itsburrow, using its jaws in burrowing ; and when they are loaded, itascends backwards to the mouth, turns quickly round, flies to about afoot's distance, gives a sudden turn, throwing the sand in a completeshower to about six inches' distance, and again alights at the mouth ofits burrow. (Westwood, in Trans. Ent. Soc. vol. i. p. 200.)Latreille states that this species provisions its cells with caterpillars,but Mr. Shuckard states he has observed the female dragging a verylarge inflated spider up the nearly perpendicular side of a sand-bank,at least twenty feet high, and that whilst burrowing it makes a loudwhirring buzz* essay p. 77.) ; and in the Trans. Entomol. Soc.(vol. i. p. 57.) he states that he had detected both A. sabulosa andhirsuta dragging along large black spiders. Mr. Curtis observed itbury the caterpillars of a Noctua and Geometra, brit. Entomol.pi. 604.) St. Fargeau, however, states A. sabulosa collects caterpillarsof large size, especially those of Noctua, with a surprising perseverance,whereas A. arenaria Fah. (hirsuta Scop. K. and Shk.^,forming a distinct section in the genus, collects spiders {Eiicycl. Methh.tom. X. p. 452.). Walckenaer also states that A. sabulosa " enterdes chenilles." {{Mem. Malice, p. 47.) In the Trans. Entomol. Soc.(vol. i. p. 199.) I have published a detailed account of the mode inwhich A. hirsuta constructs its cell, and which differs in some respectsfrom that of A. sabulosa, and of the manner in which it carriesalong and buries a large smooth green caterpillar of one of theNoctuidse. Whilst burrowing, I also observed that it made a loudbuzzing noise. It also appeared to me that each burrow was intendedonly for a single cell ; Laurelled however, seems to imply the contrary.(i?. An. tom. V. p. 322.) It is to the last named species that I referthe very interesting account given by Ray hist. Insect, p. 254.) ofthe proceedings of a species of " Vespa Ichneumon," observed byM. Goureau also notices the same fact in A. sabulosa, in Ann. Soc. Ent. France,1837, p. 66.206 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.himself and Willughby, and which not only formed its cell in theearth, and buried a green caterpillar therein three times larger thanitself, but afterwards carefully closed the hole by rolling in particles ofsand and bits of stone. It was also observed to fly to a fir tree, as itseemed, to fetch a supply of resin to agglutinate the sand together,and it ultimately fetched two fir leaves, which it placed over the mouthof the burrow to mark the spot.The males are exceedingly ardent during their amours, seizingtheir partners round the neck with their sickle-shaped jaws. I haverepresented (^fig- 83. 12.) the cocoon of A. sabulosa, dug out of asand-bank at Coombe Wood, and presented to me by Mr. Ingpen.The insect had made its escape at the top, gnawing it open irregularly :it is of a white, slender, and capricious texture, and encloses a seconddistinct cocoon of a similar nature, but lined with a shining brownsubstance. Reaumur's pi. 28. fig. 8 — 11. represent the cocoon andlarva of an insect, probably belonging to this family, having been found,"sous terre," with remnants of flies.* But Reaumur seems to havemistaken the head of the larva for the tail (fig. 83. 13. in a reversedposition).The Pcelopa;-i are for the most part exotic, and construct theirnests in the corners of rooms, &c. consisting of several ranges of numerouscells of fine earth, the entrances to which are from beneath,each cell being surrounded by a spiral layer of earth. Drury, however,figures the nest as consisting of about a dozen cells, enveloped in ageneral case of mud, which does not exhibit any spiral arrangement,as figured by Reaumur. In each cell the insect places a green caterpillaror spider, which is then closed, according to Palisot de Beauvois;but according to Bonnet, the cells are revisited by the parent fly afterthe grub has consumed the enclosed food, in order to give it a freshsupply, and which is repeated until it has attained its full growth.Palisot de Beauvois and Drury have given accounts of the proceedingsof these insects sallust. Ins. SjjJiex ccBmentaria, torn. i. p. 99.,Pelops. lunatic Fab.^, stating that spiders are deposited in the cells. -j-(Seals Disderi, in Turin Trans, vol. iii. (P. spirited) ; Reaumur,Reaumur states (torn. vi. p. 292.) that this larva " devient une guepe ichneumondont le corps tient au corselet par im long fil ;" but in a preceding page (278.) hestates that his larva had died, and that he regarded it as the larva of such insectupon the authority of Vallisnieri, (vol. i. pi. 3. fol), where a similar cocoon andimago, answering to this description, had been figured.f In the nests observed by Mr. Saunders, caterpillars were stored up.HYMENOPTERA.— SPHEGlDiE. 207Mem. torn. vi. mem. 8. pi. 28. f. 4 — 6. representing the nest and imagoof a species from St. Domingo.) Such is the account given in variousworks ; but an indefatigable observer, W. W. Saunders, Esq., F.L.S.,in a memoir upon the habits of some Indian insects, published in theTrans. Entomol. Soc. (vol. i. p. 62.), seems to have satisfactorilyproved that the nests in question are constructed by a species ofEumenes, and that the Pelops are parasites upon them, havingopened several cells constructed by the Eumenes, and foundPelopseus therein.*In support of this opinion I may observe, 1, that the legs of thefemale Pelops are simple, and unprovided vv^ith apparatus for theconstruction of such nests ; and 2. that it is only amongst the beesand wasps that we find the habit of constructing nests with materialsbrought from a distance.Some of the exotic species of the restricted genus Sphex areamongst the largest species of Hymenopterous insects. St. Fargeaustates that he was not acquainted with the precise food stored up intheir nests. An interesting account has, however, been given of thehabits of two American species by Latrobe, in the Trans. Philos. Soc.of Philadelj)h,,vo\.\'u; one of these is the Sphex cerulean, which,according to Cates, has been known to drag a spider along eighttimes its own weight. In the Philosophical Transactions for 1749, anaccount is given by Mr. Bartram of the economy of a yellowish speciesof Sphex .from Pennsylvania, which, (as well as a Silex ? observedby Duhamel, and recorded by Reaumur,) instead of burying spiders orcaterpillars, is asserted to supply its young with a periodical provisionof living flies. f Another species of Sphex, or perhaps more probablyan Ammophila, from Pennsylvania, buries two or three largegreen grasshoppers for the food of its posterity, which it stings in sucha manner that they remain half alive till the larva is hatched. (Seealso Carpenter, in Giles Technol. Repos. 1829.) The beautiful EastIndian and Mauritian species Ample ? (^Jur. Chorion Latr.) compressedFahr., according to Sonnet ( Voyage aux hides Orient.)and Reaumur (mem. tom. vi. p. 280.), provisions its nest with Blatta;,Driiry figures the cocoon of the Pelopaeus found in the cells, agreeing with thatof Ammophila, so that there can be no doubt that the Pelopa;us is reared therein.■f Here, as in the observations upon Mellinus and Pelopa?us, I can but observe,that the fact of a periodical feeding of the larva; by the parent fly is problematical.I believe this is done by none but social insects.208 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.which it first stings to death. The account of the proceedings ofthis species was communicated to the latter by M. Consign, who hadobserved it in the Isle of Bourbon.The second subfamily Pompilides has the collar either transverselyor longitudinally square, with the abdomen more or less oval, and attachedto the thorax by a very short peduncle. The legs are verylong. The fore wings have two or three perfect submarginal cells,and another commenced at the tip of the wings. The maxillarypalpi are more robust than in Ammophila (j^c/. 83. 17.), and the labiallobes much shorter {fg- 83. 18. Pompilus). These sand-wasps areamongst the most ferocious of the insect tribes, and some of the largeexotic species of Pepsis are the largest of known Hymenoptera ; manyof them have their wings black, or varied, and shining with the mostbrilliant metallic tints. The species of the British genus Pompilusare exceedingly active, running amongst grass, &C. in hot sandy situationswith great agility, and with their wings in constant agitation:their long legs give them much the appearance of spiders ; and, indeed,some of the species provision their cells (which they burrow in thesand) with these insects, which they first sting to death. P. niger, however,attacks a small Lepidoptera larva. (Shuckard, Essay, p. 52.)Some of the species of this genus have the legs unarmed, as P. bifas-hiatus and petiolatus : these Mr. Shuckard considers to nidificate inivood (trails, Ent. Soc. vol. i. p. 56.); although, never having observedany species with these habits, he considers it would necessarilybe such as are without the filiation of the tarsi. St. Fargeau alsostates that some species make their nests in burrows, which they discoveralready formed in wood, without, however, naming such species.We have already seen that the absence of chaise does not necessarilyindicate wood burrowing habits, according to Mr. Shuckard's theory,neither does it indicate parasitic habits in these insects, according toSt. Fargeau's, as I have proved by observing the proceedings of P.petiolatus in the act of carrying its prey, which consisted of a largedead spider *; and of a species allied to P. petiolatus, which I capturedin the act of burrowing in the sand of the Drachenfels, although furnishedwith simple tarsi. (Westwood, in Ann. Soc. Ent. de France,1836, p. 300.)I have bore recently observed P. petiolatus in the act of forming its cell in thechinks of the walls of my residence at Hammersmith. It employs a particular kindof clayey soil, which it carefully selects for this purpose.HYMENOPTERA SCOLJID^E. 209Another species (P. fuscus), whose proceedings I observed atCoombe, is most persevering and undaunted in its endeavours tocarry its prey to its place of destination. This consisted of a largedead ant, v^^hich it endeavoured to drag up a perpendicular bank, andultimately succeeded after many falls. The armature of the fore andhind legs, as first noticed by Van der Linden ( Obs. Hym. Fouiss.vol. i. p. 35.), affords good characters for the division of this genusinto minor groups, and has been employed by Schiodte to separatethe Danish species into five genera (as indicated in my generic synopsis),including Ceropales fig. 83. 14. C. maculata ? ^fig- 83. 15. anteriortarsus ^, Jig. S3. 16. posterior tibia J ), which has perfectlysimple legs, and which St. Fargeau regards, with apparent justice, asaparasite, having often observed the females of this genus enterbackwards into the nests of some of the real fossorial species, whichhe considered a certain proof that their object was to deposit theirown eggs therein. (Enc. Methh. torn. x. p. 183.) In some unpublisheddrawings of Abbott, the Georgian entomologist, I have observed representationsof the attacks of a species of Pompilus upon a spider.Amongst the exotic genera of this family may especially be mentionedTrigonopsis Perty, distinguished by its very long collar andflat triangular head, from Brazil ; Prorsus Latr., having immensesickle-shaped mandibles ; and Planiceps Latr., having the collar longand square, and the head flat.The family Scoliid^* (including the Sapygides) is distinguishedby having the collar laterally extending to the base of the wingsBiBLioGR. Refer, to the Scoliidje.Latreille. Descr. n. sp. Tiphia, in Magas. Encyclopedia. torn. i. p. 25.Dufour. Recherch. Anatomists sur les Solids, in Nouv. Bull. Soc. Philos1818.Klug. Berechtigung von Scolia unci Tiphia, in Weber and Mohr's Beitrage zurNature, 1805-1810. — Ditto, in Ehrenberg. Symbb. Phys.De Roniaiid, in Ann. Soc. Ent. de France, 1835, p. 653. (Epomidiopteron ^.) —Ditto, in Trans. Entomol. Soc. London, vol. ii. — Ditto, ( (? ).Guerin. Prodrome Monogr. Myzine, Extr. Diet. Pittoresq. d'Hist. Nat. torn. v.p. 575. June 1837. — Ditto, Synods. Monogr. Plesia, in Revue Zoological,torn. i. p. 56. — Ditto, in Voy. de la Coquille.VOL. II. PMODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Fig. 84.fig. 84. 1. Tiphia femorata 5 , 2 — 6. details of ditto). The labrum(fig. 84. 2.) is scarcely exserted. The legs are short and robust, thetibiae being thick, spinose, or denticulated, the basal joint of the tarsibeing scarcely emarginate. The eyes are often lunate. The antennaeare generally short, thick, and more or less serrated and convolutedin the females. The abdomen is elongate-ovate, and attached by ashort peduncle. Both sexes are winged, and the females are furnishedwith ocelli, as well as the males. The males are generally narrowand elongated, with the abdomen terminated by three spines {^fig. 84.9.). The body is often very hirsute. Some of the species, whichare for the most part exotic, are of a very large size, but the habitsof the majority are unknown ; we may, however, judge from analogy,that the majority, on account of the structure of the legs of the females,burrow in sand.Latreille, in his later works, has divided this family into the Scopand Sapygides ; the former distinguished by the thick spinedlegs and short convoluted antennae ; and the latter by the slendernessof the legs and long straight antennae. Dr. Leach accordingly formedthem into the two families Scoliadae and Sapygidae. In his GeneraCrustaceorum, however, Latreille more naturally united them into onefamily. I have, therefore, considered them only as subfamilies.The relation of these insects with the Mutillidae is very close ; themales of the Mutillideous genus Methoca having been placed byLatreille in the subfamily Scoliides, under the name of Tengyra, andWestwood, in Proceed. Zool. Soc. 1835. (Meria, Anodontyra. )Fabricius, Rossi, Panzer, Saviffni/ Egypt), jBrwZZe (Morea),Per<^(Delectus Brasilia).Griffith (An. K.), Guerin and Percheron (Genera).HYMENOPTERA SCOLIID.^. 211the males of Myrmecodes in the subfamily Sapygides, under that ofThyrsus. Scotaena also has apterous females.* Mr. Curtis has suggesteda relation between Sapyga and some of the parasitic Andrenidse ;and Latreille has noticed the relation between that genus and the flat-wingedwasp genus Ceramius. It appears to me, however, that amuch nearer affinity exists between Tiphia, Meria, &c., and some ofthe Proctotrupidae, especially Epyris, Bethylus, Sec. Dr. King's genusPristocera (Bethylus depressus Fab.) is especially interesting in respectto this affinity.The typical genus Scolia F. is distinguished by the labium beingcomposed of three linear divisions {Jiff' 84-. 8. front of head of Scolia). Itis of great extent, and comprises many very large species, inhabitingthe hottest regions of the globe. M. L. Dufour, who has published anelaborate anatomical essay upon the largest European species, S. hors(Journal de Physique, September, 1818), states that they aboundin the very hottest situations, and that they are particularly fondof revelling in strong-scented flowers, such as rue, &c. A correspondentof the Entomological magazine (vol. iii. p. 463.) states that Scolia2-cincta Fab. makes its burrows in sand-banks, to the depth ofeighteen inches, with a very wide mouth ; in digging into one whicha female had entered, he found a large locust, L. lincoln, which isprobably its prey. It flies without any hum : the male is taken singlyon flowers; but the males of S. interrupt and 4<-punctata, which areextremely sluggish, are found crowding on the ears of grass near thesea-side, in societies of twenty or thirty, where they pass the night, andmake no attempt to escape. The males of S. 6-cincta (?) are foundin similar localities; but the male of another species was solitary, andgenerally found on the flowers of the bramble, and was tolerablyactive. The males have the extremity of the abdomen tridentatefig. 84. 9.).The species of this and the allied genera have been investigatedby Dr. Klug, in Weber and Mohr's Beitrage, above referred to. Accordingto St. Fargeau {Enc. Mtth. torn, x.), the females of Tiphiafig. 84. 1. T. femorata J ; fig. 84. 2. labrum ; fig. 84. 3. mandible ;The females of the genus Myzine Latr. have not yet been discovered ; but fromanalogy with Tengyra, I have little hesitation in considering that they are apterous,as suggested by Van der Linden and Guerin, the former considering it probable thatthe Mutilla diadems Fah. may be the female of Myzine cylindrica. Plesia,which has been regarded as the female of Myzine, is more nearly related toTiphia.p 2212 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Jig, 84. 4. maxilla ; 84-. 5. labium ; 84. 6. antenna $ ), which is the onlygenus of the first subfamily found in this country, make perpendicularburrows in sandy situations, for the reception of their eggs ; but theprecise food stored up for the larvas has not been observed. Theveins of the wings of this genus do not extend to the extremity of thewings ; they also vary in the sexes, the marginal cell being closed atthe extremity in the males, but open in the females, which are furtherdistinguished by having the extremity of the wing notched (as is alsothe case in Meria ;j^^. 84. 7. represents the extremity of the wing ofthe male of Tiphia).Sapyga Latr., the typical genus of the second subfamily, is distinguishedby the long and more or less clavate antennae (^Jig.SA-. 12.antenna, 84. 10. mandible, of S. 5-punctata). The perfect insectsare found, in the hottest part of the summer, flying over walls, palings,&c. ; but their economy has been the subject of various opinions.Thus St. Fargeau remarks (^Enc. Mt'th. tom. x. p. 338.), that the females[which are destitute of cilite to the fore legs] make burrows inthe mortar of walls, or in wood, in which they deposit their eggs,with a supply of food ; adding, that he had taken S. punctata carryingan insect, which it let fall the moment it was seized, and whichSt. Fargeau observed was a larva. Latreille, however, suspects thatthe species are parasitic upon some of the bees, which build in oldwood ; and Mr. Shuckard states that he had caught S. punctata enteringinto the cells of Osmia bicornis in a sandy lane at Bexley. Mr.Bakewell also had observed it thrusting its abdomen into the nests ofOsmia cserulescens, as quoted by Mr. Shuckard (TVaw^. Ent. Soc.vol. i. p. 58.). My own observations (ibid. p. 202.) also seem to provethat it is parasitic. Ilobineau Desvoidey has, however, proved thisfact, having found the cocoons of S. punctata in the cells of Osmiahelicicola R, D. (so named from making its cells in empty snail-shells); in which situation he observed the metamorphoses of theSapyga, without, however, having detected the female in her operations.He also observed S. Chelostomae enter the cells formed andprovisioned by Chelostoma. My Jig. 84. il. represents the labrum ofthis species, extracted from a specimen just killed ; the ligula and itssaragossa? (which are not represented in Mr, Curtis's figure, evidentlydrawn from a dried specimen) being long and exserted. I have alsoobserved the eggs of S. punctata, which are of a large size, being a linelong, and of an elongated oval form, slightly thickened towards oneextremity.HYMENOPTERA MUTILLID^. 213The family MuTiLLiDiE*, corresponding with the Linnaean genusMutilla fig. 84. 13, Mutilla Europeans , 14. ditto 5 , 15 — 18. detailsof a large Mexican species, 5 ), is composed of insects which are solitaryin their habits, and of which there are only males and females ,the latter of which are destitute of wings, Month the segments of thethorax often soldered together ; this sex is also destitute of ocelli,but they are provided with a powerful sting. The antennae are filiform,or setaceous, the first and third joints being elongated ; thefirst, however, is not equal to the one third of the entire length ofthese organs : the labrum is transverse and ciliated fig. 84. 15.); themandibles more or less notched fig. 84. 16.) ; the maxillary palpi withthe basal joint very small fig. 84. 17.), the ligula not produced, andthe labial palpi with the third joint more or less dilated fig. 84. 18.).The body is often very much clothed with hair.:j; The legs of the femalesare very robust, with the bite and tarsi spined and ciliated,as in the other true Fossores. The sexes of the same species oftenvary very considerably in colour. They are generally found in hotsandy situations, the majority being exotic, very few occurring in ourown country. The females run with very great quickness, secretingBiBLioGR. Refer, to the Mutilate.Latreille. Antilles recoveries en France, Actes Soe. Hist. Nat. Paris, torn. i. 1792.Ditto, Descr. 2 n. sp. Mutillae, Journal d'Hist. Nat. torn. ii.Klug, in Nova Acta Css. Nat. Curios, vol. x. p. 2. (Brazilian Mutilla?.) — Ditto,in Entomology. Monographien. — Ditto, in Elirenb. Symbols; Physics.Swederus, in Stockholm Trans. 1787. (Sp. of Mutilla described.)Van der Linden, Note on Tengyra and Methoca, in Ann. Sc. Nat. torn. xvi. 1829.Guerin, in Voyage de la Coquille. — Ditto, in Mag. Zool. Ins. No, 6. (MutillaSenegalensis.)Waltll. Reise nach Spanien (n. sp. Mutilate descry. by Klug.)Say, in Journal of Nat. Hist. Soc. of Boston, vol. i.Olivier, in Encycl. Methh. torn. iii.Westwood, in Proceed. Zool. Soc. 18S5. (Diana, TrigonalySj Dorylus orientalis.)Shuckard, in Trans. Entomol. Soc. vol. ii.Fdbricius, Perty (Delectus Brasil), Coqiiehert, Panzer, Rossi, Spinola, Bull(Morea), i?02so?MyaZ (Voy. Astrolabe), Donovan (Ins. New Hold).+ Mr. Kirby speaks of neuter Mutillaj (Introdd. to Entomol,), but evidently incorrectly,as the species, being solitary, are not provided with workers, or neuters, as theyare termed.\ This is a curious peculiarity, considering, at the same time, that the insectsfrequent the hottest localities.P 3214< MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.themselves, on the approach of danger, amongst grass, and understones ; they are always found on the ground, but the males occasionallyfrequent flowers.Little has been observed with precision with respect to the habitsof these insects ; but it cannot be doubted, from the structure o ftheir legs, and the situations in which they are found, that they closelyresemble those of the other sand-wasps. I have, indeed, dug thefemale of Mutilla Europe out of sand-banks*, and have constantlytaken M. rufipes $ on the sand, but have never observed either in theact of burrowing. Christius, indeed, states that the former is gregarious,nidificating in company with Bombus terrestrial. I have noticedthat when alarmed it makes a rather sharp noise, most probablyby the action of the large collar against the front of themesothorax. M. Goureau has also noticed the same circumstance inboth females and males, and attributes it to the friction of the base ofthe third segment of the abdomen within the preceding joint. (Ami.Soc. Ent. de France, 1837, p. 66.)The males of the typical genus are furnished with a minute spineon each side of the anus, and the eyes are reniform ; in both whichrespects the genus nearly approaches Scolia ; indeed, the relationbetween these two families is, in several respects, extremely close.From information given by Mr. MacLeay to Mr. Kirby, it appearsthat a large North American species (Mutilla coccinea) is very active,taking flies by surprise, probably for the purpose of storing its cells.Its sting is so powerful, that a person stung by one lost his senses infive minutes, and was subsequently so ill that his life was despairedof.The females of the genus Methoca are also apterous ; but the thoraxis constricted into three knots {Jig- 84. 19. M. ichneumonides),thus resembling Gonatopus and some of the ants. I have observedthat, when captured, it endeavours to roll itself into a ball, by bendingthe head and tail beneath the breast. They are found in hot sandysituations, over which the male takes its flight. This sex is quite unlikethe female, with a long slender abdomen, continuous thorax, andlong antennae {EnLText.B. pi. 3. f. 5.), and was considered by Latreilleas a distinct genus, Tengyra, which was arranged amongst the Scoliidaj.Mr. Pickering has also dug M. Europe ^ out of sand banks, and observedthe wings of flies amongst the sand, whence it is evident that it was upon the latterinsects that the former had subsisted.HYMENOPTERA — MUTILLIDiE. 215M. Van der Linden, however, ascertained that these genera were butthe sexes of the same species (Ann. Sci. Nat. Jan. 1829, and Bull.Fencssac, April 1830) ; and Dr. Burmeister has captured the male onthe wing, carrying the female during flight. (Manual, transl. p. 327.)Mr. R. H. Lewis has also sent me specimens of a male Thyrsusvariables and female Myrmecoda, from Van Diemen's Land, capturedby himself era copula, thus confirming the relations of these two supposedgenera. Klug also mentions the same fact in the Ahhandl. derAkad. der Wessensch. 1831, p. 307. The same occurs also in thegenus Scotsmen Klug, of which males only have been described ; theinsect figured by Perty {^Delectus Ati. art. Bras. tab. xxvii. f. founderthe name of Myrmecoda varia, being a female of the lattergenus. Mr. Shuckard also considers that the insect which he hasdescribed in the Trans. Entomol. Soc. (vol. ii. pi. 8. f. 1.) under thename of Psamatha chalybeate, may be the male of my genusDiana.The exotic genus Apterogyna Dalm. is remarkable for the greatlength of the antennae in the males, and for the curiously constrictedabdomen in both sexes (fig 84-. 21.); the veins of the wings are carriednearly to the base of the wing (^^.84. 20.). (See Dalman,Anal. Exit. ; Klug, in Ehrenberg's Sym. Physical ; and Griffith, An.Kingd., Ins. pi. 76. f. 5.) Psammotherma Latr. is distinguished by thestrongly bipectinated antennae of the males. I am indebted to Dr.Klug for a species of this genus from southern Africa, and have seena second species in the Berlin Museum. With the exception of aspecies of Pompilus, in the same museum, I know no other AculeateHymenopterous insect which exhibits this structure.The genus Scleroderma Klug, placed by Latreille in this family,appears to me to belong to the Proctotrupidse, as I have endeavouredto prove in a monograph upon the genus, published in the 2d volumeof the Trans. Entomol. Soc.I may here mention another anomalous genus, which I have describedunder the name of Originals, having somewhat of the aspectof a male Mutilla, but with the head flattened and the antennae longer,very slender at the tips, and composed of 23 or 24 joints, very likethose of Lyda ; the legs are simple, and the abdomen punctured.The veins of the wings are nearly as in Hermosa and Mutilla europeS . The type, T. melanoleuca, is from Brazil.Latreille also introduces into this family the singular genera 4216 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.rylus Fab. and Lepidus Jur., consisting of insects of which malesonly have yet been observed, but differing from the remainder of thefamily in the antennae being inserted close to the mouth, the headsmall, and the abdomen long and nearly cylindric. Saint Fargeauappears to regard them as more nearly related to the ants.* (hist.Nat. Hym. p. 225.) The basal segment forms a strong knot. Themaxilla and labium, undescribed by Latreille and St. Fargeau, areextremely minute. Mr. Purcell has informed me that the Africanspecies of Dorylus is nocturnal in its habits.The second division f of the predatory Aculeata corresponds withthe genus Formica of Linnaeus, and the Heterogyna of St. Fargeau ;Such also is the opinion of Mr. Kirby. (^Monogr. Apud Anglia, vol. i. p. 224.)f BiBLioGR. Refer, to the Formicid^.Latreille. Essai sur I'Hist. des Fourmis de Frances 1 fasc. 1 imo. Drives, An.6. (1798.) — Ditto, Observ. sur la Fourmi fongueuse Fahr., in Bull. Soc.Philomel. torn. ii. 1799. — Ditto, Hist. Nat. des Fourmis, 8vo. Paris, An. 10.(1802.) — Ditto, Desert. d'une Nouv. Esp. de Fourmi, Bull. Soc. Philomat.tom. iii. (F. coarctata.) — Ditto, on Insects living in society, in Mem. duMuseum, tom. iii. — Ditto, in Humboldt's Work on South America. (F.belli cosa, with details, pi. 36.)Leach. Descriptions of 13 sp. Homicidal, Zool. Journal, vol. ii.Huher (P.). Recherches sur les Moeurs des Fourmis indigenes, 1 vol. 8vo. Paris,1810. (English Translation, 8vo. London, 1820.)Bose. Rapport sur Ouvrage de Huber, 8vo. Paris, 1813.Losana. i Saggio sopra le Formiche indigene de Piedmont, in Mem. Acad. RoyalSc. Turin, tom. xxxvii. 1834; and in Guerin, Bulletin Zool. p. 50.Lund, in Annales Sci. Nat. June, 1831. (Habits of Brazilian Ants.)Sykes, in Trans. Ent. Soc. vol. i. (Habits of Indian Ants.)Bluff, in Entomol. Monogr. (10 sp. Cryptocerus. )Carry and Soninere. Gesch. der Arisen. (Nature. Very. Amsterdam, 1 Til. )Needham. Obs. Hist. Nat. cela Fourmi, Mem. Acad. Bruxelles, tom. ii.Locker. Biographia Myrmecologise Medical, in Ephem. Nat. Curios. Dec. 11.An. 8.1 The first part only of this memoir, containing the Piedmontese ants (27 innumber, 6 being nev), described after the neuters alone, is here published. Theauthor proposed to publish a more extended memoir ; but his recent death will, inall probability, prevent this intention from being realised. I may here mention,that M. Brulle proposes to publish a monograph upon this family.Hymenoptera — FORMICID^. 217but, as Latreille, who proposed the latter name, also introduced theMutillidae into the group, I have thought it more correct to give it adistinct name, Scales (or Philopona K.), founded upon the circumstance,not only that the insects are social in their habits, but also becausethe larvae are not enclosed in separate hexagonal cells as in thewasps and typical bees.The single family, FoRMiciDiE, is composed of the well known andsingularly interesting tribes of ants (which must not however be confoundedwith the Termitidae or white ants), and which are distinguishedby their habit of residing in more or less numerous societies underground; whence arises the necessity for a great number of individualshaving the sexual organs and instincts rendered abortive, whereby, beingfreed from the latter, they are the better fitted to perform thelabours of the community, for which purpose they are moreover destituteof wings ; whilst the males and females are much less numerous,possessing wings, and being produced only for the propagation of theirspecies.The males have the body small, with the antennae and legs long andslender fig. 85.* i. F. fusca $ 2 — 5. details of this sex) ; the females,on the other hand, far exceed their partners in size, with the antennaeand legs shorter and thicker fig. 85. 6. F. fusca 5 7 — 10. details ofthis sex). Both these kinds of individuals are furnished with wingsGould. Account of English Ants. 12mo. London, 1747.Wilde. De Formica. Rome, 1612. pp. 100.King. Observations concerning Emmet or Ants, their Eggs, &c. (Philos. Trans.1767.)Dorthes. Notice sur un phenomena occas. par une Espece de Fourmi, Journal dePhysique, torn, xxxvii.Hansard. On the Combats of Ants, in Zeitschrift de Easier Hoehschule, 1825,and, in Bulletin de Ferussac, May, 1826.Hardwicke. Observations on the Loves of the Ants and Aphides. Zool. Journal,vol. iv.Boston, in Trans. Ent. Soc. vol. ii. p. 65. (Myrmica domestica Slip.)Shuckard, in Mag. Nat. Hist. Nov. 1838. (n.sp. Myrmicae.)Grander. Cat. Bibl. Banks, (Ants, Emmet, Formulae. )Fahricius, Jurine, liossi, Spinola, Saint Fargeau. (Hist. Nat. Hymen.)In the various figures upon this block (85.), I hg^ve given a comparativerepresentation of the different organs, particularly of the trophi, of the three kindsof individuals of which each species is composed. No similar comparative detailshave been given by previous authors. The individuals figured were from the samenest.MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.and ocelli, and the thorax is continuous, i.e., not exhibiting any contractionin the middle; the workers or neuters are somewhat smallerthan the males, with antennae resembling those of the females, beingthickened to the tips ; but they are destitute of ocelli : the thorax ismore or less contracted in the middle (^^. 85. 11. F. fusca ? — 12 — 17.details of this kind of individual).The head, including the mandibles, is more or less triangular,broader behind than the thorax in the neuters, but somewhat narrowerin the males and females ; the antennae have the basal jointgreatly elongated, sometimes equalling half the length of the antennas,these organs being strongly elbowed at the extremity of this joint ;they are very slender, and 13-jointed, in the males (^fig- 86. 12.). Theeyes are lateral*, not reaching to the posterior margin of the head,and rounded ; the ocelli are more distinct and larger in the malesthan in the females ; the mouth occupies a semi-oval incision on thefront of the under side of the head fig. 85. 12.); the labrum of theLatreille has described a minute species (which I was the first to discover as anindigenous insect), Ponera contracta, the neuters of which are to all appearanceentirely destitute of eyes ; Latreille having examined many specimens, both dead andalive, without being able to discover these organs ; only twice, with a strong lens, hefancied he saw a darker coloured spot in the place of the eyes. It is found understones, and at the roots of plants ; its little assembly not consisting of more than sixor seven individuals, being incapable of undertaking those measures which its moregifted brethren perform. (Man. Fourm. p. 43. 197. 270.) Jennie mentions someparticulars respecting this species bisect Miscell. t^. US.) ; Latreille also describedanother blind species from South America, having a large head, with two knots inthe abdominal peduncle. My Jig. 86. represents another species (Typhloponefulva <j> JFesticood), in which I cannot detect the slightest vestige of an eye. Itwas found dead in sugar, by C. C. Barrington, M. A., &c. : another blind species wasobserved by Lund, in Brazil, which he thence named Myrmica typhus.HYMENOPTERA — FORMICIDiE. 219neuters is horny, strongly emarginate, and introduced perpendicularlybetween the mandibles (fig. 85. 13.) ; the mandibles are horny, large?and powerful, varying in the sexes as well as in the different species :in many they are somewhat spoon-shaped, but obliquely truncate atthe tip, and multidentate. Such is their character in the females{.fid' 85. 7.) and neuters (^fig- 85. 14.) of F. fusca; but in the malesof this species they are not toothed, but produced into a terminalpoint (fig. 85. 2.). In some males, however, they are also toothed,as in the other sex fig. 86. 13. and. of Stenamma [}¥.) Westwood(^Steph. Cat.) ; whilst in the neuters of Typhlopone fulva W. they aresomewhat sickle-shaped and serrated on the inner edge fig. 86. 18.).In the neuters of others they are very long, linear, and deflexed at thetip.* In Myrmecina, they are said by Curtis to be wanting in themales. The maxillae are coriaceous, small, and terminated by a broad,rounded, thin lobe, which defends the sides of the labium ; the maxillarypalpi vary in the number of their joints from six to two. InMyrmica and Formica they are 6-jointed and of considerable length,scarcely varying in the sexes fig. 85. 3. max. ^ , 85. 8. max. 5 , 85. 15.max. ? F. fusca). In Atta and Cryptocerus they are scarcely aslong as the maxillae, and 5-jointed hist. N. Fourm. p. 33.). In Po-fergusand Ponera there are five or four joints, and in Myrmecina Latreilleiand Stenamma Westwoodiiii, four fig. 86. 14.). In Pheidoleprovides West. (Atta p. Sykes, Trans. Ent. Soc. vol. i. pi. 13. f. 5.),and Typhlopone fulva W. fig. 86. 19.), I have only been able todetect two joints in the maxillary palpi. The mentum is small,corneous, and cup-shaped ; the labium membranous and rounded, butoften, especially in dried specimens, it shrinks into the mentum. Inthe three kinds of individuals of F. fusca fig. 85. 4. labium ^ ,85. 9. ? , 85. 16. <p ), there is no material difference in these parts,nor in the labial palpi, which in that genus are 4-jointed : in Polyergusrufescens, Myrmecina Latreillei, and Stenamma Westwoodiiii, they are3-jointed fig. 86. 15.) ; whilst in Atta cephalotes, Pheidole provides,From the Important share which these organs take in performing tie duties ofthe individuals, especially of the neuters, it is evident that their various formsimply a diversity of habits with which we are, however, importunately, in manyeases ignorant : thus, in Polyergus, which does not labour, but compels the specieswhich it has made its slaves to perform its work, the mandibles are slender anddestitute of teeth ; and Latreille mentions two kinds of neuters in Eciton hamata,with different shaped mandibles, adding — " forte horus neutrorura officia pariterdiversa." gen. Crust. Sc. vol. iv. p. 129.)220 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.and Typhlopone fulva W., they are only 2-jointed (Jiff' 86. goethethorax is very variable in its shape, especially in the neuters ; itscomposition differs also according to the presence or absence ofwings ; in the winged individuals the collar is large {Jiff. 85.* lo. J ,h the head, t 1 collar), the mesothoracic scutum (t 2) and its scutellum(t 3) distinct from each other; the meta thoracic praescutum(t 4) and its scutellum (e) also distinct, the collar and the metathoraxexhibiting a spiracle on each side. In the neuters, however (Jiff. 85.17.), the composition of the thorax is quite simple, consisting of thethree segments quite distinct from each other, and each provided witha spiracle on each side.The abdomen of the males is composed of seven segments, butinthe females and neuters of only six ; the first, and in some generaalso the second (as in Jiff. 86. 16.), forms a lenticular scale or knot,varying in form, and serving as a peduncle to the abdomen. Some ofthese species, especially those which have only a single scale, aredestitute of a stings, and in such case the abdomen is larger in thefemales than in those species which are armed with that instrument,which exists invariably in those species which have the peduncleformed of two knots. The males of the former species have the abdomenmore trigonate, whilst in the latter it scarcely differs in formfrom that of the females. The external sexual organs of the males ofFormica fusca are represented in Jiff. 85. 5. The wings are of largesize, and of a delicate texture ; they exist only in the males and females; they are furnished with much fewer cells than in the wasps,&c., and the veins of the wings are often irregular: thus, in the wingof Myrmica (Jiff. 86.10.), a vein will be perceived to terminate abruptlyin the middle of the first submarginal cell. The legs are of moderateor considerable length ; they are generally simple, unfurnished withfossorial cilia, with the tarsi 5-jointed.In figures 85. 10. & 17. the prothorax and metathorax are dotted, to distinguishthem from the mesothorax. A comparative examination of these two figures withthose given in previous pages of the composition of the thorax of other Hymenopterawith, I think, most satisfactorily prove that the hind part of the thorax is not,as asserted by Audouin and Latreille, the anterior segments of the abdomen solderedto the real thorax.f Those species which are destitute of a sting are provided with glands placednear the anus, which secrete and discharge a peculiar fluid, which has been termedformic acid, the composition of which, according to Berzelius, is as follows : —hydrogen, 2-84; carbon, 32-40; oxygen, 64-76= 100.See also Blot, in Mt'm. Soc, Linn, Calvados, vol. i. ; and Zool, Journ. No. 4.HYMENOPTERA FORMICID^. 221These insects have attracted the attention oi' the observers ofNature from the earliest time ; and their untiring exertions for the welfareof the community, their devotion to the young, and their carefulnessin the collection and storing up of various materials, have ledto their being regarded as examples of surprising instinctive foresight :thus Virgil says —parum genus est, patience laborsQuEEsitique tenax et quod quality reserve."Solomon, however, more explicitly informs us of the reason for thissolicitous accumulation; teaching at the same time a profound morallesson : " Go to the ant, thou sluggard, consider her ways, and bewise ; which having no guide, overseer, or ruler, provided her meatin the summer and gathered her food in the harvest"* (Proverbs vi.6, 7, 8.). By various commentators and naturalists, however, whoconsidered this passage with reference only to the proceedings of ournorthern species of ants, (the males and females of which perish towardsthe end of the autumn, and the neuters remain in a torpidstate through the winter,) it has been contended that there were noreal grounds for considering that these insects do lay up food forconsumption during the winter (the supposed grains of corn havingbeen shown by Gould to be the grain-like cocoons of the insect);whilst others have endeavoured to reconcile the statement with thehabits of our indigenous species : thus Kirby and Spence (^Introd.vol. ii. p. 47.) contend that the words do not imply a storing up offood for future use, but merely that the ant gathers the food mostsuited for its use during the most plentiful season. Latreille, on theother hand, considers that this foresight has for its object the augmentationand defence of the nest against the storms of winter, thestores consisting merely of building materials, and not of food.I would, however, adopt, in preference to either of these views,that previously given by the former authors ; namely, that the observationcan only apply to the species of a warm climate, the habits ofwhich are probably different from those of a cold one. St. Fargeau,indeed, states that in mild winters he had seen ants at large in everymonth ; and Colonel Sykes, in his history of Pheidole provides W.This ancient opinion was supposed to be confirmed by the instinct assertedto be possessed by the insects of preventing the grain stored up from vegetating,by depriving it of its corculum ; but more careful observers discovered thatthe gnawing open of one end of the grain-like cocoon had been mistaken for theformer operation.222 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.trans. Ent. Soc. vol. i. p. 103., Atta p. S.), has clearly proved thatthis Indian species collects so large a store of grass seeds as to lastfrom January and February, the time of their ripening, till October ;having observed, on the 13th of the latter month, these insects engagedin bringing up their stores of seed to dry it after the closingthunderstorms* of the monsoon; and M. Lund observes, that thespecies of ants in Brazil, instead of disappearing during the threemonths of winter, appear rather to augment in their numbers in consequenceof the great migrations which take place during thosemonths. Dolichoderus attelaboides Z., however, which subsists uponthe saccharine fluid secreted by the Cercopidae, retires to its nestsduring those months, evidently' in consequence of there being none ofthe last-named insects during that season from which it might obtaina supply of food.There are many peculiarities in the history and development ofthese insects, which require a more careful investigation than hashitherto been given to them. Our countryman Gould, and theSwiss naturalist Huber, have indeed made us acquainted withmany of the secrets of the formulary, to which I can but veryslightly allude. The nests are generally made underground, butthey differ considerably as to their construction : some species(F. fusca, &c.) merely remove the particles of earthy thereby forminglarge chambers and tunnels, to which our railway-tunnels offer butapoor comparison; others (F. rufa, &'C.) collect great quantities ofmaterials, consisting of bits of straws, sticks, &c., heaped up into aconical mass, well known under the name of ant hills, the interior ofwhich, notwithstanding its rough outside, exhibits an admirable arrangement: others, again, construct them of earth, similarly elevated,many of the cells being above, and others below, the surface of theearth: others, again (F. fuliginosa), construct them in the trunks ofold trees, which they gnaw into numberless stories ; and othersuse sawdust in forming their buildings, stiffening it into a kind ofpapier mace. F. flava (Formica spinosa Oliv. fungus Fab), aninhabitant of Cayenne, constructs its nests of the cottony matterenclosed in the capsules of Bombay, forming it into a spongy mass(Latr., Hist. Nat. Fourm. p. 134.; Lescalier, Table. Cayenne p. 151.),very serviceable as amadou, or as a material for stopping the mostIt may, however, be observed, first, that a very large quantity of grain remainedafter the season of dearth was over (leading to the supposition that it had not beenemployed for food) ; and, second, that the known nutriment of ants consists of animaland vegetable ^Mic/»-, and not of grain.HYMENOPTERA Homicide. 223violent discharges of blood. M. Lund has described a species ofFormica (F. merdicola L.), which constructs its nest upon the stemsof reeds at some distance from the ground, or upon the spiny trunksof some kind of palm trees, using in its construction the dried excrementof horses and mules. Colonel Sykes also describes a species(Myrmica Kirbii *S'., Trans. Ent. Soc. vol. i.), which attaches its nestto the branches of trees and shrubs, composed of a multitude of thinfolia of crowding imbricated like the tiles upon a house, the upperfolium covering the whole upper part like a skull-cap. The neutersthrow the abdomen over the back, or, when alarmed, carry it in anupward situation : such is also the case with Formica elate Lund,which builds its nests on the trunks of trees, of earth mixed withleaves. Six and Martins (Reise, vol. iii. p. 1283.) mention a speciesof ant which forms its nest of minute hairs of the leaves of one of themelastomaceous trees ; and also that F. molesting Latr. (nana D. G.)makes a small globose nest of very minute hairs of plants in the oblongvesicles of Marietta, and in the inflated petiole of Tococa.A green ant, which inhabits New South Wales, was observed inCaptain Cook's voyage, which form their nests sometimes as largeas a man s head, in trees, by bending down the leaves and gluing thetips together (Hawkesworth, Account of Cook's First Voyage) ; and inthe Saturday Magazine (No. 330. Aug. 26. 1837.), in an anonymousaccount of the habits of the ants of New South Wales, it is statedthat a very small ant in the Bingo Forest builds nests of induratedclay, eight or ten feet high, whilst the large red and black ants (evidentlyspecies of Myrmecia Fab.) reside in nests scarcely raisedabove the surface of the ground. They are able, however, to bite andsting with great violence.Throughout the greater portion of the year the community consistsonly of neuters, but during the summer the males and females areproduced in considerable numbers : these are detained prisoners in thenest for a certain time, until a favourable day, or more commonly awarm still afternoon, when they make their escape, and take flight ingreat swarms, flying into the air, where the union of the sexes takesplace : soon after this the males perish, but the females, descending tothe earths immediately tear off their own wings and commence theestablishment of a new colony, or are seized and forcibly detained bythe neuters for the maintenance of the old habitation. They thencommence laying their eggs, which are very minute (but increase insize previous to the bursting forth of the larva) ; and, according to224< MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Gould (p. 35.), those which are destined for the necessary supply offuture females, males, and neuters, are deposited at three differentperiods. We are ignorant, however, of the peculiar circumstances bywhich the abortiveness of the neuters is effected. In the hive beethis is known to be produced by the female larvae being fed with aless nourishing kind of diet than that which is given to the larvaewhich are to produce fruitful females or queens ; but the differenceswhich exist between the female and neuter ant are far more strikingthan those between the queen and worker bees. In the ants, forinstance, not only are the organs of sex obliterated in the workers, butthey have a thorax of a totally different form from that of the females,and are moreover destitute of wings ; the period when this loss of thewings and modification in the form of the thorax takes place, is probablysimultaneous with that when the sexual organs are renderedabortive ; but the circumstances connected therewith, although ofgreat physiological interest, have not been yet observed. Anotherpeculiarity also exists ; namely, that certain individuals, few in number,amongst the neuters, are of a larger size, and furnished with muchlarger heads than the ordinary workers.* These individuals werefirst observed by Gould, and subsequently by Latreille ; and theyappeared to the former to be equally employed in the labours ofthe nest with the ordinary workers, although Huber could not ascertaintheir office in the nests of F. rufescens. According to M. Dela Cordage, these specimens (at least in a South American speciesallied to Atta cephalotes) appeared to be employed as defenders ofthe nests, and in capturing in their excursions. I have already alsoalluded to the existence of two kinds of workers belonging to theEciton hamata ; and Latreille has noticed other species in whichhe has found this " variety constante," especially in F. stricter, thedifference in size between the two kinds of neuters of the latter beingso great that they would be mistaken for different species. We are,however, indebted to M. Lund for a more precise notice of the employmentof these few large-headed neuters in a Brazilian species ofMyrmica. Having observed a column of ordinary neuters issuingfrom an aperture in the ground, each loaded with food, he perceivedthat the aperture was guarded by four of these large-headed individuals,a few of which were also noticed in the column, but notA similar circumstance also occurs amongst the neuters of the hive bees. Huberhas named the smaller individuals " abeilles nourrices," and the larger ones, whichsecrete wax, "abeilles cirieres."Hymenoptera — FORMICIDiE. 225taking any part in the transport of the food : on disturbing the routeand killing some of the ants, these individuals hastened to the spot,alarming the others, but gave themselves no concern with their deadcompanions : vi^hen order was restored, the aperture was observed tobe guarded by nine of these individuals.*Independent of the difference of habits in these two kinds of neuters,and of the modifications in their structure according therewith, theirdevelopment is especially interesting as connected with that of theordinary neuters. We can, it is true, as yet only employ analogy inconsidering the subject ; but as we know that the neuter bee is producedfrom ordinary female eggs, the loss of certain characteristicstaking place during its development, which the worker bees have thepower to prevent, and to restore the larva, which had been destined foran imperfect female (or neuter), to its original normal character, — sointhe ant, we may consider not only that the neuter is a modifiedfemale, but further, that the inhabitants of the nest have the instinct soto modify the circumstances producing this state of imperfection, thatsome neuters shall exhibit characters at variance with those of thecommon kind. It is in the consideration that such a power is possessedby the inhabitants, of thus modifying the larvae produced fromfemale eggs into three different kinds of individuals, that I find a confirmationof the opinion which I expressed in a preceding page, relativeto the development of the different kinds of individuals composingthe community of the white ants.The transformations of Myrmica rubra have been carefully tracedby Swammerdam (book of Nature, pi. 16.); De Geer has also givenvery ample details and figures of the various states of differentspecies of Formica and Myrmica, especially of F. rufa and M. rubra.(iKfem. torn. ii. pi. 41 — 43.) The larvae have the appearance of smallwhite grubs or worms, destitute of feet; they are short, thick, andsomewhat conical, being narrowest towards the head, which is bentM. Wesmacl has just forwarded to mc his notice of a singular Mexican ant,(Myrmecocystus Mexicans;, in which the neuters exhibit two still more remarkablemodifications of form, some being of the ordinary form of neuter Formica;, whilstin the others the abdomen is swollen into an immense sub diaphanous sphere, producedby the distension of the membrane connecting the abdominal segments. Accordingto the notes of the discoverer of this species, and the observations of M. Wesmaelin support thereof, the latter individuals do not quit the nest, are almost inactive,and are occupied only in elaborating a kind of hone', which they subsequently dischargeinto cells analogous to those of the hive. bull, Acad, Rois. Brummell. tom. v.p. 771.)VOL. II. QMODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Fig. 86.down upon the breast {fig- 86. i. larva of F. rufa seen sideways;2. ditto magnified, seen from beneath, after Ratzebm-g). The bodyis composed of the head and twelve segments. The head fig' 86.3.) is furnished with two small horny hook-like pieces, which, althoughevidently the analogues of the mandibles, are too wide apart to beused as such; below these are four small points or bristles, twoon each side, and a sub cylindrical, soft, fleshy lobe, which is retractile,and by the assistance of which the larva receives its food from theworkers, consisting of a nutritious fluid which they have previouslyelaborated in their stomach, and subsequently disgorged. Honeydew, and other saccharine fluids collected from different vegetables,probably form its chief base. De Geer, however, records the circumstance,that he had observed the neuters destroy and devour theyoung larvae which they had previously guarded with such greattenderness. Possibly their instinct might have inspired them withdespair of ever rearing these unfortunate larvae. A peculiar duty ofthe neuters consists in removing these larvae and the pupae, from timeto time, to various parts of the nest, where a proper degree of temperatureexists. Latreille has even observed that the neuters ofMyrmica Cfespitum keep the larvae and pupae separate. Dr. F. T.C. Ratzeburg has made the segmental development of these insectsthe subject of an elaborate memoir, to which I have already alluded(in p. 79.), his chief object being to prove that the head of the pupais composed of the head and first segment of the larva (the eyes ofthe pupa being visible through the skin of the hind part of such firstsegment of the larva), and that the fifth segment of the body of thelarva (exclusive of the head) becomes the peduncle of the pupa ; themeta thoracic prsescutum {fig- 85. lo. t. 4.) and the meta thoracic scutellum(85. lO. e) respectively occupying a separate segment of theHYMENOPTERA — FORMICID^. 227body of the larva. My figures 86. 4, and 5. are copied from Dr.Ratzeburg's memoir, and represent the larva at different stages, butnear to the period of assuming the pupa state. In fig. 86. 4. the eye willbe seen at the back of the first segment (b) of the body ; the antennae(ant.) occupying part of this segment, but extending into the head(a) ; the fore wings (w. i.) will be observed in the second segment ofthe body (c) : the hind wings on the third segment (d) ; whilst thefourth and fifth segments (e and f ) will be seen to be considerablyconstricted. In fig. 86. 5. the head (h), antennae (ant), and eyes ofthe pupa, are seen to be entirely withdrawn from the head of the larva,and to occupy the first segment ; and as the peduncle is still moredecidedly seen to occupy the fifth segment (f), it follows that thecollar (t. 1.), mesothoracic scutum (t. 2.), and scutellum (t. 3.), andthe meta thoracic praescutum (t. 4.), and scutellum (e), must be thethree intermediate segments. Without intending to express anydoubt as to the correctness of Dr. Ratzeburg's actual observations, 1cannot admit the theory by which he endeavours to account for theappearances he has described. As already noticed, in p. 79., thenecessarily increased size of the head of the imago*, requisite for thesupport of organs to be employed by an insect in searching for its ownfood (whereas in the larva state there was no need of highly developedtrophi, the insect being fed by others, and that merely witha thickened liquid), together, also, with the equally necessarily increasedsize of the mesothorax requisite for the support of the largepair of fore wings, and the consequent decrease in size of the prothoraxand its collar, must equally necessitate a diversity of size in thesegments of the pupa (although still invested in the larva skin) ; hencewe find the head so much increased in size, that it is pushed back soas also to occupy the first segment of the larva ; the prothorax (t. i.), onthe other hand, is so reduced in size, that it cannot be said to occupy asegment of itself; so that we may either consider it as forming part ofthe first segment with the head, in which case no anomaly will exist,the head and prothorax of the pupa occupying the head and firstsegment of the larva, or we may regard it as part only of the secondsegment, the remainder being occupied by part of the mesothorax ofI am happy to learn from the most able entomologist olim country has yetproduced, G, Newport, Esq., that my view of this subject is fully confirmed bythe nervous system of the animal at the period of its undergoing these changes, inhis forthcoming article, " Insect," in the Cyclop, of Anatomy.Q 2228 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.the pupa, which is the proper view of the subject ; but as the wing-bearingsegments of the pupa are necessarily increased in size, it followsthat they are also pushed backwards, so that the peninsular scale(f), instead of occupying the fourth segment of the larva, in effectoccupies the fifth (exclusive of the head). It may, indeed, be asserted,that as the body of the imago possesses two or three segmentsfewer than exist in the body of the larva, we may suppose that theloss of one of these segments takes place, at least, in this manner, andin this part of the body. This, however, can only be done by admittingthat the head and three thoracic segments of the imago arecomposed of five larva-segments, instead of four, an admission negativedby all analogy with pedate larvae ; but Ratzeburg does noteven imply this, because Jig. 88. 5. is that of a male, as is proved, notonly by the abdomen being 7-jointed, but also by the existence of theexserted male organs of generation.The larvae of those species of ants which are destitute of a stingenclose themselves ordinarily in an oval cocoon, of a dirty white colour(often mistaken for the eggs of the ants), marked at one end witha black spot, which corresponds with the hinder extremity of the bodyof the enclosed insect ; this cocoon is composed of a very slenderparchment-like envelope, formed of fine threads, spun by the larva,as Leuwenhoeck expressly describes ; and is sufficiently delicate,when placed in spirits, to allow the limbs of the pupa to be seenthrough it (^fig.^Q.l. cocoon of ^;Jig.S6. 6. ditto of ? Formicafusca). The larvae of those species which are furnished with a stingdo not thus encase themselves in a cocoon, the pupa being entirelynaked, and at first white, but afterwards assuming a darker colour.Formica fusca, our common small brown garden ant, has afforded memany opportunities of confirming Latreille's curious statement, thatsometimes the pupae are naked, and at others enclosed in a cocoon.The precise reason for this difference has still to be ascertained. Thepupa exhibits all the organs of the imago, with the limbs laid alongthe breast ; those of the neuters being, of course, destitute of rudimentalwings fig. 86. 8. pupa of Myrmica rubra $ ; Jig. 86. 9. ditto'^ ). As the period draws nigh for the development of the imago, theworkers gnaw a hole at one end of the cocoon, in order to form a passagefor the pupa ; which, having its various limbs enclosed in separatebut very delicate pellicle, possesses the power of moving themimmediately previous to casting off this pellicle, and of making itsescape out of the cocoon ; immediately after which it disengages itsHYMENOPTERA FORMICIDiE. 229limbs from their sheaths, its wings extend, its colours become darker,and in a very short time it assumes all the characters of the imago.It would be impossible, and indeed out of place, in a work like thepresent, to enter into the details of the history, manners, and economyof these tribes, which vary in almost every species, and of which so.much has been written. Those who would learn the details of theseinteresting subjects should consult the admirable memoir of Huber,the monograph of Latreille, or the second volume of the Introductionto Entomology, in which the greater portion of the seventeenth letteris devoted to this family. Herein, and in other general works, suchas those of St. Fargeau, De Geer, &c. (Ray, in his Philosophical Letters,has also given many interesting details relative to the habits ofthese insects), we find detailed accounts relative to the swarming ofthe sexes ; the duties of the impregnated females ; the various laboursof the neuters ; the language, or mode of communicating the knowledgeof various facts amongst the latter ; their wars and combats*; theexceeding fondness of ants for the saccharine fluid emitted by theAphides and Cocci, termed honey dew ; and the pains which theytake in securing it, by regularly milking the Aphides tj which theyeven imprison in their nests ; the emigrations of their surplus population; the attempts of the latter, when established in their new habitations,to induce others to join them ; their nocturnal labours (andThese wars generally take place between the neiiters of the same species inhabitingnests near each other, the individuals from each distinguishing, by somestrange instinct their own companions ; but occasionally between neuters of differentspecies. T. W. Bond, however, asserts, that a battle lasting an entire day wasobserved between winged ants flying in the air, one army consisting of black andthe other of red ants. {Ent. Mag. vol. iv. p. 221.) I apprehend, however, thatthis was only the ordinary swarming of a nest for the union of the sexes. (And seeMag. Nat. Hist. No. 18. ; and Hansard, foe. cit. supra, translated in TimesTelescope, 1S29, p. 111.)•f- Huber has particularly described the mode in which this is performed, observingthat during the autumn and spring months many species of ants keep a brood ofAphides in their nests, guarding the eggs of the Aphides with the greatest care.(See also Gen. Hardwicke, in Zool. Jour. No. 13., " On the Loves of the Antsand Aphides," and Mag. Nat. Hist. No. 12. May 1830.) Their fondness for sweetsof every kind is indeed well known, and Col. Sykes has given a remarkable case ofinstinct, in which an Indian species (F. interesse Sykes), contrived to make its way toa sideboard of sweets by swimming over the water in which the legs of the tablewere immersed, and even leaping from the wall upon the table. ' ( Trans. Ent. Soc.vol. i. ) See further Drury's account of the ravages of ants in tropical climates,especially upon saccharine matters, chiefly from information given to him bySmeathman. {Illustr. Exot. Ent. vol. ii. p. 80. 2nd edit. )Q 3230 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.see Kirby, in Trans. Ent. Soc. vol. i. p. xxv.) ; their singularly constructedtracts ; their great perseverance and strength * ; their repose,and diversions during their moments of relaxation, &c. : whilst in thefirst volume of the Introduction we find numerous notices of the injurieswhich they occasionally commit ; the devotion and behaviour ofthe neuters to the eggs, arise, and pupee, and the various modes offormation of the nests, are also therein fully described.The exotic species, it is true, although affording many singularforms, have been but slightly studied in respect to their habits ; indeed,on the contrary, much evidently fabulous matter has been publishedrespecting them.Some of these exotic species are of a comparatively large size, exceedingan inch in length ; and the forms of many of them are exceedinglysingular, some having an enormously large head ; others havethe jaws disproportionately long ; in some the thorax is armed withnumerous spines, whilst in others this part of the body and the peduncleof the abdomen are composed of a series of elongated knots.The species of these insects inhabiting the tropical parts of theworld are not only larger, but far more numerous, both in the numberof species and of individuals, than those of our countries. This isespecially the case in the vast elevated plains in the interior of SouthAmerica, where the largest of the species of birds and Mammalia whichsubsist entirely upon ants, such as the Myrmecophaga jubata, Dasypusgiganteus, destroy them in inconceivable numbers. M. Lund, indeed,supposes that in these climates, from their great agency in removingobnoxious matter, they become the representatives of various otherfamilies of insects, such as the Carabidae, Necrophaga, and other carnivorousspecies, which are but rarely met with. Indeed, the inhabitantsof Rio Janeiro sometimes even introduce them into theirdwellings, in order to rid them of the visits of the Cupion, as the are named, considering that there is a natural antipathy betweenthese two tribes. M. Lund, however, mentions an instance inThe pertinacity of these insects, in their attacks upon others many times exceedingthem in size, is extraordinary. I have often seen large preserved beetles, &c., towhich a minute ant was attached by its jaws, having chosen to die rather than letgo its hold. In this manner Formica elongata OUv. seizes, "et d'une maniereopiniatre," the antennas and legs of a green Melolontha of Tranquebar, and I havemyself captured a bee on the wing, to the extremity of one of the tarsi of whichthe head alone of an ant remained fixed by the jaws, the body of the ant havingevidently been torn off, without the insect quitting its hold. W. W. Saunders hasmet with a similar instance.HYMENOPTERA FORMICID^. 231which a colony of ants and of white ants were established in the sameabode ; but that, on disturbing the nest, the ants attacked the workersof the white ants, which they perhaps considered as the authors ofthe mischief. General Hardwicke, however, expressly mentions thatthe ants in India are formidable enemies to the white ants, each antseizing and carrying off its victim whenever opportunity occurs for sodoing. (zool Journ. No. xiii. p. 1 14.) On the other hand, however,their ravages upon the vegetable productions of those countries are farmore to be dreaded ; as in the instance of the attacks of Formicasaccharivora Linn, upon the sugar canes in the island of Grenada,whereby the cultivation of that plant was entirely put a stop to, and areward of 20,000/. offered for an effectual mode of destroying the ants.(Castle, in Phil. Trans, vol. xxx. p. 346., quoted by Kirby and Spence,vol. i. p. 186.) See also Guilding (in staff. Nat. Hist. No. 27.), onthe ants of the West Indies ; and an article in the Entomol. Mag.(vol. iv. p. 108.), of the " plague of ants" in New Spain, from Hearers'sDecades ; likewise an article on the same subject in the LondonMagazine, October, 1827-The Jesuit Dobrlzhoffer, in his work {DeAbiponibus, vol. ii. p, 375.,quoted by Perty, Delect. An. Art. Bras. pres. p. 23., and translatedin Nat. Hist. Ins. Fain. Library, vol. i. p, 37.), has given a detailedaccount of the astonishing devastations of the ants in Paraguay. Theconical earthen nests of one of the species, which abounds in the plainsof that country, are three or more ells high, and as hard as stone ;and he adds, " Tumults ills pyramidales prius soberer cantos hispaniapro furno ad coquendum panes adherent aliquando ; nonnun-quam eos commolunt ac in pulveres redigunt, qui rite aquasubacti adparimentandas domes egregie valent." We cannot, unfortunately,determine the species in question. The Portuguese have an old saying,that the ants are the queens of Brazil, in order to indicate theiruniversal powers of destruction. Pohl and KoUaralso mention variousobnoxious Brazilian species, especially Atta cephalotes ; the female ofwhich is, however, eaten by the natives. ( Vorzugl. Hist. Ins. Bras.)Dobrlzhoffer also mentions the same fact, as well as Azara (p. 198.),and also Barren. (less. Hist. Nat. France JEquin. p. 197.) Landeralso informs us that ants, stewed in butter, are eaten by the nativesof Yariba, in Africa. {Journ. Second Expel. into" Interior of Africa,1829.) Drury also mentions the same fact. In our own country,an exceedingly minute species (Myrmica domestica Shh.) has req4232 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.gently proved exceedingly troublesome, infesting the houses in someparts of London and the suburbs, Brighton, &c., to such an extent,that the inhabitants have been compelled to quit their abodes. (SeeStock, in Trans. Ent. Soc. vol. ii. p. 66., for various details andexperiments for its destruction.)The account given by Madame Merian of the annual visits of immenseswarms of the visiting ant (Atta cephalotes) from house tohouse, in South America*, and of their habit of forming largetroops, each individual carrying a piece of a leaf in its jaws, waslong considered fabulous, but has since been fully confirmed byHomer, Smeathman, Hancock, Seaman, and Lund, the two last-namedauthors having been eye-witnesses to the entire defoliation ofa tree by this species, which is thence called the parasol ant in Tobago.Lund has particularly described their mode of operation, andhas also observed these marches extended through several days.A species of this family, sufficiently common in France (F. rufes-cens Latr., forming the genus Polyergus), constitutes a remarkableexception to the remainder of the family, in respect to its habits.This species, which Huber names the Amazon ant, is distinguished bythe structure of its mouth, provided with slender simple jaws ; wherebyit is rendered incapable of constructing its nest, and attending tothe duties of the community (which are in a great degree performedby the latter organs). They are therefore under the necessity of formingthemselves into large armies, and of attacking the nests of Formicafusca and cunicularia, their object being to carry off the pupa ; theinsects hatched from the latter acting, in all respects, as their slaves ;and as they are brought to the imago state within the nests of theAmazons, they do not feel the desire to quit their masters, but labourfor the support of their abode as though it were their own ; increasingM. Lund states that he never observed a species of the restricted genus Formicamigrating, or marching in close columns, in Brazil ; and that the migratory species,and those which form these compact columns, belong to the section which have theabdominal peduncle formed of two nodes, and the antenna? unconcealed.-|- The fact of these Amazons carrying off only neuter pupa; seems to me to offer amore striking instance of instinct ; for were they to introduce a single male orfemale pupa into their own nest, the consequences may be easily conceived. Asit is, the proceedings of these neuter slaves, acting for their masters and theirprogeny with as much tenderness as they would exhibit to their own species,seems to prove that their labours are but the effect of circumstances, independent ofany sense of philoprogenitivcness, as already suggested in p. 181. The situationof these slaves, toiling in a strange territory for strange masters, might at firstHYMENOPTERA.— FORMICIDffi. 2S3the size of the nest, provisioning the young, &c., whilst the Amazonants are completely free from these duties. St. Fargeau, indeed, seesin the proceedings of these insects the perfection of instinct | ; assertingthat the Amazon ant is able to perform all the requisite laboursitself, but, from a love of luxui-ious idleness, it adopts a plan for havingthem performed by slaves. But Huber, who discovered and closelystudied the details of their history, expressly tells us that the Amazons" n'ont d'autre occupation et d'autre talent que celui de laguerre" {llech. Foam. p. 234.) ; and in a subsequent page he relatesan experiment, in which the greater part of a number of Amazons,placed in a glass case with their pupae, died from want ; but that asingle F. fusca introduced into the case restored order, preserved thelives of the remainder, and raised a number of the young brood. Thusthese Amazon ants ought, to a great extent, to be considered as analogousto the parasite bees, &c. ; and if the habitudes morales of theHymenoptera are to be considered as of primary importance in thedistribution of the order, these Amazons ought surely to be removedfrom the working species.Huber also discovered that a species of Formica (F. sanguine),which Stephens gives as a species found near London, larger than thePolyergus rufescens, makes slaves of the same two species as the latter:unlike them, however, they share the labours of the nest withtheir slaves ; and it would even seem that both species of slaves aremet with in the ant hills of the sanguine ants ; and Huber evenbrought up Polyergus rufescens and Formica sanguine, which areboth slave-makers, with F. fusca, in one common dwelling.M. Lund also observed a Brazilian species of Myrmica (M. palateLatr.), which was assisted in the affairs of its nest by the neuters ofanother species of the same genus (M. erythrothorax Ltmd). Healso discovered a thick column of another species, forming a newgenus (Ancylognathus lugubrious Z.), loaded with the larvae and pupaeof ants, and which he considered as a party returning from a maraud-sightappear lamentable ; but when we recollect that these slaves have been bornin this state, without knowing any thnig of a different state — that of freedom;that they toil not more laboriously for their masters than they would do fortheir own relatives if they were free ; that they suffer no privations of repose orfood ; that they are even permitted to watch over the rearing of some of theirown community ; and, moreover, that the slate of society dependent upon thestructural peculiarities of the Polyergus requires their presence in the nests of thelatter, — we are induced to hesitate before we exclaim with Sterne — " Still slavery ;thou art a bitter draught."234; MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.ing excursion, rather than changing their abode, because many ofthe ants themselves were mutilated. (Atm. Sc. Nat. June 1831.)I have above alluded to the habits of our indigenous ants of obtaininga supply of honey dew from the Aphides and Cocci ; but the exoticspecies of the family do not confine themselves to these tribes ;since, in General Hardwicke's drawings of Indian zoology, now in theBritish Museum, I have observed several representations, in whichants are in the act of milking the larvae of various species of Cerco-pidse ; and M. Lund has also noticed the same in a Brazilian speciesF. (Dolichoderus Lund) attelaboides Fab., which thus attaches itselfto the larvae and pupte of Cercopis and Membracis. He observes,however, that this is probably owing to the entire absence of Aphidesin the interior of the country (although they are occasionally foundnear Rio Janeiro ; where, however, they had, in all probability, beenimported with plants from other parts of the world). He also oncefound the larva of a Fulgora in an ant's nest. I may here mentionhaving repeatedly found many very young individuals of a perfectlywhite colour, belonging to species of Oniscus*, in the nests both ofFormicas and Myrmicae ; and M. Lund noticed a column of Myrmicat3'phlosf, many of the specimens of which carried an Oniscus beneaththe abdomen, the latter holding itself in that position by its shorthooked legs, which gave the Myrmica a most singular appearance.Latreille also noticed Onisci creeping about at will in the nests ofFormica rufa. On disturbing the nests of Formica fusca, I have almostinvariably observed an extremely minute fly, belonging tothe genus Trineura Meig., hovering over the nest, as though it hadalso been disturbed, and darting at times upon the ants.The habits of the singular Brazilian genus Cryptocerus are quiteunlike those of the rest of the family. They are solitary idle creatures,fixing themselves all along in the middle of a leaf, and whenalarmed, retreating slowly sideways to the under side of the leaf. Howfar it is correct to assert, with Lund, that they are in no degreesocial, and the care of the young depends on the females, the neutersbeing entirely useless, has yet to be ascertained. Pohl and Kollarinform us that a large species of this genus emits a liquid which stainsthe flesh for several days.The same fact is also mentioned by Mr. Knapp journal of a Naturalist,p. 304.). Various Cleopatra, also (g. Claviger, Batrisus, Myrmechixenus, &c.),inhabit ant's nests. See Chevrolat, in Silver. Rev. Ent. No. 1 7.f This species Is blind, a peculiarity which Lund thinks has some influence in theselection of their lucifugous companions.HYMENOPTERA. — FORMICID^. 235M. Lund concludes his exceedingly interesting memoir by describeing a singular genus, which he considers should be placed at the endof this family, and of which he had detected five or six species,neuters only having been observed with the antennae elbowed, and withthe abdominal peduncle formed into two nodes ; but differing from allthe known ants in the eyes, which occupy nearly the whole of thehead. They are solitary, creeping upon the trunks and leaves of trees ;they sting sharply. Latreille proposed for them the generic name ofPseudomyrmex.This family of insects constitutes an exceedingly natural and isolatedgroup amongst the Hymenoptera, &c., of which the naturalaffinities are very difficult to determine. Latreille, as above stated,considered them as nearest allied to Mutilla ; and if we regard thestructural peculiarities alone of the apterous individuals of these twogroups, we certainly find many characters in common. Compare, forinstance, Methoca j with Formica 9 ; the latter, in its want of wings,ocelli, and sting (three of the great characters of the order), being afar less perfect animal than the former. But when we examine thetrue nature of the ants, and especially the characters of the females,together with their social economy, we must award to the ants a relationwith the more typical Hymenoptera, as the bees and wasps. Itis true that, comparatively speaking, they do not exhibit so elaboratea species of economy as is shown by the type of those groups ; buttheir habits are quite as elaborate, for instance, as those of Bombus.In placing them between the true Fossores and the solitary Fossorialwasps, I am aware that I am apparently violating nature, and such isthe opinion of St. Fargeau ; but until the difficult question as to theprecise importance to be given to the habitudes morales of these insectsover their general structure is determined, I have preferred adoptingthe arrangement of Latreille's most valuable work. As to the relationsof the ants with the beetles and Tenthredinidse amongst the Tricho-pera, as suggested by Mr. MacLeay {HorcB Ent. p. 370.), I cannotconceive them to be entitled to any weight ; indeed, that author hashimself shown his opinion of the former relation, by stating, in a subsequentpage, that Stylops (which he thinks nearest allied to theChalcididae) is the link between the Cleopatra and Hymenoptera;and as to the latter, suggested with the view of 'proving that the trueHymenoptera are allied to the Trichoptera (amongst which he placesthe Tenthredinidee), and founded on the supposed similarity of their236 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.whole shape, and the gradual disappearance of ocelli, no two insectscan be more unlike than Formica and Tenthredo ; whilst the latter,and even the true Trichoptera, are furnished with ocelli.The third and last division of the subsection Praetors consists ofthe wasps, termed Diplopteryga* by Kirby (Diplopteraf Z«^r.), fromthe wings being folded throughout their entire length when at restBiBLioGR. Refer, to the Diplopteryga in general.Reaumur. Hist, des Guepes, Mem. Acad. Sc. Paris, 1779., and in his Memoires.Latreille Observ. sur quelques Guepes, Ann. Mus. d'Hist. Nat. torn. i. 1802. —Ditto, in Mem. du Mus. tom. xi. 1824. (Vespa Licheguana.) (Abstracts ofditto, in Zool. Journal, No. 5. ; and in Ann. Sci. Nat. vol. iv. )MiUhr (P. W. J.). Beytr. zur Nature. der grosser Hornisse (V. Crabro), inGermar's Mag. d. Ent. vol. iii.Garvie. On the great brown Hornet of New South Wales, Edinb. New Philos.Journal, April 1828 ; and in Bulletin de Ferussac, June 1829 ; and Mag.Nat. Hist. No. 2, (with Observations on the hexagonal form of the cells.)Wesmael. Monogr. des Odyneres de la Belgique, 8vo. Bruxelles, 1833. — Ditto,Premier Supplement, 1836. — Ditto, Deuxieme Supplement, 1837. (Extractedfrom the 4th vol. Bull. Acad. Royale de Bruxelles. )Guirin. Iconographie du Reg. Anim. ; and in Voyage de Coquille et de Belonged.Shuckard, in Mag. Nat. Hist. Sept. 1837. (Odynerus levies.) — Ditto, Trans.Ent. See. vol. ii. pi. 8. (Arabia. )Klug, in Entomol. Monograph. (Monogr. Ceramius.) — Ditto, in Weber andMohr's Beitrage, vol. i. (Pterocheilus. )Fonscolomhe, in Ann. Soc. Ent. France, 1835. (Ceramius Fonscolombei. )Cuvier,in Bull. Soc. Philomat. tom. i. 1797. (Vespa nidulans and tatua.)Felon, in Phil. Trans. 1764. (n. sp. wasp.)Bartram, in Philos. Trans. No. 493. (Great black wasp from Pennsylvania.) • —Ditto, in ditto, vol. liii. (Yellowish wasp of Pennsylvania.)SteigUtz. Abh. von Raubbienen. (Berl. Wochenb. Rel. 1775.)Coquet. Sur les Guepes. (V. vulgaris, Crabro, et gallica, Extrait de la Faunedes Medicine, 8vo. )Record Mariana. De la Guepe vegetate de la Guadeloupe. (Journal de'Pharmac.Mars, 1829.)Watson. Relation de Ins. quod Muse vegetables decatur (in Philosophy. Trans.vol. xiii).Schmidt. Naturgesch. der Hornisse, &c., in Gemein Nuts. Garb. der Bienenges. inder Oberl b. i. 5. 84.Mr. Kirby (JFaww. Bor. Amer. p. 263.) has altered Latreille's name, thetermination ptei-a being used for orders alone.HYMENOPTERA — DIPLOPTERYGA. 237fig. 88. 16.), (except in the genus Ceramias, in which they are extendedhorizontally.) These organs are always developed in bothsexes, and also in the neuters of the social species. The antennae aregenerally elbowed, and either filiform or thickened at the tips ; theyare inserted near the middle of the face, with the third joint longerthan any of the following. The tongue is of moderate length, andterminated by lacinise, which are glandular at the tip, with a pair oflateral linear paraglossse. The palpi are short and filiform ; themaxillae are long, coriaceous, and compressed, with the terminal partless coriaceous, and separated by a transverse suture. The eyes arenotched ; the thorax is oval and entire ; the collar extends laterally tothe base of the wings. The construction of the thorax of one of thewasps (P. Billardierii Fah. ?) has been elaborately investigated byMacLeay (Zool. Journ. No. 18.).The fore wings have one marginal, and three perfect submarginalcells, with an incomplete terminal submarginal one.The body of these insects is either quite naked, or but very slightlyclothed with hairs; it is in general of a black colour, more or lessspotted with yellow or buff; the clypeus is generally unspotted in themales, but in the opposite sex it is more or less spotted with yellow.The legs are of moderate length, not furnished with organs fitted forthe collection of pollen ; the posterior tarsi having the basal jointneither dilated nor furnished with pollen plates or brushes. Theabdomen is ovate or ovate conic in its form, and often petiolated ;the sting of the females and neuters is very powerful, and has occasionallycaused the death of persons who have been attacked bythese insects.The chief character upon which this division is founded, and fromwhich it receives its name, is one of those curious instances where wefind a peculiarity of organisation (apparently of very trifling nature,and which cannot, so far as we are enabled to perceive, exercise theslightest influence upon the habits of the species,) so constant andValentin. Nidus Vesparum niirandus, Act. Acad. Nat. Cur. vol. 11.Von Malinowsky. Belt. Nature. Vespa Crabro, Berlin Mag. 1808.Mulatto. Anaemia Crabronis, In Ephem. Nat. Curios. Dec. 2.Strauss. Anatomic du Felon, (V. Crabro); with 4 fig. Ferussac Bull. 1830;and in Ann. Scl. Nat. Sept. 1830.Bigge. Observations on the Natural History of the Two Species of Wasps.Oxford, 1835. 8vo.Fahricius, Panzer, Rossi, Spinola, Savignij (Egyptee), Coquebert, Drug, Griffith(An. K. Synagris cornua), Latreille (Humboldt), PertyJBrazil), ^S'^ Fargeau.238 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.characteristic, that we look in vain throughout the whole order Hymenopterafor any other instance * ; while, if we look at the habitsof the species, we find them to be sufficiently striking to induce usto suppose that we might here find satisfactory cause for such amarked peculiarity ; but so far is this from being the case, that whilstthe typical wasps have an economy as elaborate as that of the hivebee, many species are solitary, and resemble the Fossores in theirhabits. To assert that a character like this ought of itself to be consideredas of primary importance, and of superior weight to otherstructural characters modified by their diversity of economy, wouldbe unphilosophical ; and such is the view of the subject taken by St.Fargeau (His Nat. Hym. torn. i. p. 474-.), who considers thatalthough the folding of the wings may be convenient " pourcharacterised une famille artificiellement, il ne respond a aucune modificationquelconque des moeurs ou habitudes d'agir de plusieurs deces Hymenopteres, puisque leurs differences en cela sont entries ;"these differences consisting, 1st, in the social condition of some of thespecies necessitating two modifications of the female sex (for the productionof workers) together with architectonic instincts ; and 2d, in thenature of the food of the larvas, those of the social species consistingalmost entirely of a daily supply of vegetable matters, whilst those ofthe solitary species feed upon other insects, stored up for them by thefemale. But it appears to me that in the insects now under consideration,this character of the folding of the wings indicates a correspondencein the general structure of the insects possessing thesedifferent habits, apparently sufficient to prove that the " habitudesmorales," of these creatures (with the peculiar modifications of theorgans which are employed in performing such habits) are not ofprimary importance in regulating the distribution of the order.Amongst the Fossores and bees we find species which do not constructtheir own nests, but deposit their eggs in the nests of otherspecies of those groups ; but their larvae devour the same kind of foodas the insect for whose use it had been stored up, and thus (asalready insisted upon in pp. 86. and 186.) there is no absolute differencebetween the two groups of insects which possess suchdifferent habits. In the present family, however, the case is muchThe identical neuration of the wings (which led Jurine to place all these insectsin one genus, Vespa), the lunate eyes and the glands at the extremity of the labium,may be mentioned as equally characteristic, and at the same time apparentlynot more influential than the folding of the wings.HYMENOPTERAENUMERIDiE.stronger*, as above indicated by St. Fargeau ; and therefore, althoughI have not hesitated to reject the separation of the Fossores into twoprimary groups, founded upon their parasitic or working habits, Ifeel less convinced of the propriety of retaining the wasps as a singlefamily. I cannot, however, with St. Fargeau, refer the solitary waspsto the Fossores ( Op. cit. p. 475.), since they agree in so many oftheir general structural characters with the social wasps. I accordinglydivide the Diplopteryga into two families, Eumenides andDespise.The family Eumenides comprises the solitary species, each beingcomposed of males and females only-j- (Jig. 87. 1. Odynerus antilopePz.,2 — 4. details of ditto ; Jig. 87. 6. Eumenes coarctata, 8 — lo. detailsFig. 87.of E. petiolata?), having the mandibles fig. 87. 2. 8.) elongate-originate,often narrow, and forming a kind of rostrum, in this respectresembling the Fossores (from which we learn that this elongation ofthe mandibles is especially fitted for seizing and carrying off otherinsects as prey) ; these organs in many species exhibit, however, ontheir inner edge various obtuse denticulations, proving them to be but amodified type of Vespa : the maxilla fig. 87. 3.9.) and labium fig. 87.4. 10.) are long and bent backwards at rest ; the latter is divided intofour pilose set;e, terminated by glands, the two intermediate ones beingthe longest ; the anterior margin of the clypeus is produced, and is eitherThe circumstances subsequently mentioned respecting the discovery of honeyin the cells of Eumenes coarctata, Polistes Licheguana, and P. gallica, may here bealluded to, as evincing the necessity for regarding the absolute separation of thesetwo tribes of insects with distrust.f Mr. Curtis correctly describes the Odyneri as being solitary in their habits ;but he has introduced neuters into his characters of the genus, and expressessurprise that he had only been able to rear females.240 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.truncate or emarginate ; the maxillary palpi are shorter or scarcelylonger than the maxillary lobe, the basal joints being elongate-cylindrical; the terminal joints of the antennae of the males are often recurvedand hooked at the tip (^fig- 87. ii. extremity of ant. of Epipone spi-pipes$ ) ; the thorax is short and truncate both in front and behind ;the basal segment of the abdomen is more or less coarctate, in thetypical species forming a long and narrow peduncle fig. 87. 6.); thelegs are not furnished with chaise or spines, although these insectsgenerally construct their nests with earth in cavities of walls, oldwooden palings, or in sand banks, forming a succession of cells placedend to end, in each of which an egg is placed, together with a sufficientsupply of food for the entire consumption of the larva, consisting ofother insects, larvae, spiders, &c. The female then carefully closesthe mouth of the cell with earth.Reaumur {{Mem. tom. vi. pi. 26. f. 1 — 10.) has given the history ofa species of this family, which Latreille {Regne An. tom. v. p. 336.)considers to be the Odynerus (Vespa) muraria Linn.* This insect,during the early months of summer, forms a burrows in the sand tothe depth of several inches, in which it constructs its cells ; besideswhich it builds, with the grains of sand brought up whilst burrowing,a tubular entrance to the burrow, often more than an inch long, andmore or less curved, the grains of sand of which it is formed being agglutinatedtogether ; each female forms several of these burrows and depositsan egg in each cell, together with a number of green caterpillars,which it arranges in a spiral direction, one being applied against theother, and which serve as food for the larva when hatched. "Whenthe store of food is secured, the insect closes the mouth of the burrow,employing the grains of sand of which the funnel was composed forthat purpose.The larvae of Odynerus are fleshy grubs, destitute of feet fig. 87. 5.magnified), with transverse dorsal tubercles serving in their stead. Thebody (including the head) consists of fourteen segments and a minuteanal tubercle, with ten spiracles on each side. I have reared bothMr. Shepard mag. Nat. Hist. Sept. 1837) gives the muraria as identicalwith Odynerus (Epipone) spinipes, stating that it is the latter which constructs thistrumpet-shaped tube. Such may be the case, but Reaumur's description and figuredo not accord with the former species, but rather with the true Linnaean V. muraria(which belongs to a different subgenus), according to the description of the authenticspecimen of the latter still in the Linnaean Cabinet, forwarded by me to M. Westmorelandby him published in the Bull. Acad. Bruxelles. Ceramius Fonscolombei hassimilar habits.HYMENOPTEUA Eumenides. 241sexes of one of the species from larvae thus constructed ; thus disprovingMr. Shuckard's suggestion, that the female larvae viill necessarilyhave one segment less than those of the male, as in the imago.(^Trcms. of JBurmeister, p. 35. ; and Mag. Nat. Hist. Sept. 1837. Seemy memoir " On the Apud Larvae of the Hymenoptera, with referenceto the Segmental Theory of Annulose Animals," in Trans. Entomol.Soc. volsci. p. 121.) In the same Transactions (vol. i. p. 78.) I have alsopublished some notes upon the habits of Odynerus antilope, whichlines its cells visit mud, of Which it carries small round pellets into itsburrow, under the breast. It employs the green caterpillars of aCrassus ? for the food of its young. Mr. Ingpen exhibited to theEntomological Society (August 4, 1834) the nest of Odynerus quadratus,which had been discovered between the folds of a piece ofpaper which had fallen behind some books. It was nearly six incheslong and one wide, and had several openings to the cells, throughwhich the insects, on arriving at the perfect state, had escaped ; it appearedto be composed of dried mud.H. (in staff. Nat. Hist. No. 25.) describes some larvae found in thehealing of a book, apparently those of an Odynerus. Mr. Curtis alsofigures a species (O. varieties), the cells of which were formed on thetop of a book.Bouche states that Od. parietes stores up flies, &c., as well as thecaterpillars of Tortrices nature. der Ins. p. 179.).M. L. Dufour has recently communicated a series of interestingobservations upon the economy of several species of Odynerus to theAcademie des Sciences, but they have not yet been published. (SeeComptes Rendus, No. 10. Sept. 1838 ; and Annals Nat. Hist. No. 8.Oct. 1838.) I am indebted to Mr. F. Smith for specimens of Ody-nereus levies Shk., and its nest, first described by Mr. Shuckardmag. Nat. Hist. Sept. 1837). The cells are formed of agglutinatedsand, lining the cavity of a dead stick of the common bramble, fromwhich the pith had been excavated, probably by Osmia leucomelana,and placed end to end. Mr. Sells has found twenty-five small Lepidopterouslarvae in the nest of an Odynerus ; and Mr. Saunders asmany as seventy-five in the nest of Epipone spinipes. Mr. Waterhousehas also discovered Lepidopterous and Chrysomelideous larvae in the cellof an Odynerus ( Trans. Ent. Soc. vol. ii. p. xviii.) : I have also observedand captured many specimens of O. crassicornis Pz. near Paris,which were always loaded with the larvae of Chrysomela Populi, whichVOL. II. R242 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.was extremely abundant in the neighbourhood. (See Vol. I. p. 389.)Mr. Kennedy has captured O. bides with its prey, which consistedapparently of a Chrysomelideous larva. He also mentions finding inone of its cells a small dipterous bisect. blond. and Ed. Phil. Mag.Jan. 1837.) I have described gardeners Mag. 1837) a singularinstance of instinct exhibited by a species of Odynerus, which provisionsits nest with the leaf-rolling larva of Tortrix (Argyrotoza)Bergmanniana, which it dislodges by introducing its sting into therolls of the leaves, immediately running to the end of the roll in orderto ascertain whether the larva was endeavouring to make its escapefrom its unknown enemy.In the Insect Architecture (p. 26—29.) is an account of the proceedingsof a species of Odynerus which forms its burrow in a brickwall, and which was infested by a Tachina, which deposited an egg inthe nest ; and the grub hatched from it, after devouring one of the waspgrubs, formed itself into a cocoon, as did the other endeavoured grubof the wasp — both of which cocoons are presented as of an oval formand placed side by side in a large oval flask-like cell. Such habitsare, however, at variance with the recorded economy of the Odyneri.Geoffrey (hist. Ins. Paris, torn. ii. p. 378. pi. 16. fig. 2.) has describeda species of Eumenes (V. coarctata Linn., Panz. fig. 87. 6.)which differs somewhat in its habits from the rest of this family.This species constructs, upon the stems of plants, especially heath,small spherical nests (Jig 87. 7.) formed of fine earth : at first a holeis left at the top, through which the parent fills the cell with honey,and deposits a single egg therein ; the hole is then closed up, and thelarva, when hatched, feeds on the honey, undergoes its metamorphosis,and makes its escape through a hole which it forms at the side of thecell, which contains but a single insect.The habits of E. Saunders West. MSS., an Indian speciesallied to E. petiolata, not described by Fabricius, observed by W. W.Saunders, differ from those of E. coarctata; this insect making itscells of mud, attaching them under projections, each cell being somewhatsmaller than a pigeon's egg, and sometimes two or three areplaced side by side ; they are well stored with green caterpillars. Mr.Saunders observed the Eumenes repeatedly at work, and found one nestin a keyhole, and another beautifully constructed inside an old flute.(trans. Ent. Soc. vol. i. p. 63.) One of these nests produced aPaelopaeus, evidently a parasite upon the Eumenes.HYMENOPTERA M ASA RIDES. 243The genus Erasmus Latr, (Gnatho King) is very interesting onaccount of its upper wings not being folded longitudinally, and havingonly two submarginal cells, as in the Matrices ; the labial palpi also,as in those insects, are larger than the maxillary, which, accordingLatreille and Fonscolombe, have only four joints. Klug figures themas 3-jointed, but I can only observe two joints in C. Lichtenstenii Kl.M. Fonscolombe (Aim. Soc. J^nt. de France, 1835) has given a detaileddescription of C. Fonscolombii Latr. (a species inhabiting theSouth of France, for which I am indebted to M. Serville), which formscylindrical tubes at the entrance of its burrows (like Odin. niuraria),which it destroys after it has completed the construction of its nest.The genus comprises two European and two South African species.Arabia Shh. has also only two submarginal cells ; but its eyes areoval (not reniform), and its mandibles resemble those of the socialspecies, whence Mr. Shuckard considers it is the Australian representativeof Vespa.Some anomalous species of wasps, forming Latreille's family Ma-strides,agree with the Eumenides in having the fore wings longitudinallyfolded and the eyes notched, but differ in the antennas beinginserted wide apart, and composed apparently of only eight joints(fig. 87. 12. ant. Colonies apiformis $ ), the last being large, roundedat the tip, and forming a solid mass with rudimental articulations, indicatingthe terminal joints ; the labium is terminated by two verylong setse, which when at rest are retractile within the basal tube ofthe mentum ; the upper wings have only two perfect submarginalcells; the clypeus is emarginate in the centre, with the labruminserted into the notch ; the maxillae are short and obtuse, with themaxillary palpi very small, consisting of two, three, or four joints.The insect described by Fabricius (Ent. Sf/sf, vol. ii. p. 284'.) fromthe collection of Desfontaines, and figured by Coquebert (Illust.Iconogr. tab. 15. fig. 4.) under the name of Matris vespiformis, isevidently a male, from the elongated antennae and abdomen*, which isarmed on the under side with two tubercles near the base. Theinsect figured in the great work on Egypt, which Latreille regards asforming a distinct subgenus, is a female. I have received it from Dr.Fabricius nevertheless says, " aculeo recondite punctilio," perhaps only fromanalogy.R 2244-MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Klug, under the name of Matris Hylaeiformis * Klug MSS., fromEgypt; the antennae are very short, as they are m both sexes ofColonies, the males of which have the abdomen terminated by twodeep notches.The second family', Vespiu^ (Polistides St. Fargcau), is here restrictedto those species (including the common wasp and hornet)which Jive in temporary societies, consisting of mates, females, andworkers or neuters (Jig. 88. 1, V. vulgaris 3- , 2 — 6, details of ditto ;Fig. 88.Jig. 88. 7. female, 8 — 16. details of ditto, 17. and 18. neuter ). Theupper lip is concealed by the clypeus ; it is very much narrowed infront into a tongue-like piece (fig 88. 10.) ; on the under side of it isattached a membranous plate rounded in front, which Savigny termsthe epipharynx (/z^. 88. 11.). The clypeus is nearly square, and butslightly produced in front; the mandibles are not longer than broad;their extremity is broadly and obliquely truncate and toothed ; in V.vulgaris fig. 88. 2. $ , \2. ? , 18. 9 ) they are formed alike in all theindividuals ; they are, however, differently coloured in the male, andclothed with much longer hairs. The maxillae and labium are butMy specimen is also a female. Should the male agree with Colonies inhaving short antenna, the species will require a distinct subgenus for itsreception.-f- The individuals here figured and dissected were obtained from the same nest in abank. The observation of M. Parrot, recorded by Huber( A'biw. Ohs. torn. ii. p. 443. ),and quoted byKirbyand Spence(/w^ vol. ii. p. 108.), of a kind of females not largerthan the workers, and which produce only male eggs, requires confirmation.Hymenoptera VESPID^. 2i5slightly elongated and inflected, the maxillae i^fig. 88. 9. under side ofthe head with one of the mandibles extended ; fig. 88. 3. $ ,\'A. $ )terminated by a short process articulated near the extremity ; themaxillary palpi are longer than the lobe of the maxillae, with the jointsshort, and generally conical in form (yfig. 88. 3, o , 13. ? , thejoints in the male being thinner and rather longer than in the female).The labium (fig. 88. 14.) is trifid, with four terminal glands, the middledivision broad and but slightly elongate, and somewhat heart-shapedat the extremity, having two of these glands near its apex ; the labialpalpi are slender, the terminal joints varying in their proportions inthe sexes fig. 88. 4. $ , 14. $ ). The antennae are invariably12-jointed in the females and neuters (fig. 88. 8. front of head andantenna of ? ),' those of the males being 13-jointed (fig. 88. 5.),and not hooked and recurved at the tip. The upper wings have onemarginal and three complete submarginal cells. Fig. 88. 16. representsthe mode in which they are folded when at rest, a being theupper surface of the terminal part of the fore wing ; b the undersurface of the hind part of the fore wing, which is folded upon theupper surface of the fore part ; and c the upper surface of the hindwing. The basal segment of the abdomen is rarely contracted into anelongated peduncle. The male organs of generation are very large(fig. 88. 6.) ; the 'posterior tibiae are furnished with two spurs,the basal joint of the tarsi being incised on the inside and pectinatedfig. 88. 15.).The economy of these insects is scarcely less interesting than thatof the hive bee (with which they agree in their habit of constructinghexagonal cells arranged in combs of different size), and would occupyfar too great a space were I to attempt to give beyond the slightestoutline of it. The societies are, however, annual, being dissolved atthe approach of winter. The nests are of varied size, according to thenumber of the society by which they are inhabited, being from timeto time enlarged during the summer, as the community becomes moreand more extensive. Previous to the setting in of the winter, thefemales, which have been but recently developed, are impregnatedby the males, which soon afterwards die ; the females then disperse,seeking winter quarters, in sheltered situations ; .and those whichsurvive the rigours of winter commence the building of a new nest atthe return of the spring, in which they deposit eggs and tend their youngR 32t6 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.themselves ; these at first consisting entirely of neuters, which assisttheir parent in the duties of the nest. The nests are either builtunderground in holes, in banks, or are attached to branches of trees,or the woodwork of outhouses. They are composed of a paper-likesubstance formed of finely gnawed wood, or the bark of trees, reducedto a kind of paste by the action of the jaws, and contain a variablenumber of cells (sometimes amounting in number to as many as16,000*), which are of an hexagonal form, arranged in tiers, with themouth downwards (or opening sideways, as in Polistes, fig. 87. 20.),in which the larvae and pupce are contained. In some species (Polistesgallica, &c.) the cells are not defended by a common envelope {fig- 87.20.) ; but in others (as Vespa vulgaris) the covering of the nest is verythick, and consists of many layers, with a circular orifice for thepassage of the inhabitants. The males f and females are only developedat the beginning of the autumn, in order that a succession forthe following year's nests may be insured.These insects are very voracious, preying upon other insects J,sugar, meat, fruit, honey, &c. § ; which, after being properly preparedin the stomach of the winged insects, is disgorged, and serves asfood for the young, which are fed therewith daily ; the females aswell as neuters assisting in this task. The males, as in all othersocial insects, are drones, performing no kind of labour.Ample details of the natural history of the common wasps havebeen given by De Geer (Mem. torn. ii. pi. 26.), Reaumur {JSIem.tom. vi. mem. 6.), Disderi (in Turin Trans, vol. ii. and iii), and others,as well as by Kirby and Spence, in whose Introduction will be foundcomplete accounts of their general economy; the solicitude of the femalesand neuters for the welfare of the young broods ; the annualSupposing the number of cells to be 10,000, Reaumur calculates that thecommunity would consist of 30,000 individuals before the close of the year, each cellserving successively for the cradle of three generations.•}■ Reaumur figures (Ahem. tom. vi. pi. 14. fig. 3. 4.) two males from the samenest, observing that there are two sizes in this sex amongst the males (p. 206. ) ; butinthe memoire itself he has not made any observation relative to this fact.\ The Americans, aware of their service in destroying flies, sometimes suspenda hornet's nest in their parlours. st. John's Letters to an American Farmer.)I have watched the common wasp hovering over, and darting, hawk-like, upon fliesupon excrement, careful not to soil its own legs or wings.§ Their partiality for honey renders them very dangerous enemies to the hive,which they fearlessly enter to feed on the honey.HYMENOPTERA VESPlDiE. 247massacre by the neuters of the later brood of larvae, which are notableto undergo their transformations before the setting in of the winter;the structure of the different kinds of cells and nests*; thevarious kinds, and the numbers of the females, neuters, and males, andtheir several occupations ; their sentinels ; the periodical diminutionof their numbers, and their instinct in cases where their preyhappens to be too large for their powers of flight. Mr. Newport hasmade some observations on this last-mentioned instinct (trans. Ent.Soc. vol. i. p. 228.),They are very susceptible of cold. I have observed a wasp, in afrosty morning in October, hanging suspended by its jaws to a curtain,with its wings closely folded up between its legs, and upon itsbreast.Notwithstanding the powerful sting of the wasp, it is liable to theattacks of other insects. Rhipiphorus paradoxes and the larva of aVolucella (according to the Rev. E. Bigge) infest its nests, devouringthe larva ; as does also Anomalon Vesparum Curtis (J3. E. p. 198.),and another species of Ichneumon, mentioned by Mr. Bigge. Dr.Leach also mentions that wasps are much infested by Lesbia [Dominus]linearis. I have also observed a spider, belonging to the genusThomisus, sucking a wasp, which it had killed.The eggs of V. vulgaris are of a slender oval form, with a broadbase. I have observed that these eggs 'are always attached at one ofthe angles of the cell, and generally in the same angle throughoutan entire row of cells.The larvae are fleshy grubs, destitute of feet. Those of V. vulgaris(fig. 87. 14. somewhat larger than the natural size) are thickest inthe middle, with the head small and round (fig. 87. 15. head seensideways; 87. 16. the parts of the mouth in front); the labrum beingslightly emarginate and transverse ; the mandibles armed with threeteeth ; and the maxilla? and labium represented by fleshy lobes, havingseveral minute tubercles upon them, apparently representing thepalpi. Reaumur {{Mem. tom, vi. pi. 17. fig. 12, 13., e e, p p.) representsthe larvae as furnished with two pairs of toothed jaws, as well aswith maxillae and labium; but I think this must be an error.The sides of the body are furnished with lateral fleshy tubercles ;I have observed, that in forming their holes or enlarging their nests, theycarry out the rubbish in their jaws to a very great distance, instead of leaving itat the entrance.R 4248 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF Insects.and the body, including the head, consists of fourteen segments,together with a small fleshy anal lobe. The spiracles are placed alongthe sides of the body, almost throughout the entire length.Each larva is enclosed in a separate cell. From the downward positionof the opening of the cells, these larvae maintain a reversed position,their heads being also downwards; they retain their situationin the cell, whilst young, by a glutinous secretion, and subsequentlyby the swollen front of the body, Which fills the open part of the cell.They are fed by the females and neuters with honey, the nectar offlowers, or the juices of animal matter, previously prepared in the stomachof the winged nurses (or with small particles of more solid food,according to St, Fargeau), and with which they are daily supplied ; thelarva; opening and shutting their jaws, when approached, like young birds.When full grown, each spins a convex cap to its cell, of a delicate, white,and slender texture, and then becomes a pupa. The cells are of differentsizes, according to the sex of the intended inhabitant-larvae, those for thefemales being larger than the others : the female cells are mostly placedapart from those of the males and neuters ; those of the males beingoften mixed, but in a small number, in the neuter combs. The eggstate lasts eight days, the larva state thirteen or fourteen, and thatof the pupa about ten. After the imago has been produced, one ofthe old workers cleans out the cell, and fits it for the reception of afresh inhabitant. The upper tiers of cells, being first built, serve forthe habitation of the neuters ; the females, being produced at the endof the summer, occupy the lowest tiers. Fig. 87. 17. represents themale pupa of V. vulgaris.Unlike the family of the ants, the British species of this family arenearly as large as those of the tropics, the hornet being scarcely exceededin size by any exotic species. The specific differences of theBritish species of wasps require a more minute investigation than hasyet been given to them. This can only be done by studying the habitsof the different species, in conjunction with individuals of the differentsexes from the nest of each. Thirty years ago, the necessity for suchan inquiry was pointed out by Latreille, who added, " Utinam alius Kirby qui banc familiar elucubret." (gen. Crust, vol. iv.p. lis.) But the wasps still remain in as great or greater confusionthan they were at that period.The common British species, V. vulgaris, makes its nest in banks,Hymenoptera — VESPIDiE. 249&c., underground.* Another species, closely allied to it (V. mediaLatr.\ intermediate in size between it and V. crabro, forms a similarnest, but which it attaches to the branches of trees. Dr. LeachZool. Misc. vol. i. pi. 50.) has described and figured a species underthe name of V. Britannica, which ordinarily suspends its nest fromtrees, especially from pines, varying from the size of a pear to a footin diameter. The female which has survived the winter makes a smallnest, in which a brood of neuters are produced, the female closing fthe mouth of the cells when the larvae are full grown. This broodywhen arrived at perfection, assist their parent in constructing a newand much larger nest. The Rev. E. Bigge, however, considers thatthe latter statement is not correct; and I am inclined to think thatthe larvae close the mouth of their cells, especially as Reaumur frequentlysaw the larvae in the act of spinning the covering. Latreilledescribes the nest of V. holsatica Fab. as being of a very slendercapricious texture, scarcely two inches long, and almost globular inform,with one end, where is the aperture, truncated. Its envelope iscomposed of three pieces, of which the basal one resembles the cupof the acorn. One of these nests was found in a bee-hive, another inan empty room. (Latr., in Ann. du Mus. tom. i. p. 289.) Reaumurfigures a nest, nearly agreeing with this description, attached to aSuch is the ordinary habitat of the species regarded in this country andFrance as the V. vulgaris of Linnaeus ; but that author says, " Habitat sub testis "(syst. Nat. p. 949.); and De Geer's nest (tom. ii. p. 766. pi. 26, 27. fig. 1.) was fromthe wooden rafters of a house. The Rev. A. Matthews showed me a very largenest in such a situation, at Weston, Oxfordshire ; and I can perceive no differencebetween the neuters of it and of the underground nest, in my figure 88. 17. TheRev. E. Bigge has endeavoured to clear up the differences between this insect andthe tree wasp ; but he has fallen into many errors. Thus, he considers the LinnaeanV. vulgaris to be the tree wasp, which it certainly is not, because Linnaeussays, " Scutellum quadrimaculato, abdominal incisors picts tigris distinct,"which Mr. Bigge even states is not the case in the tree wasp. He also considersthe insect now regarded as the V. vulgaris (the common earth wasp), as the Vespagallica Linn., which it certainly is not; the latter being decidedly a Polistes, as Ican assert, having captured specimens in France exactly agreeing with the Linnaeandescription. Again, he states that the habits of the tree wasp had been fullydescribed by De Geer ; but this is evidently not correct, in consequence of thesituation in which De Geer's nest was found. I hesitate, however, in ref^ardino-it as identical with the ground wasp of Reaumur, especially in consequence of thedifference in the sexual organs of the male, a character which Audouin has provedto be of great specific value amongst the humble bees.f J. W. Bond {Entomol. Mag. No. 18. p. 224.), in like manners states that thefull grown larva is covered in hy the scorning rvasps.250 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.branch (3Iem. torn. vi. p. 19. fig. 1,2.); and Kirby and Spence describeanother (vol. i. p. 510.); a correspondent of the Magazine of NaturalHistory has figured another, which was found attached to a reedinside the roof of a barn (No. 11. January 1830). A similar nest isrepresented by Knapp (journal of Naturalist, p. 333.), which he givesas a distinct species, under the name of V. campania. Shaw, also(in Nat. Miscell. pi. 603. vol. xv), has figured the nest of the " cam-popularwasp." 1 have figured one of these nests in a still more immaturestate (sent. Text Book, p. 389.) ; in which the saucer-like capand half of the envelope only had been completed, leaving the cellsexposed. The Rev. E. Bigge not only regards these various nests asthose of the tree wasp (V. Britannica Leach), in a more or less forwardstate, but also infers that our species is identical with the Americantree wasps mentioned by Shaw, who evidently refers the nest figuredto Reaumur's pi. 22. I am, however, inclined, on the other hand, toconsider that there are several distinct species amongst these treewasps, judging from the strong variations exhibited by numerous specimensin my collection.The hornet (V. Crabro) builds its nest in decaying hollow trees,under the eaves of barns, &c. ; it is composed of coarser materialsthan that of V. vulgaris, Reaumur asserting that it uses the bark ofliving trees, but Kirby and Spence say decayed wood. If the hole inthe tree be not sufficiently large, they enlarge it, gnawing the sidesof the interior. The antennae of the males fig. 87. 18.) are curiouslynotched on the outside. An abstract only of the elaborate memoir ofStrauss, above referred to, has yet been published. He has described267 solid pieces and 258 muscles in this insect.M. St. Hilaire discovered in Brazil a species of this family (PolistesLicheguana), which makes an abundant supply of honey ; which,like common honey, is occasionally poisonous, owing to the peculiarplants frequented by the insects. (Latreille, in Mem. (hi this.tom. xi.)Epipone moro Fab. (Vespa Tatua Cuvier, Bull. Soe. Philomat.No. 8.) has the basal segment of the abdomen narrowed into a slenderpeduncle, like an Eumenes ; its nest is in the form of a truncatedcone, with the bottom flat. This species inhabits Cayenne.Another species (Charters St.F., nidulans Fab.) suspends its nest(which I have received from Demerara) b}' a ring from the topmostbranches of the trees, so as to swing backwards and forwards with theHYMENOPTERA VESPIDiE. 251wind, and to be out of the reach of monkeys. It is in the shape of atruncated cone, and is composed of a verjuice substance, exactly Hkecard-board. The combs, which increase in number with the increasingpopulation (the nest sometimes attaining a very large size), are circular,but convex on the under side, with a central aperture for theingress and egress of the inhabitants ; they are attached to the generalenvelope through their entire circumference ; the bottom layer, solong as it serves as the bottom of the nest, is smooth; but when afresh layer of cells is required, these are built upon the under side ofthis bottom, with their open ends directed downwards, and a freshbottom is then added, the central orifice serving to allow a passagethrough the several layers of combs.Reaumur has described and figured numerous varieties of thesecard nests in the 6th volume of his Memoires. I have seen someother varieties, which remain undescribed in the national museums ofLondon, Paris *, and Berlin, One of these is of a large size, and hasthe outer envelope of the nest covered with small conical prominences.Another nest, lately received by the Zoological Society ofLondon from Ceylon, is not less than six feet in length, and has beenbuilt inside an immense palm leaf.A species of these insects, inhabiting New Spain and the WestIndian Islands, has received the name of Vespa venetians, from havingbeen frequently observed to be infested by a parasitic plant, resemblinga coral branch (probably a species of Bavaria), which arisesfrom the segments of the abdomen, or other parts of the body. It isordinarily upon dead specimens that this occurs ; but the plant hasbeen observed to germinate in the larvae. Indeed, in Der Nature(No. 4. tab. 4.), the wasps themselves are represented as flyingaround a tree, with the vegetating matter growing out of the abdomen.(See Hist, of Ins., Fan. Libraries, vol. ii. p. 296. ; Trans. Ent.Soc. vol. i. p. Lxvi. ; Annales Sci. Nat. July 1829, in which a speciesof Sphaeria was observed to have infested an entire nest of wasps inGuadaloupe.) Various absurd speculations have been made upon thenature and growth of this plant, which is, however, evidently analogousto the plant (Botrytis Bassiana) which produces the fatal diseasein silkworms termed kincardine.One specimen in the Jardin des Plantes, about eight inches in diameter, appearsto be covered with a thick layer of pottery, rather than capricious matter, asthough formed of earth.252 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.The species of the genus Polistes do not enclose their nests in ageneral envelope, but leave the cells exposed, attaching them to stemsof plants, walls, &c., sideways, so that a moderate-sized nest has, at adistance, somewhat the appearance of a full-blown flower. (Reaumur,Memoires, tom. vi. pi. 19. and 25.; Swammerdam, Book of Nature,pi. 26. ; Rose, Ahliandl. Ins. vol. ii. Bomb, et Vesp. tab. 7. ; TurinTrans, vol.xxii. Polistes italics.)Fig. 87. 19. represents Polistes gallica, stationed upon a verysmall nest. This, and some other nests of the same species, which Ibrought to England from Paris, afforded me an opportunity for observingthe habits of the species (especially with reference to theirflight, and departure from and return to the nest), of which I haveread the particulars in a paper before the Entomological Society.M. V. Audouin has observed that the spiracles of these larvae, owingto the dilated form of the front of the body, are placed only uponthe resound meta thoracic and first abdominal segment.St. Fargeau states, that he has often found in the nests of Polistesgallica cells filled with honey, which he had tasted without experiencingany ill effects.Polistes macaensis is a very common Chinese species, and is frequentlyrepresented in the drawings on rice-paper sent to thiscountry, together with its nest, which is attached to the twigs of trees,and is composed of cells without any covering.The second subsection of the Hymenoptera aculeata comprisesthe very extensive and interesting families of bees, which, from theirpeculiar construction and economy, may be considered as the typesof the order, and, consequently, as the farthest removed from any ofthe other orders of insects.As a group, they have been termed by Latreilie Mellifera *(honey-gatherers), or Anthofiiila (lovers of flowers).BiBLioGR. Refer, to the Mellifera in general.Kirby. Monographiaia Apnm Anglia, 2 vols. Svo. Ipswich, 1802.Latreilie. Ordre Naturel des Insectes assignes gencralement sous le nom d'Abeilles,in Hist, des Fourmis, p. 401. — Ditto, ditto, in Humboldt, Observ. de Zool.Brazil. — Ditto, in Ann. du Mus. d'Hist. Nat. tom. iv. and v.HYMENOPTERA — MELLIFERA. 253These insects, which in the system of Linnaeus formed the singlegenus Apis, are characterised by having the basal joint of the posteriortarsi dilated into an oblong or sub triangular plate (Planta Kirby){fiy. 90. 7., 92. 10. 19, 20.), which is generally hirsute on the inside,and provided with instruments for collecting and carrying pollen. Insome species, however, which are parasitic and solitary, this joint issimple, but of the same form (fig. 90. 19. 21.); the jaws are strong,these organs being ordinarily employed in the economy of the differentspecies, and consequently being varied accordingly ; the maxillaeand labium are elongated, and often transformed into a probosciscapable of being folded up several times beneath the head (seeJig. 89.), the labium being pilose at the extremity ; each of the fouranterior tibiae has a single apical spur, and each of the two posterior,a pair, except in the genus Apis.Saint Fargeau and Servile, in Encyclop. Methh. torn. x.Saint Fargeau. Hist. Nat. Hyinenopteres, 8vo. 1836.Wiedemann, in Zoologisches Magazin (g. Plusia and Extreme. )Klug. Ueber geschlechts verschiedenheit der Plezaten, in Der Gesellscli. Natiirf.Freunde zu Berlin Magazin, 1807, 1808, 1810. — Ditto, in Waltll eisenachSpanien. — Ditto, in Symbols Physical.Disderi, in Turin Transactions, vol. ii.Styles. (Leaf-cutter Bees), in Philos. Trans, vol. li. 1760.Schiiffer. Die Mauerbiene (Megachile muraria), 4to. Regent. 1764; and inBland. von Ins. 2 band.Wartmann. Nature. der Mauerbiene, in Der Naturforscher, 22 st.Latreille. Observ. sur Isabelle tapissiere de Reaumur, in Bull. See. Philomat.torn. ii. and 1799. — Ditto. Observ. sur les Moeurs d'une petite Abeille inMagaz. Encyclop. 1799, torn. iv. — Ditto. Observ. sur Isabelle pristinede Far., Ann. du Mus. d'Hist. Nat. torn. iii. 1804, and torn. xiv. 1809.Ditto. Monogr. g. Antbidnim Fah., in ditto, torn. xiii. 1809; and inGermar's Mag. 1815.Spinola. Memoir on Ceratina albilabris, Ann. Mus. d'Hist. Nat. torn. ix.1807.Huher. Observ. Trachusa purulent Panzer, in Mem. Soc. Ply. Nat. Hist. Genevavol. ii. ; and in Bulletin des Sci. Nat. September 1825.Guilding. Nat. Hist. Xylocopa Teredo jF. Trans. Linn. Soc. vol. xiv. 1824.Fonscolombe. Megachile americans ( Guerin, Mag. Zool. Ins. No. 50. ) On ff.Lithurgus (in Ann. Sci. Ent. France, torn, iii.)Marshall de Bernstein. Apis eriophora, Caucasus, in Mem. Moscow, torn. ii.1809.Westwood, in Trans. Ent. Soc. vol. ii. p. 112. (g. Mesotrichia. )Fabrieius, Savigny (Egyptee), BrulU (Morea), Perty (Brazil), Coquehert, Panzer,Christius, Illiger, Rossi, Spinola, Jurine, Guerin, Curtis, Griffith (An. K.).254! MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.The neuration of the wings, which in other groups of Hymenopterais of essential importance in generic distribution, here becomes ofminor consideration, from the Cuttle variation in this character ; hencethe arrangement of Jurine, founded thereon, is very imperfect.The larvae feed exclusively upon pollen or honey. Some of thespecies live in society, residing in dwellings of a beautiful construction,the work of the females and neuters, or of the latter alone ; the larvaebeing in such cases separately enclosed in hexagonal cells, and attendedand supplied with food by the females and neuters : others,however, are solitary in their habits, without any neuters ; the femalesbuilding nests, generally composed of a series of cylindrical cells, forthe reception both of the eggs and a supply of pollen paste sufficientfor the support of the grubs when hatched, a single larva occupyingeach cell : others, again, are solitary, but do not build nests, depositingtheir eggs, cuckoo-like, in the already provisioned cells ofother bees ; so that, when the progeny of the latter are hatched, theyare either starved to death in consequence of the grub of the formerdevouring all the provisions (being most probably first hatched), orare even perhaps devoured by the former,* The perfect insects feedonly upon the nectar of flowers.The larva in this section is a whitish, short, thick, and fleshy grub ormaggot, having a wrinkled body, somewhat pointed at each end, andgenerally observed in a curved position (Jiff. 90. 9. larva of Colletes ;91. 15. ditto of Anthidium). It is entirely destitute of feet. The head(^.ff. 90. 10. head of larva of Colletes seen in front ; ll. sideways ; 91.16. head of larva of Anthidium seen in front, 91. 17. ditto sideways.)is small, and placed low upon the first segment of the body ; it issmooth on the upper part, having a minute conical tubercle on eachside, which seems to be articulated near the base and tip (Jiff. 91. 18.).Those two parts were considered by Swammerdam and Walckenaer asthe rudimental eyes of the perfect insect; but from their structure it isevident that they must rather represent the antennae. Below these isto be observed a small transverse lip, answering to the upper lip of theperfect insect ; and below this is a pair of horny jaws (Jiff. 91. 16, 17.md), small, having a transverse movement, and shutting under theThe latter opinion has need of confirmation. In the burrowing Fossores, theparasites doubtless devour the larvas of the founder of the nest, the latter being alsocarnivorous ,- but as the larvae of the working bees are pollinivorous, it is contrary toanalogy that their parasites should be otherwise than pollinivorous.HYMENOPTERA MELLIFERA. 255upper lip: these jaws are kept by the grub in continual motion when iteats ; and it is by their assistance that it gnaws and divides the balls ofpollen paste, or other matters which serve for its food. In the larvaof Anthidium manicatum these jaws fig. 91. 19.) have three teeth ;but in that of Colletes succintus they are acute and entire [fig. 90. 12.),thus somewhat resembling the jaws of the perfect insect. Beneaththese jaws, and reaching to the sides of the head, are a pair of fleshyorgans, which appear to be soldered to the head, having a fine styleat the extremity of each. These evidently, from their situation andlength, represent the maxillas of the future bee ; and below these isanother fleshy, rounded, and somewhat prominent organ fig. 91. shavingat its anterior part a transverse corneous line, and a minutefleshy nipple, whence the material is discharged which is employedby the larva for spinning its cocoon, this part is the rudiment of thelower lip. The body, excluding the head and including the analsegment, is composed of fourteen articulations, of which the secondand nine following bear a pair of lateral spiracles, beneath which, andforming, as it were, the union between the dorsal and ventral parts ofthe body, is a series of lateral, raised, fleshy tubercles, which (togetherwith the jaws) are employed by the larva as organs of locomotionin its very limited movements.Swammerdam book of Nature, pi. 23. and 24.), Schaffer {Ahliand-lunge, vol. ii. tab. 1. and 5.), Reaumur (torn. v. and vi), De Geer(torn, ii), Guilding linn. Trans, vol. xiv), Walckenaer {{Mem. Hu'dictus), Ratzeburg nova Acta Berl. vol. xvi. tab. 9.), iSrc, have givendescriptions and figures of the structure of the larvae of various bees,which do not exhibit any material diversity. According to Schaffer,the structure of the mouth of the larva differs in the sexes. appears to have fallen into some errors as to the same organs,and the portions of the mouth of the perfect insect representedthereby. A wide field remains unexplored with respect to this branchof the science.The pupa fig. 91. 22. pupa of Apis mellifica <y ), whether enclosedor not in a cocoon spun by the larva, is at first soft, but exhibits allthe limbs of the future bee, enclosed in separate cases, and layingalong the breast. By degrees it acquires greater consistence, and exhibitsall the colours of the perfect insect. And it is to be observed,that the exuviae both of the larva and pupa are so exceedingly delicate,as to have escaped the notice of some authors, who have asserted that256 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.they do not cast their skins. That this, however, is not the case, isevident, not only from analogy, but from an interesting specimen ofColletes succinct in my collection, which I have represented in .13., and in which the pupa is in the act of bursting through thedorsal skin of the larva ; and it would seem as if the insect had notsufficient strength to enable it to make its escape, but that it remainedalive in that position until the enclosed parts of the perfect insect hadattained their ordinary colours, the thin skin with which they arecovered being also scaled off in several places.Probably, no group of insects has attracted so much attention asthe present, either amongst general observers or professed naturalists ;hence we find that the bees have afforded subjects for some of themost interesting memoirs which have hitherto been produced uponthe insect tribes. Reaumur, De Geer, Huber, Latreille, and Kirby,have especially devoted themselves to the investigation of the habitsand structure of these insects. The Monographiaia Apud Anglice ofthe last-named author may be cited as a model of a complete monograph.In it, and other more recent publications, about 250 speciesof bees found in Great Britain are enumerated.The classification of the Mellifera depends considerably upon thevariations in the structure of the mouth ; hence, and because the oralapparatus of the bee is perhaps one of the most interesting and complicatedpieces of insect mechanism, I may perhaps be allowed to givea somewhat more extended notice of it*, selecting for illustration oneof those species in which it is most fully developed, namely, the retusa, and illustrating it minutely in various positions, f IfThis account of the mouth of Anthophora retusa, and the subsequent observationsupon the nature of the parasitic connection existing amongst certain bees,form the subject of a memoir read by me at the Entomological Society, on the 1stof December, 1834.f Fig. 89. 1. represents the head of A. retusa, laterally, with the mandiblesclosing upon the extremity of the labrum, and the inaxillaa and labium bent beneaththe breast, as in inaction ; Jig. 89. 2. the head in front, with the latter organsin the act of being brought forwards; fig. 89. 3. the labrum detached ; fig. 89. 4.mandible of the female ; /?(/. 89. 5. ditto of the inane ; fig. 89. 6. profile of the head,with the labium and maxilla partially unfolded and separated, showing the tubularmentum (m 2.) partially sheathed by the basal part of the maxilla; (m 1.) ;fig. 89. 7. shows the basal parts of these organs still more unfolded, to exhibit themanner in which the fulcrum, K. (d), and the cardines, K. (d d), shut together, so asto lie between the hora, K. (y) ; fig. 89. 8. is a lateral view of the head, and lowerparts of the mouth extended (the labrum and mandibles being removed) ; m xHYMENOPTERA MELLIFERA.Fig. 89.the face of this insect, or in fact of any other species be examined,when at rest, there will only be observed a square or other shaped deflexedlip, over or beneath the extremity of which a pair of hornyjaws will be seen. If, however, the under side of the head of theabove-mentioned insect be examined, a long slender horny organ(fig. 89. 1.) is perceived, which, in its unfolded and extended state,constitutes the tongue of the bee. This organ at first appears toconsist but of a single piece, but it is in fact composed of two separateparts, closely uniting along the centre in a straight line (fig. 89. 2.).Presently we see the jaws opened, the labrum raised, and this slenderthe terminal lobe of the maxilla ; d d one of the cardines, d the fulcrum, m 2. thetubular mentum (tubes if); z the saragossa (laconic interiors if); and +the-jointed labial palpi (laciniae exterior AT. ); x the epipharynx or epiglottis ofSavigny, beneath the labrum ; fig, 89. ig. the basal portion of the same apparatus stillmore fully extended; fig. 89. 10. the same organs seen from beneath, o being theextremity of the mentum, and o o the base of the labium, the intervening spacebeing occupied by the basal dilated muscular portion of the paraglossse; y thehora K., or strong muscle whereby the maxilla is protruded ; ^^r. 89. 11. the basalportion of the same organs seen from above, to show the situation of the epipharynx(x), of which the extremity is recurved, as in fig. 89. 9. 's^;fig. 89. 1-2. the epipharynxremoved, wad fig. 89. 13. the same laterally, both with the front turned down;^^. 89.14.the epipharynx (dotted) separated from the pharyngeal tube, in order to showthe internal valve (hypopharynx Savigny^; fig. 89. 15. the extremity of the tubularmentum, with the basal portion of the labium and its laciniae withdrawn into thetube as at rest ; fig. 89. 16. a section of the same, to show the manner in which thefolding of such basal parts is effected; fig. 89. 17. the extremity of the mentum(m 2.), and the base of the labium and its lacinise (z) and palpi, (f) fully protruded,showing the strong muscles at the base of the laconia.Observ. — The same letters are applied to the same organs throughout all thesefigures.258 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.part gradually brought from beneath the breast, by means of a joint atthat part which appears to be its base, lying beneath the jaws, whereit is furnished with a pair of jointed palpi, until it is stretched out infront like the beak of a bird. This part now opens laterally (fig. 89. 6,),and exhibits not only the two pieces of which it is composed (m l.),but also three organs often of equal length, hitherto concealed withinit as by a sheath, namely, a delicate central one, transversely striated,and two lateral ones, flattened, and very slender, with a central ribandwith an articulation beyond the middle, and two minute joints atthe tip fig. 89. lo. +). The two horny pieces first noticed asforming the external sheath of the tongue are the terminal portions ofthe maxillae, and the feelers at their elbowed base are the maxillarypalpi ; the central striated organ is the labium, and the two lateralarticulated ones are the labial palpi. We next observe that theannulated labium, without any apparent motions the other parts of themouth, is suddenly thrown out to nearly double its former length (asin fig. 89. 8.) : this is effected in the following manner ; if, whilst remainingin this position, we examine the under side of this apparatus,we perceive that the base of the central part arises not from thehead itself, but from a slender horny tubular piece, which is thementum fig. 89. o, 7. ic, m 2.). On each side of this central part,two slender filaments* (paraglossse, z) moreover exist, which, as wellas the base of the labium itself, are withdrawn into the extremity ofthe tubular mentum (as in fig. 89. 15, 16.), so that the tips alone ofthe paraglossse are visible (l6. z). As, however, the muscles at thebase of these organs are very strong fig. 89. 17.), the insect is enabled,at will, to throw out the labium and its paraglossse with muchforce to their greatest elongation (as in fig. 89. 8. lo. 17.). Anotherpeculiarity is at that time observable : the central portion, althoughstriated, does not at first exhibit any remarkable hairiness ; but nosooner is the labium thus thrown out and retained in its situation, asit were, by a sort of catch or fastening, than the central part becomesdistended, the muscles of each ring of which it is composed beingbrought into action, by which means the erection of a whorl of hairsupon each ring at right angles (which had previously laid along theorgan) is effected : this is especially the case near the extremity ofthe tongue. I have often caused this erection of hairs artificially byAnalogous to the lateral labial lobes of Tenthredo (fig. 69. 9-).HYMENOPTERA MELLIFERA. 259forcibly pulling out portions of the labium as far as possible.* Thelabial palpi being attached by a muscle (fig. 89. 17. o) to the base ofthe labium, also undergo a similar withdrawal and protrusion, but toa much less extent. The tubular mentum (m. 2.) extends to the backof the head, and is defended on each side by the basal portion of themaxillse (mel. as vnjig. 89. 6, 7.) ; but if a pin be applied between thisunited apparatus and the head, two other elbows will be found connectingthe tube and the maxillae with the head, and it is not untilthese elbows are extended in nearly a straight line, that the mouth isstretched out to its fullest extent. The elevated horny ridge extendingfrom the base of the tubular mentum to the elbow nearest the head(d), is the fulcrum of Mr. Kirby's monograph ; and the diverginghorny ridges (dd) connecting the base of this fulcrum with the max-ills,are the cardines of Mr. Kirby. In the Introduction to Entomology(vol. iii. p. 356. and note, and p. 359. note) this fulcrum is called thetrue mentum, the tube being regarded as the labium, and the striatedpiece as the lingua ; the reasons alleged for this nomenclature being,that the situation of the fulcrum between the hinges and base of themaxilla indicates it as being the real analogue of the mentum ; whilstthe terminal striated portion, being employed to lap honey, should beregarded as a tongue rather than a lip (labium). If we look, however,at the place of insertion of the labial palpi, between the tube and thestriated part (the typical position of these organs being between thementum and labium) ; if we observe that when at rest (fig. 89. 6.), thetube rests between the basal portion of the maxillae (which is thetypical position of the mentum) ; and if we recollect that the horae,cardines, and fulcrum of Mr. Kirby are organs bestowed upon thebees for the necessary elongation of the oral apparatus, we can butregard the tube of Mr. Kirby as the true mentum, and the tongue asthe labium. I shall therefore adopt the nomenclature of Latreille,Savigny, &c. for these organs. The fulcrum on its upper side(fig. 89. 11.) exhibits a narrow gutter (d) enclosed above at its junctionwith the head, by a membrane produced in front (x), so as toI am not aware that these peculiarities have been so minutely described by anypreceding author, and have been the more anxious to explain the nature and cause ofthe extension and dilatation of the labium in Anthophora (which, in fact, is its morecommon and natural position when in action), because in several works, includingMr. Curtis's British Entomology, it is represented in an unfolded, Jut not in adilated state, not being longer than the labial palpi, which might probably inducethe idea that these figures were not conformable with nature.S 2260 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.form a tube, which is the pharynx, the extremity of this membranebeing deflexed (fig. 89. 12, 13. x) : if this, however, be removedfid' 89. 14.), we perceive a beautifully delicate, erect, membranousvalve which entirely closes the entrance into the oesophagus. Theease with which this complex machinery, which when at rest presentsnot fewer than four different foldings, is employed, is surprising. Itis also to be observed that when folded up it is almost difficult toconceive where it can be placed so as to permit so little of it to beseen. This, however, is to be explained by the under side of thehead being hollowed out for its reception.Another character of considerable importance in the classificationof the bees is one which, from its immediate connexion with theireconomy, will not be considered less deserving of a detailed account.M. le Comte de St. Fargeau, following up the views of Latreille, hasgiven an interesting notice of the organs employed by various beesfor the collection of pollen, in the tenth volume of the EncyclopedieMethodique. The larvae of all the Mellifera feed either upon pasteformed of honey and pollen, or upon honey alone ; but as the femalesof nearly one third of the modern genera of bees do not possess organsenabling them to provide this paste {fiQ' 90. 19. hind leg of Sphecodes ;21. ditto of Hyla?us, destitute of polliniferous organs), they are compelledto deposit their eggs in the nests of other bees. These organsare of two kinds : the first consist of naked portions of the body, eitherslightly excavated or flat, with the margins fringed with hairs ; thisinstrument has been termed " la palette," which may be english thepollen plate. It exists on the outside of the hind tibiae and basaljoint of the tarsi of the neuter hive and humble bees fig. 92. 19.),which are rather hollowed out, and in which species it is employed tocarry pollen grains which have been saturated with honey. In otherbees belonging to both the families into which the Mellifera are divisible,such as Dasypoda, Andrena, Colleges, Halictus, and Panurgus,it exists upon each side of the metathorax, and the correspondingsurface of the two posterior thighs fig. 90. 7.), and is employed forthe purpose of carrying plain grains of pollen, its sides being guardedby incurved hairs. The other instruments consist of bundles of hairs,whence they have been termed the scope or scapula by Mr. Kirby,la brosse" by the French, and which we may call the pollen brushesfig. 90. 7., and 91.8.). All bees, indeed, possess brushes of hairs,the queen of the hive bee being the only known exception ; but theseHYMENOPTERA — MELLIFERA. 261ordinary brushes, or, as we may term them, brushes in all male bees,and in the females of the parasitic species, only enable the insects toclear themselves from the pollen with which the body has beenpowdered in the flowers which they have been plundering : in thefemales of the working bees, however, they serve to collect the pollento certain parts of the body more thickly clothed with hairs, andwhich are the real pollen brushes. In the social bees these areplaced (in addition to the external pollen plate) on the inside of theposterior tibiae and tarsi (fig. 92. 20.). In other working bees, Eu-cere,Systropha, Anthophora, Xylocopa, &c., the pollen brush isplaced on the outside of the two posterior tibiae and tarsi (yfig- 91. 8.) ;whilst in others (Anthidium, Osmia, Megachile, &c.) the under sideof the abdomen is entirely covered by it {Jig- 91. 14.).From these considerations, M. St. Fargeau is induced to propose thedivision of each of the two families of the Mellifera into two groups,under the names of " parasites" and " recoltantes," subdividing thelatter into various minor divisions from the situation of the pollenplates and brushes. M. Latreille, however, has not adopted this modeof arrangement. Indeed it is to be observed that the variation in thestructure of the species, thus varying in their habits, docs not seem towarrant the establishment of them into separate families. This circumstanceappears naturally dependent upon two considerations: 1st,it is essential that the parasite in its perfect state should possess acertain resemblance to the animal in the nest of which it deposits itseggs, so as to deceive the latter and its associates*; and 2nd, thenature of the food of both being similar, the variation in structureis much less striking than if the parasite were carnivorous, as theIchneumonidae, and the animal attacked (as the caterpillars of Lepidoptera,&c.) herbivorous. The parasitic connexion indeed goesno further than this, viz. that the larva of the parasite eats up thefood of its fosterer, and so starves it to death ; the larvae of both aretherefore pollinivorous, and the differences which will naturally bemost striking, will consequently be found in those organs which areSo closely is this resemblance carried in the parasitic Bombs, that the proprietyof their generic separation from the working humble bees has even been questioned.In like manner, the Dipterous genus Volucella, which is parasitic upon bees, soclosely resembles them in general appearance, that it requires some little entomologicalskill to distinguish them from the humble bees : other instances to the sameeffect might be adduced.S 3262 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.employed in the construction and provisioning of the nest of theworking species, and which we may therefore expect to find in a lessdeveloped state than in those species which, from being parasitic, donot require their full development. Hence it is that we find thegeneral structure of the parasite bee closely resembling that of thebee, at the expense of whose young its own are destined to benourished; and hence, if we regard Bombus and Psithyrus of St.Fargeau, Alae and Euglossa, Melecta and Anthophora, or Sphecodesand Halictus, with reference to their general structure, they will befound most intimately allied ; whilst if, on the other hand, we regardsuch portion of their economy as is connected with the formation andprovisioning of their nests, it will be requisite to place them in differentdivisions. If we observe, however, the great variation existingamongst bees in this portion of their economy, it is evident that thiscannot be regarded as a normal or typical character, and that a distributionfounded thereupon would necessarily be unnatural. Thearguments which I have already employed in pages 86., 186., and238. upon this subject, in relation to the sand wasps and wasps, are ofcourse equally applicable to this tribe of insects.I will therefore now shortly notice those arrangements whichhave been made by authors, and which are based upon structuralvariations. Reaumur, followed by De Geer and other early authors,separated the bees into two primary divisions, under the names ofAbeille " and " Pro-belle." To these, other generic groups wereadded by Scopoli and Fabricius, which Mr. Kirby, in his celebratedmonograph upon the English bees, published in 1802, reduced againto two, under the names of Melitta and Apis ; the characters formingthe most striking distinction between them being furnished by thetongue, which organ in the first is short, flattish, usually acute, with alateral auricle, and not inflected {^jig. 90. 3, 4. 20.), and being in thelatter (containing the true bees) elongate, slender, cylindrical, andfolded backwards towards the breast (fig' 89. 7. and 92. 16.). In thesame year, Latreille, in the memoirs appended to his Natural Historyof Ants, and in his Histoire Naturelle, SjC, divided the bees into twofamilies: 1. Andrenetae (named after the extensive Fabrician genusAndrena, and corresponding with Mr. Kirby's genus Melitta andReaumur's Pro-belle) ; and 2. Apiariae (corresponding with Mr.Kirby's Apis and Reaumur's Abeille) : and Latreille's names, alteredby English entomologists in their terminations into the family names ofHYMENOPTERA — ANDRENID^.Andrenidae and Apidae*, have been adopted by the generality ofwriters for the two primary divisions of the bees.In the first of these families, Andrenid^ f i^fig- 90. i. Andrenanigro-eenea ? ), the mentum is elongated, the labium at its extremityFig. 90.small, and either spear-shaped (^Jig> 90. 2. head of Andrena with theorgans unextended ; Jig. 90. 3. the same with the parts fully extended)or cordate fig. 90. 20. labium of Colletes), with a small ear-shapedlobe on each side, and being either straight or very slightly deflexed insome (fig. 90. 4. apex of labium of Andrena, not folded backwards),and reflexed in others, and considerably shorter than the tubularmentum; the labium and terminal maxillary lobes not forming anelongated proboscis. The palpi are of the ordinary shape, the labialAs the preceding section, Praetors, is divided into subjection, named fromsome peculiarity of structure or habits, which are again divided into families, itwould be more uniform to consider the two divisions of the section Mellifera assubjection, instead of families, which might be named, from the different degrees ofdevelopment of the mouth, Brachyglossata or Brevilingues, and Macroglossata orLongilingues; and these, again, might be divided into families, as the Megachilidae,Anthophoridffi, &c. I confess, however, that I prefer retaining the old Linnaeanand Fabrician names to designate the groups which were originally comprisedtherein.\ BiBLiOGR. Refer, to the Andrenidae.Walckenaer. Memoire pour servir a I'Hist. Nat. g. Halictus. 8vo. Paris, 1817.Imhoff. Description of Andrenidae, in Isis. 1 832.Dufour, in Ann. Soc. Ent. France, 1838, p. 281. (Andrena lagoons, Manilla.)Wesmael. Observ. sur les Species du g. Sphecodes, Bruxelles, 8vo.S 4264 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS,ones being 4-jointed, and resembling the maxillary, which have alwayssix joints. The mandibles are simple, or terminated by one or twonotches (fig. 90. 5. and. of A. armata ,J ). The antennae areelbowed fig. 90. 6. antenna of Andrena $ ) ; the hind legs ( fig.90. 7. hind leg ? , 8. ditto $ Andrena) are generally completelyclothed with hairs ; the trochanters and femora in the females beingpollinigerous; the basal joint of the posterior tarsi is never externallydilated into an angle, and the second joint of the tarsi arises from thecentre of the lower edge of the preceding joint.These insects are all solitary, each species consisting only of malesand females. The latter collect pollen from the stamens of flowers,rather by means of the general hirsuties of the body than with theposterior tarsi. This they form, by the addition of a little honey, intoa paste for the food of their progeny. TJiey burrow in the ground,often to a considerable depth, in sandy situations; sometimes evenupon foot-paths, especially if exposed to the sun. At the foot ofthese burrows they deposit an egg in the midst of a supply of thispaste sufficient for the entire consumption of the future grub, andwhich is then covered up : they thus proceed, cell after cell, eachbeing of the width of the burrow, closing up the hole at the top withearth, to prevent the attacks of parasites, which, however, often succeedin entering the hole, and depositing their eggs in the cells. Somespecies, however, are parasites upon the others, the nature of whoseeconomy I have already detailed.In the structure of the mouth, some of these insects are nearlyrelated to certain burrowing wasps, as Crabro, Philanthus, &c. : withthese, therefore (forming a first division, which maybe termed Obtusethe arrangement of the bees is commenced ; and in which thecentral portion of the labium is obtuse, being either transverse orheart-shaped, and very short fig. 90. 20. labrum of Colletes). Thisdivision comprises only two genera, both of which are British.The species of Hylaeus (which as a genus has been greatly confusedby Fabricius) have naked bodies, and are consequently destitute ofapparatus for carrying pollen, and are stated by St. Fargeau {Enc.Methh. tom. x. p. 213.) to be parasitic upon other Mellifera fig. 90. 21.hind leg ? ). They are generally found in the flowers of variousspecies of Reseda; I have also observed them repeatedly in those ofthe onion. They emit, when handled, a strong, yet agreeable odour,resembling the scent of balm, or rather Dracocephalum Moldavian.HYMENOPTERA ANDRENID^. 265One species, H. dilatatus K., has the basal joint of the antennae greatlydilated.The species of Colleges, of which the type is Reaumur's " Abeilledont le nid est fait d'espfeces de {{Membranes soyeuses " {{Mem. torn. vim.5.), are workers, having hairy bodies for the collection of pollen.They nidificate in the earth and the softer parts of walls : each nestis cylindrical, consisting of from two to four cells placed end to end,the bottom of one fitting into the mouth of that beneath it; each cellis about one third of an inch long, and one sixth of an inch broad, andis composed of several layers of a very thin and transparent membrane(how prepared Reaumur could not ascertain) ; in each cell is depositedan egg and a quantity of pollen paste, destined for the food of thelarva when hatched. The history of these insects is contained inReaumur's fifth memoir of his sixth volume. The perfect insects aregenerally found towards the end of the summer. I have observedthat they frequent the flowers of the common ragwort.The typical species was first noticed in Grew's Rarities, the nestshaving been found by that author in the middle of the pith of an oldelder branch. I have found it burrowing gregariously, in considerablenumbers, in sunny sand-banks at Coombe Wood, in the month ofJuly ; and have succeeded in rearing the bees from the larvae fig.90. 9 — 12.) found in the cells. After the insects have become pupae,a thin inner lining, of a dark brown colour, is found to have been leftby the larvae, which, as it exhibits, under a high-powered lens, notraces of a thread or silken construction, is most probably composedof hardened pollen paste.In the second division of the Andrenidae (which may be termedAcutilingues), the central terminal portion of the labium is acuteor lance-shaped fig. 90. 3, 4.); and in some of the latter genera ofthe division, it nearly approximates in its increased length to thestructure of the same organ in some of the Apidae.The species of Sphecodes are the only bees in this division whichare destitute of pollinigerous organs fig. 90. 14. Sphecodes gibbus ? ,15. mandible $ , 16. ditto ? , 17. antenna ^, 18. antenna $ , 19. hindleg $ ). They are generally black, and destitute of hairs, with theabdomen of a shining red colour. According toM. Walckenaer, theyare parasitic upon the species of Halictus. Mr. Kirby, however,(citing Reaumur's torn. vi. mem. iv), states that they make their ownnests in the manner of the Halicti ; but from the construction of their266 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.legs, it is evident that they cannot be poUinigerous, as indeed Messrs.Serville and St. Fargeau affirm. (^Enc. Methh. torn. x. p. 447.)TheHalicti consist of some of the smallest indigenous species of bees.In the males, the body is cylindric, and in the females the extremityof the abdomen is marked with a longitudinal channel. Some of thespecies are metallic in their colours. We are indebted to M. Walksfor a very interesting and complete account of the habits of twoof the species of this genus, namely, the Halictus generator anddesignates, which make their burrows in beaten tracks, depositing inthe cells with their eggs a small ball of pollen slightly moistened withhoney. The burrows are often to be observed in vast numbers, placedclose together. See also Encyclop. Metlu (torn. x. p. 407.) for furtherdetails of the habits of this genus.The species of the genus Andrena are very numerous, and maketheir appearance in the early spring and summer months : they have verymuch the appearance of hive bees (^fig- 90. i. Andrena nigro-aeneas ? ,2 — 8. details). They nidificate under ground in a light soil, formingburrows from five inches to a foot deep ; preferring a southern aspect,and removing the earth grain by grain. The diameter is sufficientonly to allow the bee to enter and go out ; at the foot of this burrowthey deposit an &%%, placing with it a small mass of pollen paste.The pollen is carried not only upon the pollen plate of the hind leg, butalso upon the pollen brush at the base of these legs, and at the sides ofthe metathorax. When the female has completed the deposition of hereggs, she carefully stops the mouth of the burrow. During the progressof nidification she occasionally takes rest, sitting and sunning herself atthe mouth of her cell ; her partner wheeling around her in circles ofvaried diameter, with great velocity. (Reaumur, Mem. tom.vi. mem. 4.)The sexes of many of the species are unknown ; this is even thecase with And. fulva, the most beautiful and by no means a rarespecies, and of which the females alone are known. They frequentthe blossoms of the gooseberry.These insects are subject to the attacks of various enemies; amongstthese, the most striking are the species of Stylops, and the curiouslittle insect which has been regarded as the larva of the Melos.Dr. Klug has likewise published an account of another parasite *upon Andrena in Der Gesellschaft Naturforschen der Freunde zuBerlin Magazin, vol. iv.Braula ^caeea {Nitzsch) is another singular parasitic genus found upon bees.Hymenoptera — APIDJE.In Dasypoda the sexes vary so much in appearance, that they havebeen regarded as distinct species. Mr. Kirby states respecting theonly British species, that its habits are similar to those of Andrena,forming burrows, at the mouth of which the female sits enjoying thesunshine, the male circling round her.The exotic genus Nomina is remarkable for the curious manner inwhich the legs of the males are dilated, curved, and spined.The insects composing the second family of the bees, Apid^, havethe mentum long, with the labium at its extremity, forming anFiff. 91.elongated slender seta, reflexed when at rest, and as long as, or longerthan the mentum, with two small lateral filaments (paraglossse Illiger,auriculae Kirby), and forming with the maxillae (which are also elbowedand recurved at the place of insertion of the palpi) an elongatedproboscis, capable of being porrected in front of the head whenin action, or folded up beneath it, and the breast when at rest, in theshape of a flattened 2 (see ^;^. 89.). The palpi, attached at thebase of the labium, form two slender flattened filaments often as longas the labium itself, the two basal joints being very long, with the twoapical joints minute, and obliquely affixed near the extremity of thesecond joint*; the maxillary palpi vary in the number of their jointsReaumur has figured some other curious parasites in his Memoires, torn. v. pi. 36.f. 1 — 3. ; and tom. vi. pi. 4. f. 13, 14., and pi. v. f. 8, 9.) belonging to the Acaridre:and see Goeze, in Der Naturforscher, st. 14. I have also Found a very singularand distinct Anoplurous insect parasitic upon an Andrena.In the species nearest allied to the Andrenida; (Panurgus, Nomadaa, &c.), thejoints of the labial palpi are continuous ( fig. 91. 11. labium and palpus of Nomadaa).268 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.from one to six {fig- 91. 4. maxilla of Nomadaa ; ^^. 89. lO. m x, dittoof Anthophora \ fig. 91. 5. ditto of Osmia;^^. 91. 3. ditto of Anthi-drum). The antennae are often elbowed, the basal joint being long.The basal joint of the posterior tarsi is often externally dilated, andthe second joint in some species arises from the internal angle of thepreceding joint (as in fig. 92. goetheeconomy of these species of bees is very different, but may bereduced to three heads, namely, 1st, Social bees ; 2d, Solitary workingbees ; Sd, Cuckoo-like parasitic bees. From the great extent of thisfamily it has become necessary to introduce various subfamilies, &c.,for which improvements we are indebted to Kirby and Latreille.The former author, commencing the arrangement with such insectsas most nearly resemble the Andrenidce, and founding his distributionupon various portions of the mouth, proposes the establishment ofsubdivisions, in which, after the Andreniform species, the parasiticbees succeed, and which are followed by the leaf-cutters and miningbees, and the woolly-legged bees ; the series being terminated by thegenera Xylocopa, Apis, and Bombus of modern authors. In thisarrangement, Mr. Kirby, evidently fearful of placing too great a relianceupon a single character (that of the number of joints in thepalpi, of the classification resulting from which he has given a table inhis first volume, p. 129.), and influenced by the general appearanceof the insects, placed the carpenter bees, Xylocopae, near to Bombus,between which, however, the relationship, either in structure oreconomy, is but slight.In the same year that Mr. Kirby 's monograph appeared, Latreillepublished a memoir upon the distribution of the bees amongst thevaluable papers appended to his History of the Ants ; which distributionwas so similar to that of our countryman, that in his next workhe thus expressed the lively sentiments resulting from such a coincidence: " Aussi ai-je senti la joie la plus vive de me voir dans un sigrand accord avec cet illustre savant ; une telle resemblance dans lefruit de nos recherches prouve evidemment que la nature qui est une,a et notre guide." (hist. Nat., S^c. torn. iii. p. 370.) In his GeneraCrustaceorum, Sj-c. (vol. iv. 1809), Latreille, in a note, gave the followingseries as indicative of the habits of his groups: 1. SolitaryAndreniform bees (Systropha, Panurgus) : 2. Solitary carpenterbees (Xylocopa, Ceratina, Trophies, Chelostoma, Heriades, Stelis) ;3. Solitary leaf-cutter bees (Osmia, Megachile) ; 4. Solitary wool-hymenopteraAPIDiE. 269gathering bees (Anthidium) ; 5. Solitary parasitic bees (Nomadaa,Passes, Melecta, &c.) ; 6. Solitary woolly-legged bees (Eucera, ,Centris, .&c.) ; Y. Bees temporarily social (Euglossa,Bombus); 8. Bees permanently social (Apis, Melipona, and Trigona).In this work Latreille considers the parasite bees more nearly alliedto the woolly-legged ones (by means of Melecta and Anthophora)than to the Andreniform bees (by means of Nomadaa and Panurgus)as arranged by Mr. Kirby. In effect both these affinities seem equallytrue, the difficulty as to the arrangement of these parasitic genera inaccordance with their real allies, arising from the parasitic nature ofthe former, and the solution of the question whether their arrangementought not to be entirely independent of such consideration. Inhis last general work, the second edition of the Ittgne Animal., La-triflehas advantageously reduced the number of primary groups,and divided the family into five sections : — 1. Andrenoides (Andreabees, including the first group in his Genera, with the addition ofXylocopa) ; 2. Dasygastres (hairy-bellied bees, including the remainderof the second, and the third and fourth groups) ; 3. Cu-china;(cuckoo bees, his fifth group) ; 4. Scopulipedes (brush-leggedbees, his sixth group) ; 5. Sociales (social bees, containing the tworemaining groups of his 'Generals.This arrangement I shall adopt with the following slight alterations :the subfamilies Dasygastres and Cuculinse, being established uponcharacters arising from their polliniferous or parasitic economy, will(for the reasons already given) require modification, as indeed La-triflehimself admits. {Regne Animal., tom. v. p. 347.) For the formerI therefore propose the name of Longilabres, long-lipped; and thelatter, which, however, I would only provisionally retain, I denominateDenudatse, naked bees ; restricting the limits of these groups by thecharacters which have supplied their altered names. Moreover, thegenus Xylocopa appears to me to be much more nearly allied to *and Centris, than it is either to Ceratina or Panurgus (asindicated by Latreille), or to Bombus, as insisted upon by Mr. Kirby.If we therefore adopt the following position of these subfamilies, weshall perhaps obtain an arrangement founded upon a greater numberSince the above was written, I have become acquainted with, and described aremarkable osculant genus, proving this relation (Mesotrichia torrid West., inTrans. Ent. Soe. vol. ii. pi. 9.).270 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.of affinities, and one which apparently rejects the least number ofsuch relations, than any yet proposed.1. Subfamily Andrenoides. Panurgus, leading to Nomadaa in thenext subfamily, but rejecting the supposed affinity with Xylocopa.2. Subfamily Denudatse, passing to Stelis and Ccelioxys in the nextsubfamily, but rejecting the affinity of Melecta and Anthophora.3. Subfamily Longilabres, connected with the next subfamily by Osmia,Macrocera, Eucera, and Ceratina ?4. Subfamily Scopulipedes, passing by means of Epicharis, Lester,and Xylocopa, to Euglossa and Bombus in the5. Subfamily Sociales, consisting of the temporarily and permanentlysocial bees.The first subfamily, Andrenoides, or, as it may be more uniformlytermed, Panurgides, consists of insects nearly allied to the Andrenidasin the labium being shorter than the mentum, and in the structureof the labial palpi, which are composed of continuous linear joints{.fid' 91* 11')' ^^^ *^^<^ basal ones not being so much elongated as inthe following subfamilies. The maxillary palpi are 6-jointed(fig. 91. 4.) ; the upper lip is short ; and the females are destitute ofa pollen brush on the under surface of the abdomen. They are,however, furnished with a pollen plate on each side of the metathorax,and another on the posterior femora : the hind legs have also pollenbrushes.Of the mode of nidification of these insects, nothing is known. Theperfect insects belonging to the genus Panurgus, according to Latreille,are attached to semiflosculous flowers : I have observed them revellingin the pollen of a large Anthems ; and so little disturbed werethey on my approaching them, that they contented themselves withmerely holding up their legs on one side of the body, precisely in thesame manner as the humble bees do under similar circumstances.The insects composing the second subfamily, Denudatje or Me-lectures(CucuLiN^ Lute.) (as well as those of all the followingsubfamilies of bees), have the labial palpi formed of two very long,flattened, scaly basal joints, and two minute apical ones (^^. 89. lo. \and 92. 16.). The abdomen is not provided with a ventral pollen brush,neither do these insects possess any pollen plates, their bodies beingHymenoptera APIDiE. 271in effect naked, whence they are supposed to be parasites. Some ofthe species resemble small wasps in their colours, whilst in otherssome parts of the bodies are clothed with small patches of very shorthairs. The mandibles are narrow (fig. 91. lo. mandible of Nomadaa),and either toothless, or armed only with one small tooth. The scutellumis often tuberculated or toothed. From their evidently parasitichabits they have been termed cuckoo-bees.These insects, from the structure of the tongue and other parts ofthe mouth, form three sections, of each of which we have a representativegenus in England ; Nomadaa, in its tongue and palpi, nearlyapproaching Panurgus ; Melecta, in the general form of the mouth,being closely allied to Anthophora ; and Epeolus, in its inarticulatemaxillary palpi resembling Ccelioxys.The species of Nomadaa are gaily coloured insects, having much theappearance of small wasps, with which they have been confoundedby some authors. They are destitute of hairs, and have no instrumentsfor carrying pollen. Of their precise habits, however, we arewithout decisive information. They frequent dry sunny banks, flyingwithout any noise ; and it has been considered by many entomologiststhat they are parasitic upon other bees, and Mr. Shuckard conjecturesthat they infest not only the nests of several species of Andrena, butalso of Eucera.The type of the genus Melecta is an elegant species, having themargins of the abdomen spotted with white markings. According toMr. Kirby, both sexes of this insect were found by Mr. Trimmer inthe nest of Anthophora retusa, whence, as well as from other circumstanceswhich he mentions, he was induced to consider that it wasparasitic upon that insect. I have repeatedly found them in company,and seen the Melecta entering the burrows of the Anthophora. Accordingto Mr. Shuckard, it is parasitic upon Eucera, as well as boththe British species of Anthophora. Mr. Newman has, however, consideredthis difference of connexion as indicating a distinction ofspecies, and has accordingly " made six distinct species out ofMelecta punctata." {Ent. Mag. No. 10.) We have no decisive informationas to the habits of Epeolus.The third subfamily, Longilabres or Megachilides (DasygastresLatr.^, as the former names import, is distinguished by the largeoblong form of the upper lip. The mandibles are very strong, andarmed with several teeth fig. 91. 2. mandible of Anthidium, 6. ditto272 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.of Osmia $ ). The maxillary palpi are but slightly developed(fig. 91. 3.) ; the labial, on the contrary, are very long, with the twolast joints obliquely inserted ; and the saragossa are minute. Ingeneral the wings have only two complete submarginal cells. Coolioxysand Stelis approach the preceding subfamily in the want of pollingorgans, and in their naked bodies ; but, from the structure oftheir mouths *, they must be placed in this subfamily. All the othergenera are polliniferous, the pollen brush being very large, and coveringthe underside of the abdomen (^jig- 91. 14.). They are, however,destitute of pollen plates. From their respective economy, they havebeen termed mason and upholsterer bees ; the former building theirnests of fine moistened earth, whilst the upholsterers employ in theconstruction of their cells portions of leaves, which they have cutfrom various plants by means of their powerful jaws, which are employedlike a pair of scissors.The males of the genus of Coelioxys, as Mr. Kirby observes, haveonly six abdominal segments, instead of the ordinary number seven fig.91. 12. apex of abdomen of C. monica J ). Messrs. Serville and St.Fargeau state, that these insects f, as well as the species of Stelis,deposit their eggs in the nests of Anthidium, Megachile, Osmia,and Anthophora.In the genus Anthidium, the males (fig. 91. l. A. manicatum ^ ,2, 3., 15 — 21. details and larva, &c. of ditto), are much larger than thefemales ; and the abdomen, which is broad, is armed in the formerwith lateral and terminal spines ; in the other sex it is round and unarmed.These insects frequent various woolly leaved flowers, strip-fig.91. 9. represents one of the mandibles of Stelis; those of Coelioxys are stillmore robust, and toothed ; thus proving that, although parasites, those organs,which in the working species are used as tools, retain their typical form in theparasite, and do not undergo a modification of form, their habitudes morales notbeing sufficiently strong to necessitate a modification of these organs. This is theonly reason I can suggest why these parasites should have jaws shaped like those ofthe working species upon which they are parasitic.f Reaumur describes and figures an insect men. tom. vi. p. 122. pi. 11. f. 4.)which has all the appearance of a male Coelioxys (ano 6-dentato), but which hedescribes as the male of a leaf-cutter bee (Megachile). Linnaeus refers this figureto Coelioxys monica, but Mr. Kirby (M. A. A. 1. 154.) objects to this. I howeveragree with Linnaeus, considering that Reaumur's insect had been reared parasiticallyin the nest of the Megachile. G. R. Waterhouse has also mentioned some facts tothe like effect, having reared a Coelioxys from cells of Megachile circumcincta, orOsmia atricapilla. (See Ent. Mag. vol. iv. p 498.)HYMENOPTERA. APID^. 273ping off the clown with their toothed jaws fig. 91. 2.), for the purposeof forming their nests. Of this an account is given by Mr.Kirby, as well as the description of a nest, supposed to be of thisspecies, found in the key-hole of a garden door. Although holes intrees are the more ordinary situations for their nests, they seem tohave an especial liking for the latter locality, since Mr, Anderson, theingenious curator of the Botanical Garden at Chelsea, has also presentedme with a nest found under precisely similar circumstances,and from which I reared specimens of the Anti. manicatum. Therewere twelve or fifteen cells or cases fig. 91. 20.), consisting externallyof a loose covering of white down (20. a), within which wasanother covering, more compact and smooth on the inside (20. b),and within this was contained an oval cell, of a strong coriaceoustexture, and of a chestnut colour (20. c). This latter I consider (asdoes also Mr. Kirby from subsequent observations (see Introdd. to Ent.vol. i. p. 4'39. note., to be the cocoon formed by the larva itself, becausesome of my woolly cases contained a mass of matter apparentlyconsisting of dried pollen paste, the egg deposited with which hadprobably on some account proved abortive ; and in these there was nooval chestnut-coloured cocoon. It was in February that this nest wasdiscovered, at which period some of the cells were empty, the inhabitantshaving forced off a circular cap fig. 91. 21.) from the top ofthe cocoon, and escaped ; others, however, contained full-sized grubs.As the other closed cells did not produce insects, I opened themafter keeping them more than two years, when I found that eachenclosed a dead female insect, which had evidently not attained sufficientpower to make its way through the case. Hence I am inducedto believe, either that the females do not appear until some time afterthe males have quitted their cocoons, or that the empty cells werethe construction of a former year. The point at the top of my cocoons,which Mr. Kirby calls a funnel, does not form an aperture, noris there any corresponding opening in the woolly covering.Some of the species of the genus Osmia are termed mason bees,since the materials of which they construct their nests are minutegrains of sand, cemented together with a glutinous secretion, andwhich are placed by the insects on the angle of a wall, or the crevicesbetween bricks, &c. : they are of a sufficient size to contain from threeto eight, or, according to Geoffrey, fifteen cells, placed irregularly.{Iteaumur, tom. vi. mem. iii.) Other species of Osmia (O. bicornis,VOL. II. T274 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.&c.) nidificate in old rotten palings, in which they burrow in an uprightdirection. The palings in the lane leading from Burnham Greento Chadwick are greatly damaged by the last-mentioned species. Imention this more particularly, because Reaumur states that thisspecies builds its nests in the hollows of large stones. In the firstvolume of the Entomol. Magazine is an account of the habits of O. bi-corns,which is therein stated to nidificate in posts, composing itsoval cells (about 20 or 30 in number) of clay and sand, glued together.In the Insect Architecture (p. 33.) are some observations on the habitsof this insect. The males appear a considerable time before thefemales. Spinola has given a short account of the history of anotherspecies of Osmia (O. gallarum, Ins. Lig. vol. ii. p. 70.), which selectsthe abandoned galls of the oak for the place of its nidification, aroundwhich it glues the leaves, depositing from twelve to twenty-four eggsin the cells which it constructs within. In the second volume of theMemoires de la Societe de Physique de Geneve is contained a veryinteresting memoir, by Huber, upon a solitary bee, which he regardsas the Trachusa purulent (Apis purulent Pans), but which agreesbetter with Panzer's Apis fusca, and which appears to be anotherspecies of this genus. This insect selects the empty shells of snailsfor the cradle of its progeny.* The history of another wood-boringspecies, apparently of this genus, is given by Wartmann, in Der ,stuck xxii.fThe genus Megachile comprises the leaf-cutting, and some otherbees. The economy of these insects has long attracted the attentionof the curious; and so early as 1670 it was noticed by Ray, Willughby.Lister, &c. Linnaeus, supposing that identity of economyThis insect is therefore identical in its habits (if not specifically) with Osmiahelicicola of Rob. Desvoidy, which, together with O. bicolor, was reared by thatauthor from nests formed in the deserted shells of Helix neraoralis and H. romania.(See Comptes Rendus, Acad, des Sciences, 1836, No. 23,, for further details; andCyclop. Nat. Hist. vol. iii. p. 360.)f M. Audouin has reared one specimen of a small species of Osmia from thefirst of a series of cells, of which the remainder were filled with spiders, which hadevidently been there deposited by some fossorial species, the parent Osmia havingtaken advantage of the burrow to form its own cell. Such, I apprehend, was alsothe case with the specimen of Osmia leucomelana, as detected by Mr. Smith,entering the dead sticks of the common bramble, from which it might howeverhave excavated the pith, but from which he afterwards reared Odynerus WipesShk., which had also made use of the same burrow. (See Shuckard, in Mag. Nut.Hist. 1837, p. 491.)HYMENOPTERA. APIDiE. 275indicated specific identity, has united several distinct species underthe name of Apis centuncularis. This genus is well distinguished bythe ovate abdomen and the maxillary palpi being very short and disjointed.In the females, the former part is flattened above, and verywoolly beneath ; the jaws and labrum, also, are very large ; whence thegeneric name. The species form their nests in the trunks of decayedtrees ; I have also dug them out of old palings : they are lined withpieces of leaves, of a circular form, which the insects have most dexterouslyclipped off, by the assistance of their powerful jaws. These piecesare so admirably adjusted together, that, although not covered with anycoating of gum, &c., they are honey-tight; the interior surface of eachcell is composed of three of these pieces, the bottom being concave, andfitted into the mouth of the cell beneath: six or seven of these cellsare found in each burrow. Mr. Kirby has given the history of thesebees at great length in his monograph, and has added a translation ofReaumur's account, contained in the fourth memoir of his sixth volume.(See also 3Iag. Nat. Hist. No. 6., for an account of the habitsof M. centuncularis ; and G. R. Waterhouse, in Ent. Mag. vol. iv.p. 497., on the habits of Meg. circumcincta.) The males of M. are distinguished by having the terminal joint of the antennaethickened, and the fore legs greatly dilated. Reaumur (Mem.tom. vi. mem. v. pi. 13.) likewise gave an account of another bee, whichhe termed "belle tapissifere," and which employs pieces of the leavesof the scarlet poppy of the corn-fields, for the lining of its cells. Theprecise species, however, remained unknown until Latreille, by againtracing its habits, discovered and described it under the name ofMegach. papa veris, in a valuable memoir appended to his Hist. Nat. desFourmis, and which now forms the type of the genus Anthocopa of Serville and St. Fargeau {Enc. Methh. tom. x. p. 314.), or rather of Latreille(Hist. Nat. tom. xiv). Other species, as the Megachile muraria (formingthe type of St. Fargeau's unpublished genus Chalicodoma, — seeBrulle, Expel. Scient. de More), are, however, true mason bees. Thehistory of the last-named species has been detailed by Reaumur (tom.vi. mem. iii), and has been misapplied by Mr. Kirby {Monogr. vol. i.p. 178.) to the Osmia;. SchaefFer has also given an elaborate accountof this species in his Ahlumdlung (vol. ii), illustrated in five plates.Some nests of this species, collected by M. Audouin and myself nearParis, have enabled me to observe the habits of this species, so fullydetailed by these authors ; and to discover that it is attacked byT 2276 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.several parasites, including Trichodes aquarius, a species of Anthrax,and a large Pimpla. Another species, Megach. sent, places its nestson the stems of vegetables.The genera Heriades and Chelostoma have the body very longand slender, the males having a singular cavity near the extremity ofthe abdomen beneath. They nidificate in posts and rails in a mannervery similar to the Xylocopse. An interesting account of the habitsof Chelostoma is published in the first volume of the EntomologicalMagazine, from which it appears that the coverings and partitionsbetween the cells are composed of sand. Kennedy (\nLo7id. and Eden.Phil. Mag. Jan. 1837) says that clay is thus used. When at rest,they roll themselves into a ball, taking their repose in the bells ofdifferent species of Campanula.The rare and interesting genus Ceratina (^<7. 91.13. Cer.cyanea, $ )appears to form the connecting link between the subfamilies Longishand Scopulipedes ; its supposed habits and several of its structuralcharacters closely resembling those of Xylocopa. JVI. Spinolahas published a memoir upon the habits of this genus, in the tenthvolume of the Annales du Museum d Hist. Nat. de Paris, 1807. Thisauthor states that the nests are formed in the pith of a branch ofbramble or briar ; but Messrs. Serville and St. Fargeau consider theseinsects to be parasitic, asserting that they are unprovided with anypolliniferous organ, and, consequently, that when found in such situation,it was for the purpose of placing their eggs in the nests of small Os-miffor Heriades. {Enc. Methh. tom. x. p.l81.) Mr. Thwaites has, however,confirmed Spinola's statement, having observed it, as he informsme, " nidificating in bramble-sticks, out of which it scoops the pith, andthen deposits in them, at regular distances, masses of a coarse sort ofhoney, on each of which a larva may subsequently be found feeding."The fourth subfamily, Scopulipedes Latr. (or Anthophorides),derives its former name from the very thick coating of hairs upon thehind legs of the females, which constitute the pollen-brushes (^^.91.8.).In general, the basal joint of the posterior tarsi has also its extremityangularly produced. These insects have no pollen plates ; the abdomenis also destitute of a ventral pollen-brush. The wings have commonlythree perfect submarginal cells; the third joint of the antennaeis often long and clavate, being very slender at the base ; the mouthis occasionally very considerably developed. These insects, notwlth-HYMENOPTERA. — APIDiE. 277Standing the shortness of the wings, and the robustness of the body,fly with great strength and rapidity, and with a considerable hummingnoise. The sexes are often very different, both in structure andcolour ; the males in some having very long antennae ; in others, theposterior femora are thickened ; whilst, in a few the tarsi of the intermediatelegs are furnished with curious brushes of hairs. The face isoften of a pale yellow colour, and the females are generally of blackor more obscure colours. They nidificate in the crevices of old wallsor in the ground, preferring banks exposed to the sun. Their cellsare composed of earth, and very smooth on the inside. The mouthof the nest is closed with the same material.The species of Eucera, as the name implies, are distinguished bythe great length of the antennae in the males, which are nearly equalto that of the body. Mr. Kirby has observed that the last ten jointsof these organs in this sex are composed of innumerable minute hexagons.The cells of these insects are formed under ground, at thedepth of two or three inches: their internal surface is very smooth.The Anthophorae, at least the common British species A. retusa,makes its nest not only in hard dry banks, but also in the crevices ofwalls burrowing through the mortar, and causing much damage byloosening the bricks. Each nest contains several cells of an oval orelliptical shape, placed irregularly, and covered with a thin whitemembrane : they are about three quarters of an inch in length. Aninteresting memoir, by Latreille, is published in the third volume ofthe Annales du Museum, upon Anthophora parietina : the fourteenthvolume of the same work likewise contains another memoir by the sameauthor upon this genus. In Insect Architecture (p. 33.) are some detailsrelative to the habits of the typical species A. retusa, which appearsvery early in the spring. I have observed that this insect, both onthe wing and when at rest, does not carry its hind wings on thesame plane as the fore wings.The genus Saropoda seems to connect the preceding insects withthe carpenter bees, its structure so nearly approaching Anthophora,that the French authors unite them together ; but its habits, accordingto Mr. Kirby, who observed the proceedings of S. furcata, are quitedifferent, resembling those of Xylocopa. It nidificates in putrescentwood, forming longitudinal burrows, which are divided into nine orten oval chambers, separated from each other by a sharp kind of cornice,forming the shells of an equal number of cells made of theT 3278 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.scrapings of the wood. The tunnel, except at its top and bottom,which are bent, runs in a straight direction, so that the insect hatchedfrom the lowermost first deposited egg makes its way, in all probability,through the bottom aperture without disturbing its brethrenoverhead.We are indebted to Reaumur (Mem. torn. vi. mem. iv.) for the historyof the carpenter bees, Xylocopa, a genus containing the largestspecies of the family, all of which are exotic, the species describedby Mr. Kirby in his Monograph having evidently no claim to be regardedas a native species. Their wings are often black, with a finepurple or violet gloss, and some of the species are richly coloured.The females of X.violacea, the species observed by Reaumur in France,appear in the spring, and select posts, palings, espaliers, &c., in gardens,in which they construct (fig. 91. 7. mandible of a Chinese species)their burrows, from twelve to fifteen inches in length, and rather morethan half an inch in diameter ; the top and bottom of the tunnel iscurved, having a passage at each end. When completed, they depositan egg at the bottom, with a proper supply of pollen paste ; thewhole is then covered with a layer of agglutinated sawdust, formedduring the construction of the burrow : the layer thus formed servesnot only as the roof of one cell, but as the floor of another which isplaced immediately above it. They thus proceed until about a dozencells are formed. When the larvae are full grown, they assume thepupa state, head downward, so as to allow the lowermost and oldest tomake its way out of the bottom of the burrow as soon as it becomeswinged, and which consequently takes place earlier than in thosewhich occupy the upper cells. The late Rev. L. Guilding has publishedan interesting account of the habits of one of the West Indianspecies, Xyl. teredo, in the fourteenth volume of the LinncEcin Transactions,illustrated with numerous figures.The males of some of the large species (X. ladies, and severalothers undescribed) have the fore legs greatly dilated.The fifth and last subfamily of the Apidae is the Sociales ofLatreille (or Apices). Here, dependent upon their social habits, wefind each species composed of three kinds of individuals ; viz. males,females, and neuters, or workers.* In addition to their gregariousWhen we consider that in the community of the hive bee, consisting, for instance,of at least 2000 males, 50,000 workers, and 1 queen, a single individual of the femaleHYMENOPTERA. APID^. 279habits, the circumstances of the larvae being fed from time to timeby the worker bees, and the cells being generally of an hexagonalform, they are also distinguished by their peculiar habit of secretingwax for the manufacture of the cells of their nests. In these insects,the outside of the posterior dilated tibiae is smooth, and hollowed inthe neuters into a shining plate, for the reception and carrying ofpollen, which has been accumulated by means of the pollen-brushesupon the basal joint of the tarsi of this pair of legs. The maxillarypalpi are minute and inarticulate. These bees have the body coveredwith thick hairs. Some Brazilian species (genus Euglossa) are naked,and of very brilliant colours ; their economy is unknown, but theirlegs are provided with large pollen-plates : some of them, however, asthe Alae cerulean St.Farg. (figured in Griffith's Animal Kingdom), aredestitute of these organs, and are consequently supposed to be parasitic.The same remark also applies to certain British species of humblesex should alone be permitted to arrive at perfection, the immense number of50,000 individuals of that sex being rendered imperfect by a process which preventsthem from acquiring their normally perfect state, we cannot but be surprised thatthe physiological peculiarities connected with the development of the workers, to sucha far less perfect extent than that of the true females, have not been yet sufficientlyinvestigated. To assert that it is merely owing to the diminished size of the cell, itshorizontal direction, or the quality of the food of the workers, that their sexualorgans are rendered abortive, the shape of their tongue, sting, mandibles, and legs,altered, and the abdomen deprived of its wax-pockets, is not sufficient : the processby which all this is effected, and the instincts of the creature changed, requires to beinvestigated. (See Treviranus, in Zeitschrift fur Phtjsiologie, tom. iii. cap. 2. p. 200.,and Bull. Fenissac, April 1830; and in Ditto, October 1830; and Espargnet, inActes Soc. Bordeaux, No. 32., May 1833; and Ditto, in Bull. Oct. 18.30.) Inlike manner, the physiological peculiarities whereby, even amongst the imperfectfemales, or workers, a notification of form is effected, is equally worthy of research ;for it must evidently be owing to a principle analogous to that which produces thedifferences between the female and the ordinary workers, that the latter are still furthermodified. Thus, in the hive bee, Huber and others have proved that the workers aredivided into two classes, namely, the nurse bees and wax workers, differing in sizeand instincts. Again, some of the workers, differing in shape from the rest, areoccasionally fertile, depositing eggs, but which only produce males. (bevan, p. 26.2d edition.) There are also occasionally observed in the hive other kinds ofworkers, known to apiarians under the names of captains and black bees. In thehumble bee, also, the early-born females, as well as the males, differ in size from theirparents, the former, as it appears, only producing male eggs ; and Mr. Newport hasascertained that a diversity also exists in the working humble bees. The productionof these different kinds of individuals must originate in the peculiarities connectedwith their treatment by the workers, whilst in the early stages of their existence.T 4;280 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.bees, the peculiarities of which did not escape Mr. Kirby ; he, however,speaks of the neuters of these species, and suspects that theynidificate under ground. {Monogr. vol. i. p. 210.) St. Fargeau, however,taking into consideration their structural incapability to form their ownnests, has regarded them as parasitic, and separated them from thetrue humble bees, under the name of Psithyrus, in the Annales de laSoc. Ent. de France.Referring to the observations which I have already made as to thenecessity of regarding general structure, rather than parasitic economy,as of primary importance in the distribution of the bees, I adoptLatreille's division of this subfamily into two sections ; those whichhave the posterior tibiae spurred, comprising the humble bees, whichare temporarily social ; and those which have the posterior tibiae withoutspurs, consisting of the hive and other honey bees, which arepermanently social. St. Fargeau has placed the social bees in hissection Hymenopteres phytiphages sicilians social, dividing theminto the Pyrenees, consisting of the families of the ants and Apiarides ;the latter divisible into two tribes, 1st, Apiarites (genus Apis) ; and2d, Meliponites (genus Melipona) : and t\\e Annuals ; the latter consistingof the social wasps and the humble bees, or family Combines,composed of the single genus Bombus.The humble bees, composing the genus Bombus*, are at once knownby their large and very hairy bodies : they are the largest species ofthe Mellifera found in England ; and they are often of a black colour,with bands of yellow or orange. They form societies consisting of aboutfifty or sixty individuals, occasionally, however, amounting to two orBiBLioGR. Refer, to the Bombs.Huher. Observ. sur los Bourdon (Trans. Linn. Soc. vol. vi).Lahillardiere. Note sur les Moeurs des Bourdon, in Mem. du Mus. d'Hist. Nat.torn. i.Dahlhom. Bombs Scandinavia Monogr. 8vo. Lund. 1832.Lepellctier de Saint Fargeau. Observations on ditto (Annal. Soc. Ent. de France,torn. i.).Reaumur. Memoires, tom. vi. mem. i.Latreille, in Mem. du Mus. tom. iii.Petit Hours, in Nouv. Bull, des Sciences, 1814, tom. i.Goezen, in Der Naturforscher, St. 14.Drewsen et Schiodte. Bonorum Psithyrorumque Daniaj enumeration critica,Havnia;, 18.38, 8vo.HYMENOPTERA. — APIDjE. 281three hundred. They construct their dwellings under-ground in meadows,pastures, or hedge-rows, generally employing moss for thispurpose. Their union, however, lasts only till the cold weather killsthe great mass of" the inhabitants, a few impregnated females alonesurviving to become the foundress of fresh colonies at the commencementof the following spring. The neuters are late in their appearance,being produced from eggs deposited by these foundress bees ;and it is not until autumn that the males appear. Unlike the hivebee, the females take their share in the labours of the community,and they are accordingly furnished with two peculiar organs possessedby the neuters, of which the queen of the hive is destitute, althoughthe neuters of the latter insect possess them ; namely, the dense fringeof hairs surrounding the pollen-plate of the posterior tibiae, and thedilated base of the first tarsal joint. The economy of the bumblebeealso, unlike that of the hive, admits of the presence of numerousfemales in the same nest. The species of Bombus are very difficultto determine, from the colours of the hairs being very liable to fade.It is essential, therefore, to trace the insects from their first leavingthe nest. M. Audouin has proved that the sexual organs of the malesof closely allied species present very characteristic specific distinctions.(A?in. Genera. Set. Physiq. torn. viii. p. 285.)The patient affection of the females in the construction of the nestand cells, and deposition of eggs ; the subsequent cares of the workersfor insuring a constant supply of food to the young brood, and forsecuring its escape from its cell when arrived at the perfect state ; theconstruction of the nests and cells ; the different kinds of individuals,and their various duties at different periods of the year ; the distinctionbetween the females and neuters, and between the two kindsof the former, some of which are of a smaller size than the foundressbees, and produce only male eggs, — (between these small females andthe later produced larger ones great jealousy exists: it is the latterwhich, after impregnation, survive the winter, and deposit their eggs inthe following spring, — ) these, together with numerous other interestingpeculiarities in the history of these insects, are treated upon bythe various authors cited above, as well as by St. Fargeau, and Kirbyand Spence, in the first and second volumes of their Introduction.With respect to the Apathy, Psithyri, or Pseudo-bombs, as the parasiticBombs have been named, it is to be observed that, inasmuch asin the hive bee we find those individuals which take no share in theMODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.labours of the hive, namely, the males and queen, unfurnished eitherwith pollen-plates on the hind legs, or auricle at the base of theposterior tarsi ; whilst in Bombus this deficiency, as above stated,occurs only in the males, thus indicating the working character of thefemale humble bees ; — so we are strictly warranted by analogy inregarding the Apathy as incapable of working, and consequently asparasitic, since all the individuals of which the different species arecomposed are alike destitute of these, and some other characters peculiarto working bees. The exotic genus Euglossa is distinguished not onlyby the great brilliancy of colouring in many of the species, but by thegreat length of the labium and maxillae (whence the generic name),and which extend to the extremity of the abdomen.The hive bee*, and some other analogous species (forming theFig. 92.tsecond section of the Sociales), have the basal joint of the posterior tarsistriated (Jig. 92. 20.), and the posterior tibiae have no spurs at theBiBLioGR. Refer, on the Hive Bee.Hill. Instruction of Bees. London, 1593. 8vo.Butler. Feminine Monarchy; or, the History of the Bees. Oxford, 8vo. 1609;and numerous subsequent editions.Purchas. A Theatre of Political Flying Insects (Bees) 4to. London, 1657.Miranda, in M6m. Acad. Roy. des Sciences, 1712.i- The various details in block 92. are those of the hive bee : fig. 1. the male ordrone ; 2. front of its head ; 3. mandible ; 4. antenna ; 5. apex of abdomenlaterally ; 6. posterior tibia and portion of the tarsus : 7. the queen or female ;8. mandible; 9. antenna; 10. tibia and posterior tarsus : 11. the worker, neuter,or imperfect female; 12. front of head; 13. labrum ; 14. mandible; 15. maxilla;16. labium; 17. antenna; 18. base of anterior tarsus; 19. outside of the hind leg;20. inside of the posterior tarsus.HYMENOPTERA. APID/E. 283extremity, a character not to be found in any other Hymenopterousgroup. Many volumes have been written upon the natural history ofWarder, Aquarium; or, a Discourse on Bees. London, 1676. — Ditto, A furtherDiscovery of Bees, 8vo. London, 1680 (by Austen). — Ditto, The TrueAmazons; or. Monarchy of Bees. London, 8vo. 1713 (edited by Austen).Dois. A Letter concerning Bees, in Philos. Trans, vol. xlv.Sutton. Letter concerning Swammerdam's Treatise de Apibus, Philos. Trans.1699.Shirley. Melissologia ; or Female Monarchy. 8vo. London, 1744. — Ditto, AnInquiry into the Nature, &c. of Bees. 8vo. London, 1765. — Description of acurious and useful Hive (Journ. Economy. 1767).R^attmur. Memoires, torn. v.Mills. On the Management of Bees. 8vo. 1766.Wiseman. Treatise on the Management of Bees. 4to. London, 1768.Hunter, John. Observ. on Bees, in Philos. Trans. 1792.Keys. A Treatise on the Breeding, &c. of Bees. 12mo. London, 1814.Hush. A Treatise on the Nature, &c. of Bees. Svo. London, 1815.Dunbar. Observations on Bees, Edinb. Philos. Journal, vol. x. ; and in Isis,1832.Barton. Inquiry whether the true Honey Bee is a Native of America, in Trans.America. Soc. Philadelphia, vol. iii.Knight. Economy of Bees, Philos. Trans. 1807.Coeli de Scabra, Notice sur les diverses Species d'Abeilles particulier enBrazil, in Mem. Math. Phys. Acad. Sc. Lisbon, tom. ii.Espargnet. Sur la Reproduction des Abeilles (Bull. Hist. Nat. Soc. Bordeaux,tom. iii. 1829). — Ditto, Essai sur I'Hist. Nat. des Abeilles, in ditto, tom. iv.1830.Koenig, Solution du Problems des Cellules hexagonal des Riches des Abeilles,in Mem. Acad, des Sci., ann. 1739.Sevan. The Honey Bee. London, 8vo. 1838. 2d edit.Master. On the Management of Bees. London, 1834.Schirach. Author of numerous Memoirs in German, of which the following arethe chief: — On the Female Bee, without Impregnation, to the third Generation,in Abhandl. der Bienenges. Oberlaus. b. i. — Ditto, on Swarming, inditto, 1766-67, 68. 70. — Ditto, on the Queen Bee, in ditto, 1767. — Ditto,on the Males, in ditto, 1768-69. — Ditto, on the Production of Queens fromWorker Larvae, in ditto, 1768. 1771. — Ditto, Further Observ. on Males, inditto, 1770 and 1771. — Ditto, New Lode of multiplying Bees, and causingthem to swarm in May. 8vo. Badissen, 1761. — Ditto, Mulatto-theology. 8vo.Dresden, 1767. — Ditto, on Early-swarming and Queen Bees. 8vo. Ba-dissent,1770.Harold. On the Male Bees, in Abhandl. Frank. Bien. Gesellsch, 1772-73,Bonnet. Lettre sur les Abeilles. Berlin, Samml. 1 775.Rocca. Traite complet sur les Abeilles. 3 tom. Svo. Paris," 1790.Needham. Nouv. Recherch. sur les Mouches a Miel, Mem. Acad. Bruxelles,tom. xi.Huber (F. ). Observ. sur les Abeilles. Paris, 1810. 8vo. — Ditto, German284 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.the hive bee, yet many interesting points in their economy still remainundetermined. Of the products of the hive, honey * is by far themost important ; and various interesting details as to the productionof this substance are contained in the 10th letter of Messrs. Kirbyand Spence's first volume ; whilst in the 11th and 15th letters will befound much information as to the food and mode of feeding of thelarvae, the construction of the waxen-j- cells ^ by the workers, thesubstances employed in building the nest, and the extraordinary ma-^edition, Dresden, 1793; English edition, 12mo. London, 1808. — Ditto,2 vols. Geneva, 1814. (Second volume by P. Huber. )Latreille. Memoire sur un Gateau de Ruche d'Abeille des Grandes Indes, et surles Differences des Abeilles proprement dites, vivant en grande Societe, deAncien Continent et du Nouveau. Ann. du Mus. d'Hist. Nat. torn. iv.1804. — Ditto, Notice des Species d' Abeilles vivant en grande Societe, inditto, torn. V. 1804. — Ditto, in Mem. du Mus. d'Hist. Nat. tom. viii. 1822(on the Nature of Wax).Mamdohr, in Magazin Gesellsch. Nature zu Berlin, 1810. 4 band. (Organ ofTaste in Bees. 1812 (Organs of Hearing and Smell in Bees); also inGermar's Mag. der Entomol. vol. i.Hatter. On Impregnation of Queen Bee, in Abhandl. der Oberlaus. Bienengesel,1768-69.Garden. On the Proboscis of Bees. Philos. Trans. No. 1 75.Lombard {C. F.). Manuel du Proprietary d' Abeilles. 8vo. Paris, 1802. — Ditto,6th edition, 1825, 8vo. — Ditto, Eat de nos Connaissances sur les Abeilles auCommencement du 19me Siecle. 8vo. Paris, 1805. — Ditto, Memoire sur ladifficult de blanche les Cares de France. 8vo. Paris, 1 808.Mckenzie, in Brewster and Jameson's Edinb. Philos. Journal, vol. iii. 1820.Propolis, a resinous substance collected by the bees, consists of one part ofwax and four of pure resin ; it is collected from various plants, and is used as a strongcement by the bees. (Vauquelin, in Btdl. Soc. Philomat. No. 57. ; DeLoche, in Mem.Acad. Turin, tom. ii. )+ The true nature of bees' wax has been the subject of much research. (SeeLatreille, in Mem. du Museum, tom. viii. ; De Loche, in Turin Trans, vol. ii. ; andTreviranus, in Zeitschr. flor Phydologie, 1828, p. 62. ; and Bull. Set. Nat. Jan.1829.):j: Dr. Barclay (in Wernerian Trans, vol. ii. p. 260.) has described the partitionsbetween the cells as being all double, each cell being an independent structure ; butthis peculiarity does not occur in cells of virgin wax, but only in old comb, in whichthe partitions between the cells do not consist of wax, but of the cocoons spun by theprevious occupiers of the nest. Such is the explanation given by Mr. G. R. Water-house,and its correctness is easily proved by immersing such cells in boiling water,when they will not dissolve; but Mr. G. Newport, in a memoir read on the 1st ofApril, 1 839, before the same society, adopts a contrary opinion ; and moreoverasserts that virgin cells are lined with a delicate membrane.HYMENOPTERA. APID^. 285theatrical accuracy observed in the formation of the cells * ; whilstnearly a quarter of the second volume is occupied with descriptionsand accounts of the duties of the various individuals composing thecommunity ; descriptions of the preparatory states ; the singular powerwhich they possess of causing the development of the queens fromneuter grubs, in case of the death of the old queen ; the destructionof the female grubs by the latter, their swarming, &c. &c.The geographical range of the species of the genus Apis (whichare distinguished by their possessing three submarginal cells in thewings) is believed to be restricted to the Old World ; it is evidenthowever, from the early records of the North American States, that aspecies of bee, congenerous with the common hive bee, was domesticatedthere ; of which I have received specimens from Philadelphia,which cannot be specifically distinguished from Apis mellifica. Amemoir upon this question is contained in the Transactions of theAmerican Philosophical Society, Philadelphia, vol. iii. 1793-f-; see alsothe remarks of M. Huevel, contained in the German Isis for 1823,and republished in the Bull. Sci. Nat. March, 1825.The principal species of bees kept for domestic purposes are thefollowing: — Apis mellifica Linn., or the common hive bee of Europe,and which has also been introduced into the United States of America;Apis ligustica Spinola, kept in some parts of Italy ; Apis fasciataLatreille, in Egypt and some parts of Asia Minor ; Apis unicolorFabricius, in Madagascar ; Apis Indica Linn., at Bengal ; ApisAdansonii Latr., at Senegal ; Lacordaire also observed hives of an un-describedspecies at Chili. A considerable number of other speciesThe mathematical precision of the hexagonal cells of the hive has attracted theattention of some of the most profound mathematicians, Koenig and Reaumurhaving proved that the different angles of the sides and bottom are precisely thosewhich were fitted for the required construction. Mr. G. R. Warehouse, in aningenious article, " Bee," in the Penny Cyclopcedia, has endeavoured to show that thenormal form of the cells is cylindrical ; but that, in consequence of the bees workingin concert, the space between the cylinders is gradually altered into a straight side,thus forming hexagons instead of cylinders. Lord Brougham (in his Dissertationson Subjects of Science connected with Natural Theology, 1 839) has entered deeplyinto the mathematical questions connected with the structure, in opposition to theview of Mr. Waterhouse.f The fifth volume of the same American work contains an interesting paper " Onthe Knowledge of the Ancients concerning poisonous Honey'" by Dr. Barton : andsee Beck's Elements of Medical Jurisprudence, edited by Dunlop and Facere, vol. iv.p. 299. It has also formed the subject of a communication made to the ZoologicalSociety of London, in 1834, by K. E. Abbot, Esq. from Trebizond.286 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.might also be employed in the same manner, with effect. Fabriciuscites, amongst others. Apis acraensis and laborious. (See Kirby andSpence, Introdd. vol. ii. p. 242.)Spinola (/w^ecto Liquorice, vol. ii.) has published a long account ofthe bee employed in Italy for producing honey, and which he hasnamed Apis mellifica ligustica. This species, which is different fromour common hive bee, agrees with the description given of the honeybeeby Aristotle and other writers of antiquity, inhabitants ofSouthern Europe ; whence it is evident that these authors were unacquaintedwith the common bee of the North of Europe. Spinolalikewise considered his species distinct from Latreille's Egyptianspecies Apis fasciata, which is annually transported in bee boats downthe Nile. (See ^^Ae?««Mm, January 1835.)Other exotic species of this section compose the two generaMelipona (having the basal joint of the posterior tarsi of a triangularform, two submarginal cells, and entire jaws) and Trigona, havingtoothed jaws, and a more hairy body. The insects of the latter genus,of which Apis amalthea Fah. is an example, build their nests at thetops of the branches of trees, out of the reach of monkeys, in theshape of a large pear : the former select cavities in rotten stumps oftrees. The nest of a Mexican species of this genus was exhibited atthe Linnaean Society, on January 29. 1 829, built in the hollow of a logof wood ; and which consisted of numerous irregularly-placed ovalblack-coloured cells, filled with thick amber-coloured honey, amongstwhich numerous specimens of the bees lay dead. An elaborate essayupon this insect, by Huber, has been published in the Memoirs of theSociety of Geneva, vol. viii. p. 1. 1837 : and an account of this orasimilar Mexican nest, by Capt. Beeches, is contained in the thirdnumber of the Journal of the Royal Institution. (See also Bevan,chap. 23.)The memoir of Scabra (Notitia de diversa Species de Abelhas quedao mel propria do Brasil, o desconhecidas na Europa, folio, Lisbon,1799) should also be noticed. (See Bull. Sc. Nat. January 1830.*)Latreille has described many species of these exotic honey bees inthe appendix to the travels of Humboldt and Copland ; but it maybeeasily conceived how much remains unknown of the habits of theexotic species, when it is stated, that out of thirty-five species ofIn the Journal of the Geographical Society (quoted in Ent. May. vol. v.p. 119.) is a memoir upon the management of bees in Cashmere.STREPSIPTERA.Melipona described by St. Fargeau, in his Hist. Nat. Hynienopt., asingle male only was observed ; and it is probable that not a singlefemale exists in collections — neuters only being known. This authorhas added another genus, Tarragona, established upon the neuters ofother Brazilian species ; and Messrs. Kirby and Spence observe (^Introd.vol. iv. p. 4'97.) that the honey bee is replaced in New Holland byanother distinct but undescribed type.*Order STREPSIPTERA f Kirby.(Hemiptera Latr. ; Diptera Lepidoptera Lamarck.)Char, Anterior wings transformed into a pair of short slender contortedappendages ; posterior wings very large, folding longitudinallylike a fan.Mouth with two slender acute jaws, wide apart, and two largeinarticulate palpi.Tarsi 2-, 3-, or 4-jointed.Larva apod and vermiform, with a flattened head.Pupa coarctate and inactive.Fig. 93.We are now arrived at a small group of insects, which may be re-theHorticultural Society of London, in 1825, received a hive of bees fromNew Holland, differing materially from the bees of Europe, " being infinitely smallerand wholly without stings." (literary Gazette, 1825, p. 443.)"f" BiBLIOGR. Refer, to the STREPSIPTfiRA.Rossi. Fauna Etrusca Mantissa (tab. 8. fig. B. 6., Suppl. tom. ii. p. 114. pi. 7.f B.).Kirby, in Monogr. Apud Angl. vol. ii. p. 111. — Ditto, in Sowerby's BritishMODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.garden as the most anomalous annulose animals with which we areacquainted ; and which, either as respects their anatomical characters,or the many obscure points connected with their economy, may justlybe considered to merit the epithet bestowed upon one of them byLatreille : " Systematic entomological perturbed videtur cum ex ordinisomnibus repeater — animalculum — animus excretions. Tempusducats, et dies alter luce afferent." (gen. Crust. S^c. lova \y .p. 388.)The insects of which this order is composed are of small size, thelargest not reaching a quarter of an inch in length. (Frontispiece,Fig. 94.Vol. \.fig- 6., represents Stylops Spencii, ^w^fig. 93. i. the same laterally;^^. 94', 1. Elenchus tenuicornis ; 91'. 7. Halictophagus Curtisiiii ;Miscell. pi. 45. — Ditto, in Trans. Linn. Soc. vol. xi. (bis). — Abstract inBull. Soc. Philomat. 1815; and Germar, Mag. dent. torn. ii.Jurine. Observ. sur les Xenos Vesparum, in Mem. Acad. Turin, torn, xxiii.Leach, in Zool. Miscellany, vol. iii. p. 133. (Stylops Kirbii). — Ditto, in Journ.du Physique, No. 88. 1819.Curtis. British Entomology, pi. 22G. (Stylops), 385. (Elenclius) ; and 433.(Halictophagus).Pickering, in Trans. Ent. Soc. vol. i. p. 170. (Stylops Spencii).Westwood, in Mag. Nat. Hist. No. 26. May 1832 Ditto, in Trans. Ent. Soc.vol. i. (Observ. upon the Strepsiptera, and Descr. of Elenchus Templeton).Ditto, vol. ii. (Description of Parasites found upon the Larva of Stylops). —Ditto, in Griffith's Animal Kingdom Ins. i pi. 59. (Stylops ChildrenGray. )Gtwrin and Percheron. Gen. des Insectes Rhipipt, pi. 1. (X. Vesparum).1 No account is given in the text of this work as to the locality of the specieshere figured and dissected. I am enabled, however, to state, that it was obtained byMr. G. B. Sowerby from the abdomen of a bee, forming part of a collectionreceived by him from Nova Scotia.STREPSIPTEUA. 28994. 11. Xenos Rossii, after Jurine ; 94. 12. the same from nature.)The body is long and narrow, its greatest extent being occupied bya very large and singularly developed thorax. The general characterof the body indicates great weakness, and we accordingly find thatthe insects live but a very short time in the imago state. The headand thorax are of a velvety texture. The head is distinct and exposed(fig. 93. 2. head of S. Spencii ; 93. 3. ditto of S. Childreniiii ;94. 2. under side of head, and front of body of Elenchus) : it is transverse,with the eyes very large, lateral, and prominent, being placedupon the contracted sides of the head, which gives them the appearanceof being inserted upon short foot-stalks. The number of hexagonalfacets is small, and they are singularly separated from eachother by a septum or partition, which, being elevated above thelenses, gives the eyes a cellular surface. The lenses are much larger,and infinitely less numerous, especially in Xenos, than in other insectswith compound eyes. (kirby, I.e. p. 104.) In the last-named genusthere are not more than fifty lenses. In Elenchus tenuicornis Mr.Templeton* could only detect about fifteen lenses in the eyes, whichare quite sessile (fig. 94. 3. eye of Elenchus, from Mr. Templeton'sdrawings). The front margin of the head is rather produced anddeflexed below (Trans. Exit. Soc. vol. i. pi. 17. f. 5.), but it does notappear to exhibit any transverse impression indicating the existenceof a distinct clypeus, or upper lip ; such, at least, is its character inthe recent specimens which I have examined Savigny, however,described this deflexed gradually narrowed part of the head, as amoveable labrum, in the " characters oris" which he communicatedto Dr. Leach (Zool. 3Iisc. vol. iii. p. 133).f The composition of themouth is very singular, exhibiting none of that complicated structurewhich we have seen in many of the preceding insects. This is, ineffect, to be attributed to the fact, that the imago takes little, if any,food during its short existence. J In the various specimens which Ihave examined and dissected, I have not, indeed, been able to detectI am indebted to this gentleman not only for his unique specimen of Elenchustenuicornis, together with specimens of his minute Mauritian Elenchus, but alsofor an elaborate MS. description and figures of the former species.•f Jurine describes Xenos vesparum as having " deux levies, une superieure, largeet ciliee, et une inferior beaucoup plus petite."\ Speaking of the Xenos Peckii, Professor Peck states that it probably does notfeed in the perfect state, like some Phalaena, and only continues the species. [Linn.Trans, vol. xi. p. 92.)VOL. II. U290 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.any distinct oral aperture. There is, it is true, a transverse impressionon the back of the under side of the head, with a smaller one more infront (described by Curtis as the pharynx, B7'it. Ent. pi. 226. fig.E. a.). At each side of the former (which extends nearly across thehead) arises a long, narrow, nearly straight, somewhat lancet-likeappendage, arising from a slightly dilated (articulated?) base (Jiff-93. 4.) : these pieces are directed forwards, but in a converging direction,so that their points cross * ; immediately behind these instrumentsarises a pair of very large two-jointed organs, also directedforwards, the basal joint being obliquely truncate, and the terminalpoint inserted somewhat laterally (Jiff. 93. 4. 94'. 4. palpus of Elenchus).Savigny, who undertook the examination of the mouth of one of theseinsects, forwarded to him by Dr. Leach, regarded the pair of long,lancet-like organs as mandibles, and the basal joint of the last-describedorgans as the maxillae, whilst the terminal joint he regarded alone asrepresenting the maxillary palpus ; the labium he regarded as thepiece soldered to the under side of the head, destitute of a ligula orlabial palpi. (Zoo. J/^cvoLiii. p. 133.) Kirby also regarded the lancet-likeorgans as mandibles, and the articulated ones as maxillary palpi.(Linn.Trans. vol. ii. p. 103.) Upon these considerations, the order hasbeen regarded as mandibulated. Mr. Newman, on the other hand,considers it as not sufficiently separated from the Diptera, " its mandiblesbeing elongate, linear, and without any horizontal motion ; itsmaxipalpi fully developed, as in Diptera, but the maxillae scarcely discernible; its labium distinct and triangular, as in Lepidoptera, but thelabipalpi minute or obsolete." (Ent. Mag. vol. ii. p. 327.) I cannot,however, find the least analogy between the oral organisation of theStrepsiptera and the tubular developed elbowed mouth of the Di-pera,the labium of which is greatly elongated ; whereas, on thecontrary, there seems to me much greater resemblance, in thisrespect, between the Strepsiptera and Lepidoptera, the labium in bothbeing soldered flatly to the head, the acute mandibles, as they havebeen termed in Stylops, being exactly represented in some of LinnaeanBombyces, by the short rudimental maxillae, and the large articulatedProfessor Peck asks what can be the use of these instruments : they are notstrong enough to enable the insect to cut its way through the paper cells of thewasp's comb : can they be useful in opening the sides of the larva for depositingthe eggs ? Neither of these suggestions are, however, applicable to Stylops.STHEPSIPTERA. 291appendages being much more analogous to the labial palpi of theLepidoptera, than to the maxillary palpi of the Diptera. (Comp.Curtis, 24. f. 6. Gastropacha ; or 328. f. 3, 4. Ptilophora.)The antennae are of singular construction, although consisting of butafew joints : they arise between the front of the eyes near the baseof the contracted ocular foot-stalks. The basal joint is thick, andenlarged to the tip ; the second joint small, or of moderate size. InStylops the antenna; are furcate, the third joint being produced, on theoutside below, into an elongated flattened plate nearly as long as theremainder of the antennas : the fourth joint is inserted near the baseof this plate, on its upper side * ; it is rather depressed, and about halfas long as the third joint: the fifth and sixth joints are still shorter andmore slender fig. 93. 5.). In Elenchus fig. 94. l. and 6. side ofthe front of the body, showing the antennae and pseudelytron, afterCurtis) the antennae are also furcate after the second joint, but the thirdjoint is much more slender and elongated than in Stylops ; and thereonly appear to be two other joints, which are also more elongated andslenderer. In Xenos fig. 94. 12.) the functions of the antennae (afterthe second joint) are nearly of equal size, the third joint emitting fromits base a single-jointed branch; so that, in this genus, these organs areapparently only 4-jointed. In Halictophagus fig. 94. 7.) the antennaeare more regularly constructed; consisting of seven joints, those afterthe second joint being flabellated, each (except the last, which iselongated) emitting a thickened branch. Mr, Kirby noticed theanalogy which existed between the antennae of some of these insectsand many Cleopatra and Hymenoptera, which have branchingor furcate antennae. But it is to be observed, that, with the exceptionof a very few (Grins, Parus), antennae thus constructed are foundonly amongst male insects ; and hence it appears to me not improbablethat all the winged individuals of this order, yet discovered, aremales, all exhibiting a complicated structure in their antennae: thisis especially the case with Halictophagus.The thorax is very large, oblong, and singularly developed, contr.Kirby describes the third and fourth joints as both arising from thepreceding.-f- Professor Peck considered that all his specimens of X. Peckii, which were alike,were males (Lin7i. Trans, vol. xi. p. 91.) ; but Mr. Kirby, chiefly regarding theanal appendages as an oviduct, apprehended that they were females. Rossi statesthat he was acquainted with both sexes of Xenos, but Jurine doubts this. All thespecimens reared by the latter (as many as twenty) were exactly alike.u 2292 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.sitting of a very small, collar-like prothorax and mesothorax, andan immense metathorax; this structure corresponding, as we shallsee, with the slight development of the anterior, and the disproportionatelylarge size of the posterior wings (fig. 93. 6. represents alateral view of the body of Stylops Childreniiii with the head andwings removed). On carefully removing the prothoi'ax, it is foundto consist of a simple ring or collar (fig. 93. 7. dotted), to which thefore legs are attached on the under side. The mesothorax fig.93. 8.) is nearly similar, and scarcely of larger size, having the meso-thoracic legs on its under side. It is moreover furnished with a pairof small singular appendages, which have been the subject of greatcontroversy. These organs have been termed prebalanciers*, prae-halters,pseudhalteres, pseudelytra, or anterior wings (fig. 94. 5.pseudelytron of Elenchus, 94. 13. ditto of Xenos). They are narrow,elongated, curved, and channelled processes, thickened at thetips, originating close to the anterior and lateral edge of the mesothorax,and so nearly to the fore legs, that F. Bauer, who executedthe drawings of the dissections for Mr. Kirby's memoir (linn. Trans.vol. xi. tab. 9.), figured them as connected together by a very minutemembrane. If such were actually the case, these organs would ofcourse be pro thoracic, and not representatives of the mesothoracic orfore wings ; and hence Latreille rejected the name Strepsiptera (proposedfor the order by Mr. Kirby, on the supposition that they wererepresentations of the fore wings, although'contrary to Bauer's views).More recent observations have, however, demonstrated that these organsare attached to the mesothoraxt, and are consequently analogousIn the seventeenth number of the Zoological Journal, the pseudelytra andprebalanciers are erroneously spoken of as distinct organs.f Latreille, Annul. Genera. des Scienc. Phi/siq. p. 6. fig. 18. 8. ; Curtis, pi. 226. fig. K. ;Griffith, Anim. King. his. pi. 59. ; West. M. N. H. May, 1832. MacLeay hora Ent.423.*), although considering these appendages as pro thoracic, insists on the proprietyof Kirby's name, because it is admitted that they are twisted, and that they are usedin flight. The names of the orders of insects being, however, founded upon themesothoracic and meta thoracic alary appendages, such a nomenclature would beuntenable. As it is, these organs are mesothoracic, and therefore real wings ; andthus Kirby's name is correct. Mr. MacLeay has subsequently adopted the opinionthat the pseudhalteres are true elytra, and that " consequently the only wings theinsect possesses are the under wings, the paraptera of which are enormously developed,as well as the epimera of the metathorax ;" adding, however, the remark,The insect, in fact, ceases to be so very extraordinary." (Zool. Journ. No. 18.p. 176.)STREPSIPTERA. 293to such elytra as we find in Atractocerus (Vol. I. p. 276 fig. 31. l.),Synibius ibid. p. 291. fig. 33. 16,), &c. Ldtreille, however, regardedthem rather as analogous to the mesothoracic regulate, or basal wing-coversof the Lepidoptera; or as representing the lateral prolongationsof the prothorax * observed in some species of Psychoda or Scenes(Latreille, in Mem. du Mm. torn. vii. and Cours d'Entomol.p. 24-2.) The position of the second pair of legs, attached to the samesegment as these organs (see Curtis, pi. 226. fig. K ; and my figureof S. Childreniiii, Griff. An. K. pi. 59. fig. 1. i,j, k, I, m, n), clearlyproves them to be mesothoracic. It is true that the great size of theonly pair of the actual organs of flight of the Strepsiptera, might suggestan analogy with the large size of the wings of the Diptera, which aremesothoracic, but it appears evident to me that a more correct analogyexists with Plasma, Atractocerus, &c.The metathorax is of very large size, and of an oblong form, roundedbehind, and projecting over the basal dorsal segments of the abdomen.The front part of its dorsum is divided by diagonal lines into fourportions, the anterior of which bears some resemblance to the Coleopterousscutellum (and is so named by leixrhy , Linn. Trans, vol. xi. pi. 9.fig. 4. e), but it is, as I apprehend, a component part of the metathoraxitself; the posterior part of the dorsum is dilated considerablyat the sides (the dilated parts being termed femoral by Kirby, /. c.fig. 4. 1 1), with a deep anterior impression, and forms a very large post-scutellum.It is difficult to assign to these regions their strict analogousnames. The anterior scutellum-like piece is, however, consideredby Percheron (Gen. des Ins. Rhipipt. pi. 1.) as the prsescutum ;the two lateral triangular pieces following (or the lumbi Kirby,I. c. fig. ^-ff) as conjointly forming the scutum ; the middle triangularpiece, with the apex pointing forwards (or the interlumbium K., I. c.fig. 4. /*), as the scutellum ; and the large posterior piece (or the pro-scutellumK., I. c. fig. 4. h) as the post scutellum. The transverse pieceat the base of the latter is overlooked by Percheron in his description,although clearly represented in his figure. It is named the posthumusby Kirby (/. c. fig. 4. i). The under-surface of the monasteriumpresents towards the base a strong inclination where the middle legsare lodged, which is succeeded by a flattened piece, dilated at theSome of the large exotic Lamiides have a moveable spiniferous tubercle oneach side of the prothorax. (Umbones K. and S.)V 3294< MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.place of insertion of the hind legs, which is at the extremity of themonasterium.* The true wings are attached at the anterior lateralangles of the metathorax : they are of very large size, somewhatexceeding a quadrant of a circle ; they are rather opake andmembranous, with the anterior margin incrassated ; and with a veryfew longitudinal veins, some of which are abbreviated, by means ofwhich the wings are folded up longitudinally at the sides of the body.The legs are of moderate length, and considerable weakness, but thecoxae of the two anterior pairs are elongated, giving them considerablepowers of motion. The femora are simple; the bite not furnishedwith spurs ; and the tarsal joints are furnished beneath with large fleshycushions, without any terminal ungues. In Stylops the last joint isdeeply notched fig. 93. 9.), but it is entire in Xenos fig. 94. 15.).In Elenchus the tarsi are apparently only two-jointed, and in Sarcophagus3-jointed fig. 94.8, 9.), whilst in Stylops and Xenos they are4-jointed.f The abdomen is fleshy, soft, and composed apparently ofeight segments, the last of which is furnished with a complicated analapparatus, consisting of a deflexed corneous flattened narrow lobe,and a recurved horny and dilated point {fig- 94. 14. extremity ofabdomen of Xenos ; 94. 10. ditto of Halictophagus). After deaththis part of the body shrinks up; but during life it is swollen, of adirty pale colour, with transverse dark-coloured scaly plates];These insects are parasitic, in their early states, in the bodies ofMr. Newman adopts a different view of the parts of the thorax, regarding itas constructed on the plan of that of the Diptcra, considering the prothorax as veryslender, the inesothorax as very large, with its scutellum remarkably elongate (orthe pro scutellum K.'), and the metathorax as visible on each side of the latter(being the femoral K. ). The pseudelytra he considers as analogous to the tippetsof the Lepidoptera, the large wings as the fore wings, and he mentions " a pairof crumpled opaque whitish hind wings, which are somewhat pedunculated, andmuch resemble the hind wings or halteres of Diptera. My friend, Mr. Walker,called my attention to these," which he describes as attached to the part consideredby him as the metathorax. I do not hesitate in considering that there must besome error in the latter observations, as no other author has ever seen any thinganswering to the last described appendages, which were probably tattered parts ofthe true wings. Jurine regards the pro scutellum and femoral of Kirby as aloneconstituting the metathorax.-f- Jurine describes the tarsi of X. Eossii (Vesparum li.) as 5-jointed.:j: Mr. Curtis, in his Observations upon Elenchus, speaks of a male? captured byMr. Dale, and females by Messrs. Haliday and Walker. His figures D. and JF.probably represent these individuals, but I apprehend that they are all of the samesex, namely, males.STREPSIPTERA. 295various bees and wasps*, the larva, when full-grown, protruding its headbetween the abdominal segments of these insects, appearing, at firstsight, like a small flattened acarus. The full-grown larvae of Stylopsare nearly cylindrical fleshy grubs, about a quarter of an inch long(fig. 93.10. laterally, 93. ll. dorsally viewed), of a white colour, withthe head distinct and flattened, and attached to the body by a narrowneck : the head is not at this time provided with distinct mandibles,&c., but appears only to be provided with several small elevatedtubercles (fig. 93. 12. front of upper side of the head, 93. 13. dittounder side), behind which is a transverse impression; and the posteriorangles of the head are rounded and elevated. In several larva whichI have examined in a living state, the anterior part of the dorsumexhibited a more distinctly coriaceous texture, and seven articulations ;but the terminal part was quite inarticulate. Mr. Kirby describesthe supposed pupa of S. Melittae in a similar manner. (linn. Trans.vol. ii. p. 233.) The precise manner in which this larva feeds is notknown : Professor Peck, however, distinctly states, that in the feedingstate the head of the larva is near the base of the abdomen of thewasp, as he found by dissection ; and that, when the feeding state ispassed, it is easy to conceive that it turns, and with its flattened headseparates the membrane which connects the abdominal scuta, and protrudesitself a little way, accurately closing the aperture, which is butThe presence of these parasites is at once indicated by the swollen and distortedappearance of the abdomen of the bee or wasp. There are generally two or threeparasites in each infested insect, but in a Polistes gallica, presented to me by Mr.Broome, there are no less than five of the heads of the larva of Xenos exserted{^fig. 93. 20.) ; and Jurine mentions having observed as many as six entirely withinthe body of a Polistes. Upon comparing the volume of the internal air vessels andabdominal viscera of a stylopized bee with those of one not thus attacked, I immediatelyobserved that the former were very considerably reduced in size ; andalthough the ovaries were easily perceived in the attacked individual, I was unableto perceive them in the former : hence I should consider that Mr. Kirby'ssupposition that the presence of these parasites renders the insects attacked abortive,is well founded. They do not destroy the bee or wasp, as it is not an uncommoncircumstance to meet with these insects with the exuviae of the Strepsipterastill remaining in them. M. Dufour states that they " n'attaquent point les viscerade I'insecte, et ne vivent qu'aux depend de son tissu adieux splanchnique. (Ann.Sci. Nat. Jan. 1837. p. 19.) Mr. Kirby states, that he doesjiot recollect observingthe exuviae in a male bee. (Iiitrod. to Ent. vol. iv. p. 209.) They are certainlyfound for the most part in female bees, but I have known them occur in individualsof the opposite sex. (And see Ent. Mag. vol. ii. p. 327.) Jurine also observes,that male Polistes are attacked as well as females.u 4-296 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.just large enough to admit it. All this time the wasp is active, andassociates with its companions. When just protruded, the head ofthe larva is of a pale brownish colour, but by degrees it assumes arounder form, and becomes almost black.On endeavouring to remove one of these full-grown larvae, thehead of which was exserted, I found it impossible to detach it,although I had widened the space where the head protruded, theneck being apparently in some manner attached to the interior surfaceof the bee's abdomen. After much difficulty, I ascertained that thisattachment was caused by a fine thread extending from one side ofthe neck, and firmly attached to the abdomen fig. 93.15.) of the bee.*Whether this thread was tubular or not, 1 cannot state ; but the circumstance,combined with the want of manufactory organs in thehead of the Stylops larva, as noticed by Jurine, seems to favour theopinion originally entertained by Mr. Kirby, that the Stylops, in itslarva state, feeds by absorption. I would, however, by no means wishit to be considered that this view of the subject is satisfactorily established,even although it appears to be confirmed by the examinationof the exuviae of a Stylops larva remaining within the abdomen of abee after the perfect Stylops had escaped. This, on removal, wasfound to consist of a thin and transparent pellicle (fig. 93. 14,), beingof a long, cylindrical, and narrowed form, having the dorsal portion moredarkly shaded, and presenting the appearance of indistinct articulations.This, therefore, was undoubtedly the larva-skin of the insect : theneck exhibited the thickened appearance visible in the neck of thelarva, and precisely in the same situation that the thread abovenoticed was attached in the larva, I observed an apparent spiracleor circular aperture connected with an incrassated and apparentlytubular process of the neck. Within the pellicle I likewise observeda long thread, which appeared to arise from the same aperture; butthis might possibly be accidental, as it was removed without anydifficulty or rupture.Mr. Newman (mag. Nat. Hist. No. 23.), after making the observation quotedabove (p. 147. note j:), questions whether Stylops may not feed in a similar manner.L. Dufour (Ann. Set. Nat. Jan. 1837, p. 16.) describes a larva, probably of aStylops, found in Andrena aterrima, and attached upon one of the large tracheavesicles, which occupy the base of the abdominal cavity of this bee, by means oftwo trachea trunks, which entered the body of the larva near the anterior extremity,whereby it obtained a supply of air in a manner quite anomalous.STREPSIPTERA. 297Within this Fast-named pellicle I also observed near its posteriorextremity another crumpled-up mass of pellicle of a dark opakecolour, perfectly distinct from the pellicle of the larva itself, and whichhad evidently formed the covering of the enclosed pupa, and had beenshed by it previous to the time when the imago had escaped. Hence,as well as from the account given by Jurine, it is evident that thepupa of the Stylops is enclosed in a distinct skin, and is also in thatstate enveloped by the skin of the larva *, contrary to the suggestionof Mr. Kirby (linn. Trans, vol. xi. p. 97.) ; and hence the accountsand figures given by most authors of the pupa of these insects are infact merely representations of the larva in an altered form, but totallydifferent from that of the real pupa, which no author, except Jurine,has seen.f Figure 93. 16. is copied from Curtis's Brit. Ent. pi. 226,and is described by that author as a pupa in which the head is wider,the eyes appearing through, and in a different situation, and theinferior wings are folded laterally; in a specimen of the imago, extractedfrom the pupa, they met over the body. (Curtis's Addend, toStijlops.)Jurine's figure of the larva of Xenos Vesparum Rossi turinyrft/i*. vol. xxiii. f. 3.) differs from that given above of Stylops; thehead being represented as small, and succeeded by a very large nearlyquadrate segment, with two frontal and several longitudinal tubercles,followed by eight transverse joints, gradually narrowed to the end ofthe body. Professor Peck's figures of the larva of X. Peckii representthe body as consisting of a regular series of transverse segments. Thesefigures disagree, however, with specimens of the larvae of X. vesparum,kindly sent to me, in spirits, by the Senator Van Heyden, of Frankforton the Maine, together with specimens of the pupa in differentstages of development, the larvae precisely agreeing with those of" Hae pupa, si acids ope e loco penitus extrahantur abruptoque tegumento letterdeinde tunica sen veste alba propria exuantur." (i?ossi. ) Professor Peck, indeed,figures the head of the pupa as furnished on each side, behind, with a number ofpellucid hexagons linn. Trans, vol. xi. pi. 8. fig. 7.), whence Mr. Kirby wasled to suppose that the skin of the head, at least of the larva, had been rejected(but I have never seen any thing analogous to this in the exserted heads of the pupof Stylops) ; and hence Mr. Kirby considers the metamorphoses of these insects asintermediate between incomplete and coarctate.■f Dufour describes the larva of Xenos Rossii in its first state, but his descriptionof the pupa is merely that of the larva in its altered form. fain. Set, Nat. Jan.1837, pi. 1. A. fig. 15.)298 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Stylops. Percheron copies Jurine's figures of the larva and pupa,but adds, " Je doute beaucoup de leur exactitude;" that of thepupa is, however, correct, agreeing with that which I have given(fig. 93.17.) of the most advanced pupa of Xenos sent me by VanHeyden, and in which the resemblance to the imago is at once perceived,the limbs being seen to be distinctly formed, but enclosed infine sheaths, and laid upon the breast; the wings not extending beyondthe extremity of the thorax. The abdomen at this time is considerablyswollen.Mr. Kirby's account of the discovery of these insects, and of thebursting forth of the imago, is so interesting, that the following extractwill not be deemed out of place : after mentioning that he hadrepeatedly observed something upon the abdomen of various Andrea,which he had at first regarded as a kind of acarus, he at length determinedto examine and describe one of them : " But what was myastonishment when, upon attempting to disengage it with a pin, Idrew forth from the body of the bee a white fleshy larva a quarter ofan inch long, the head of which I had mistaken for an acarus. Howthis animal receives its nourishment seems a mystery. Upon examiningthe head, under a strong magnifier, I could not discover anymouth or proboscis with which it might perforate the corneous coveringof the abdomen, and so support itself by suction: on the undersideof the head, at its junction with the body, there was a concavity ;but I could observe nothing in this but a uniform unbroken surface.As the body of the animal is inserted in the body of the bee, doesthat part receive its nutriment from it by absorption? After Ihad examined one specimen, I attempted to extract a second; andthe reader may imagine how greatly my astonishment was increasedwhen, after I had drawn it out but a little way, I saw its skin burst,and a head as black as ink, with large staring eyes and antennae, consistingof two branches, break forth, and move itself briskly from sideto side. It looked like a little imp of darkness just emerging from theinfernal regions. I was impatient to become better acquainted withso singular a creature. When it was completely disengaged *, and ILatreille imagines that pseudhalteres are serviceable in enabling the Stylops todisengage itself from between the scales of the abdomen of the insects within whichit has lived. ( Bene Ann. torn. v. p. 427. ) Mr. Thwarted has observed that the imagodischarges a thickened dusky-coloured fluid, with which the abdomen had beendistended shortly after it is disengaged from the body of the bee.STREPSIPTERA. 299had secured it from making its escape 1 set myself to examine it asaccurately as possible ; and I found, after a careful inquiry, that 1 hadnot only got a nondescript, but also an insect of a new genus, whosevery class [order] seemed dubious. (sion. A]). Anglice, vol. ii. p. Ill)Tn the perfect state, these insects are but short-lived delicatecreatures. Mr. Dale, who has been very fortunate in his discoveriesof this order, thus describes the proceedings of one which he caughtflying, on the 7th of May*, over a quickset hedge of a garden. " Itlooked milk-white on the wing, with a jet-black body, and totally unlikeany thing else ; it flew with an undulating or vacillating motionamongst the young shoots, and I could not catch it till it settled onone, when it ran up and down, its wings in motion, and making aconsiderable buzz or hum, as loud as a Sesia ; it twisted about itsrather long tail, and turned it up like a Staphylinus. I put it undera glass, and placed it in the sun ; it became quite furious in its confinement,and never ceased running about for two hours. The elytra,or processes, were kept in quick vibration as well as the wings ; itbuzzed against the sides of the glass with its head touching it, andtumbled about on its back. By putting two bees (A. labial) undera glass in the sun, two Stylops were produced: the bees seemed uneasy,and went up towards them, but evidently with caution, as if to fight ;and moving their antennae towards them, retreated. I once thoughtthe bee attempted to seize it ; but the oddest thing was to see theStylops get on the body of the bee and ride about, the latter usingevery effort to throw his rider." (Brit. Ent. fol. 226.) The beeswere quite mad immediately before the Stylops came out ; andwhen on the body of the bee, the Stylops kept its wings still and halferect. Professor Peck also states that a Xenos, which he placedunder a watch glass, coursed round its prison with surprising trepidationas long as it lived, which was but a few hours. Mr. Dale alsostates, that all the Strepsiptera appear to be short-lived (Curtis, 43;^.),and Mr. Haliday confirms this [Ibid. 385. ) Mr. Stephens also captureda specimen of Elenchus tenuicornis whilst sweeping low herbage,and observed that it was very active, moving its pseudelytra with greatrapidity. ( Trans. Ent. Soc. vol. i. App. p. 65.)Mr. Pickering found a living Andrena in the imago state in a sandbankin the month of December (which had evidently never quittedI have captured specimens of Stylops Melittaj at large, in the months of Apriland May.300 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.its cell subsequently to arriving at the perfect state, but was waitingfor the arrival of spring weather), the abdomen of which exhibitedat that time the heads of three Stylops larvae ; on scaling off one ofwhich, a living specimen of the imago of Stylops Spencii (Frontier.Vol. I. Jig. 6.) was disclosed; the two other specimens were still inthe larva state : hence, as the cell of the Andrena is closed by theparent at the period of the deposition of the e^'g with a mass of pollenpaste, it would appear that the parent Stylops must make its way intothe cell before it is closed.* The cells of Polistes gallica tante, p. 239.fig. 19.) (a species infested by Xenos vesparum) are not closeduntil the larva of that wasp is ready to assume the pupa state ; andhence Professor Peck considered that the Xenos deposited its eggs inthe larva of the Polistes [Linn. Trans, vol. ii. p. 92.). Mr. Kirby, however(soc. cit), reasoning from analogy, doubts whether the egg islaid in the wasp in its first state, and the larva feeds upon it in its last.Rossi, however, was of this opinion, since he says of X. vesparum,Cui vespse larva antequam cellulae clauderentur forte incunabuladevise videtur." These circumstances are of considerable interestas regards the natural history of these insects, since we are unacquaintednot only with the distinctions of the sexes, but also with thesituation in which the eggs or larvae are deposited, and at what period,or in what manner, the connexion between these Hymenoptera andtheir parasites commences. Reasoning from analogy, we might supposethat in the case of the Andrena, the Stylops has the same instinctas the Chrysididte, or other cuckoo-like Hymenopterous parasites,which lay their eggs in the nests of Hymenoptera formed in sand orwood, and which are similarly closed as soon as the egg and supply offood are deposited, and of course before the larva of the fosterer ishatched. The larvae of thee Hymenopterous parasites are, it is trueexternal feeders, but it is not difficult to suppose that the Stylopslarvae, if hatched after the bee larvae, may, as soon as hatched, eatinto the body of the latter, or even into the pupa. The eggs ofXenos may, on the other hand be at once introduced into the body ofG. H. K. Thwaites, Esq., reared many specimens of a Stylops (one of whichhe kindly presented to me), chiefly from females of a species of Andrena, at thebeginning of May 1838. The male bees, he observed (in a letter to me), do not appeartill the third week in May ; and at the beginning of June he again observed thefemales of the same bee, but not one of these was infested, so that the stylopizedbees are at least a month earlier than the others ; hence he questions whetherthe short-lived Stylops can lay its eggs in the cells of the latter bees.STREPSIPTERA. 301the Polistes larva, in consequence of its cell not being closed, but thesame mode of proceeding more probably takes place in both genera.We may in like manner, from analogy with what is known relative to thedevelopment of the Ichneumonideous parasites, easily imagine that theparasite larva may remain as such in the various states of the bee's orwasp's development, and not undergo its change to the pupa stateuntil the latter has arrived at the imago state. But these are mere conjectures,which, from the anomalous character of the Strepsiptera, maypossibly be quite contrary to the real economy of these parasites ; butthe facts now known relative to their habits will not warrant us inadopting the supposition of Messrs. Kirby and Spence, that the eggsare apparently deposited in the abdomens of the perfect bees or waspson which the larvae feed ; indeed, although the simultaneous appearanceof the bees and the winged Stylops may at first seem to sanctionsuch a proceeding, yet that fact, taken in conjunction with the shortduration of the Andrea in the winged state (together with the factof a stylopised bee having been found before quitting its cell), wouldnecessarily prevent such a proceeding, the Stylops being so delicatelyorganised as to render the idea untenable, that it could pass so long aperiod in the winged state as it must necessarily do, supposing its developmentto take place within the body of the perfect bee alone.Many of the Andrente, for example, appear at the beginning of thespring, and remain but a very short period in the perfect state; if,therefore, the development of the Stylops was so i-apid as that theeggs should be deposited in, and the perfect Stylops produced from,the Andrena during this short period of its winged existence, it wouldbe necessary, in order to insure the continuance of the race of theStylops, that such perfect Stylops should survive till the followingspring, which is not in the slightest degree probable. The depth ofthe cells of the Andrea under ground, would also prevent the Stylopsfrom making its way to it in order to deposit its eggs in the newlyhatched imago, pupa, or larva ; whilst Mr. Pickering contends that theapparent want of any oral organs by which the Stylops larva, whenhatched, would be able to make its way into the body of the larva, issufficient to disprove the notion that the egg is deposited in the cello?the bee, whence he is led to adopt the theory that the Stylops depositsits eggs in the egg of the Andrena. This idea is however foundedupon the examination of larvae which had already protruded theirheads between the segments of the abdomen of the bee, having arrived302 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.at their full growth, and some of which were even ready to burst forthas imagines ; but it is not improbable that the Stylops larva, duringits feeding state, may possess more powerful oral instruments, whichare subsequently withdrawn, just as is the case with the mandibles ofthe larva of Diptera.In such uncertainty, the fact that the sexual distinctions of theseinsects have not been observed, or, rather, that all the specimens whichhave yet been examined in the winged state are apparently males(judging from the antennae and abdominal appendages), togetherwith the circumstance that some individuals remain unchanged atthe time when others assume the winged (male ?) form, are deservingof consideration ; as is also the following observation. In the springof 1836, whilst keeping numerous stylopised individuals of AndrenaGynnana and paula, in the hopes of rearing the Stylops, I observeda number of excessively minute hexapod creatures creeping amongstthe hairs of the abdomen of the bees (which were evidently muchannoyed at their presence), and which, with a strong lens, I distinctlysaw making their way through the transverse impression near the extremityof the upper side of the head of the larva of the Stylops* {^Jig.93. 18.) ; and in this manner every one of the many larvae of the Stylops,which I hoped to rear, perished. Anxious, however, to obtain moreknowledge of these parasites of the parasite, I opened the bodies of someof the bees thus attacked, so as to expose the moist and fleshy bodyof the It^rvae of the Stylops, when I was surprised to find the latterfilled with an extraordinary number of them ; some, as though notsufficiently developed, lying in an arched position ; and others, nearerthe head of the Stylops larva, struggling towards the place of exitabove mentioned. The transparent skin of the larva permitting themto be clearly visible, I do not hesitate in stating that there must havebeen far beyond a hundred of these creatures in each Stylops larva.The body is long and flattened (fig. 93. 19. one highly magnified),rather narrow towards the tail, which is furnished with two very longsetae ; the head is semicircular and flat, with two dai'k eye-like patchesat each posterior angle, and apparently destitute of antennae ; thebody is composed of thirteen segments, including the head, and excludingthe two small fleshy tubercles upon which the anal setae areplaced : the first segment of the body is transverse, and appliedThe Senator Van Heyden lias observed the same circumstance in Xenos.Trans. Ent. Soc. vol. i. p. Lxxiv.)STREPSIPTERA. 303closely in front to the posterior part of the head, but easily distinguishedtherefrom ; the posterior angles of the remaining segmentsare terminated by several setae. The legs are six in number, attachedto the lateral under surface of the three anterior segments. Thesecreatures creep but slowly about the head of the larva (fig. 93. sandamongst the hairs of the bee's tail, and whilst in motion theyhave a very peculiar mode of progression.These little creatures, which exhibit many points of resemblancewith the supposed larvae of Melos (Pediculus melittifi A'.), give riseto various queries connected with their economy, which it is difficultto answer, even by analogy. That every Stylops larva should be thusinfested to this extent, is in itself singular ; but when we inquire,when were these parasites deposited in the body of the internal-keepingparasite Stylops larva ? upon what will they now subsist ? or inwhat situation will they remain until they are again enabled to placethe germs of their progeny in a similar situation in the body of thelarva of the Stylops ? we are compelled to admit our inability to offerany satisfactory reply. Is it possible that they may be the larvae ofthe Stylops in an active form ? Such an opinion is opposed by themany apparent anomalies which would attend such a circumstance ;but the Strepsiptera are sufficiently anomalous to warrant the proposalof such a question. Coccus, Psyche, Oiketicus, Hippobosca, andAphis, may all be cited as possessing anomalous habits and modes ofdevelopment which would exhibit analogies with Stylops, supposingthe female Stylops to retain its larva form, and to produce such livingyoung. The impregnation of such a female might easily be effected,although remaining in its fixed position, or the young might be producedfor several generations without such an act. I have made somefarther observations upon these minute parasites in the Trans. Entomb.Soc. vol. ii. p. 1 86.Mr. Pickering has given the following list of species of Andreawhich he has observed to be infested with Stylops : — Andrena nigro-aeneas,A. tibialis, A. rufitarsis, A. labial, A. fulvicrus, A. Collinsonana ?A. Mouffetella, A. various, A. picicornis, A. paula, A. Xanthus, A.convexiuscula, A. Afzeliella, and several new species ; to which he hasadded, from my collection, A. Gwynnana. Recent observations havealso proved that the allied genus Halictus is also subject to the attacksof species of this order. (St. Fargeau, in Encycl. Methh. tom. x, p. 292.)Indeed, Mr. Dale has named one of the genera Halictophagus, on304- MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.the bare supposition that it infests Halictus, the type II. Curtisiiiihaving been found in company with the males of Halictus aratus, onthe 15th of August, in one of which he found a pupa exactly at theapex of the abdomen. (See Dale, in Mag. Nat. Hist. July 1830.)The genus Xenos is restricted to the wasp genus Polistes, X. vesparum(Rossii K.) attacking P. gallica, and the American X. Peckii infestingP. muscat. Rossi also mentions Vespa sexfasciata, and some othermore minute species, as infested with a similar foe. Mr. Kirby foundexuviae in V. consoler, an exotic species of the restricted genus V^espa.(Sowerby, Brit. Miscell. 45.) The Senator Van Heyden has observeda new species of Xenos, in which the branches of the antennaeare of unequal length, in Polistes gallica, and another species muchsmaller than X. Rossii, in a species of Odynerus (O. actus ?). M.Van Roger had also observed the larva of a species of this genus inthe body of Vespa vulgaris. (trans. Ent. Soc. vol. i. p. Lxxiv.) Mr.Shuckard also possesses other exotic species of wasps similarly infested.Mr. Templeton found a specimen of Elenchus tenuicornis (Walkerii ?)in his net, in which he had placed the nest of a Bombus, whence hethought it probable that it was parasitic on that genus ; but havingdiscovered another species in the Mauritius, where the genus Bombusdoes not occur, he is now inclined to doubt his former opinion.(trans. Ent. Soc. vol. i. p. 174.) The Mauritian species he considersto be probably parasitic upon a species of wasp (Polistes ?) which isfrequent in that island. M. L. Dufour has also observed a larva,evidently of one of these insects, with the head exserted between theabdominal segments of one of the Fossorial Hymenoptera, Ammophilasabulosa ann. Sci. Nat., Jan. 1837, p. 19.); and Mr. R, Templetoncaptured a species of Sphex at Rio Janeiro, from the abdomenof which he extracted a new species of Xenos, which he has namedX. Westwoodiiii, and of which he has forwarded a detailed descriptionand figures to the Entomological Society of London.The species seem widely distributed, although, from their minute size,they have hitherto escaped the observation of collectors abroad. Thegenus Stylops, of which there appear to be many species (of which sufficientcomparative characters have not yet been given), has hithertobeen found only in England, if we except S. Childreniiii Gray, discoveredin a North American bee ; Xenos occurs in the middle andsouth of Europe, and in North America ; X. Westwoodiiii was foundin a Brazilian Sphex : Elenchus in England, as well as in the islandof Mauritius ; R. Templeton having captured many specimens of anSTREPSIPTERA. 305extremely minute species, in his sweeping-net, in that island, andwhich I have described under the name of El. Templeton ( Trans.Ent. Soc. Lond. vol. i. p. 173. pi. 17. f. 15.); and R. H. Lewisinforms me in a recent letter that he has captured a Stylopized beein Van Diemen's Land. Halictophagus has hitherto only occurredin England; indeed, English entomologists may justly be proud ofthe great share which they have had in extending our knowledge ofthe limits of this singular tribe of insects.These insects appear at different times of the year. The majorityof the individuals of Stylops have been found in the beginning ormiddle of the spring, as early as the middle of March, until the middleof May, which is owing to the species of Andrews, which they infest,bursting forth at that time. Mr. Pickering's discovery of one in thebody of a bee which had not quitted its cell, in the month of December,shows that the appearance of the Stylops is synchronous withthat of the Andrena. Xenos Vesparum, according to Rossi, comes forthin August and September. The specimens of Elenchus tenuicornis K.have been captured in June and July, and beginning of August, bysweeping grass ; and Halictophagus Curtisiiii on the 15th of August.It is exceedingly difficult to speak with decision as to the relations ofthis order. Rossi, the first observer of one of the species, regarded itas Hymenopterous, " Insects novi generis Ichneumon primum,"Mr. Kirby at first considered that, from its mode of life, it ought alsoto belong to that order, and to the genus Ichneumon, although sogreatly differing from its characters ; whilst, from its elytra, it oughtto be Coleopterous, although possessing little of the general habits ofthat order ; adding, "Perhaps it had better be considered as Hemipterous"[in the Linnaean sense including the Orthoptera OUv*'\ ; " but, tillan opportunity occurs of examining more specimens, it would be rash tospeak too positively upon this head." (amon. Ap. Angl. vol. ii. p. 112.)In his more detailed memoir, published in the Linnaean Transactions,Mr. Kirby observed that, " With respect to the place of Strepsipterain the system, it seems to me that this order should follow Cleopatra;for its metamorphosis being different from that of Orthoptera andHemiptera, and nearer to that of Cleopatra, this seems its mostnatural situation, considered as an elytrophorous order." {Ojj.cit.Mr. Haworth thought it as allied, but remotely, to those Cimices whosestella cover the abdomens. trans. Ent. Soc. 1807, p. 60.)VOL. II. X306 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.vol. xi. p. 108.) Lamarck placed it amongst the Diptera. Latreilleplaces it between the Lepidoptera and Diptera, observing that, in anatural system, they should immediately succeed Eulophus, and otherparasitic Hymenoptera. Jurine regarded it as intermediate betweenthe Hymenoptera and Diptera. Mr. MacLeay, combining the opinionsof Kirby, Latreille, and Jurine, places the Strepsiptera between theCleopatra and Hymenoptera, as an osculant order. force Ent.p. 425.) It would occupy far too great a space to review the groundsupon which these various relations are supposed to rest ; and whichare founded, indifferently, upon structural, metamorphosis, or economicconsiderations. I cannot, however, but observe, that whilst the mouthappears to me to present the greatest analogy to that of the Lepidoptera,the nature of the transformations is much nearer that of thecoarctate Diptera (although the head of the larva does not appear tobe of variable form), some of which are also equally entomobious.The branched antennae of Eulophus, or the longitudinally folded wingsof Leucospis, offer but very slight grounds of support (in addition tothe parasitic habits of these genera) to the supposed relation of theStrepsiptera and ChalcidideB ; whilst, at the same time, the wholestructure of these insects in the imago state removes them from theDiptera, whereas it must be admitted that, in respect to the generalstructure of the body (and by adopting the view given above of thethoracic segments and nature of the alary appendages), the Stepsare intermediate between such Cleopatra as Atractocerus, andsuch Orthoptera as Plasma.The order consists of onlj'^ a single family, Stylopidge Kirby.*Order LEPIDOPTERA f Linn. (Glossary Fahr.)Char. Wings four, large, extended, membranous, covered on bothsides with minute imbricated scales ; often connected together bya hook and bristle ; neuration branching.■f BiBLioGR. Refer, to Lepidoptera in general.A. General Lepidoptera of all Countries.Cramer. Uitlandsche Capelle, &c. 4 vols. 4to. Utrecht, 1775-82, with a supplementaryvolume by Stoll.LEPIDOPTERA. 307Mouth with rudimental labrum and mandibles ; maxilla animate,sometimes with minute palpi ; labrum rudimental, with two largelabial palpi.Tibife spurred ; anterior with an inner spur.Thorax forming an ovate mass ; prothoi-ax very small, furnishedwith a pair of batavia ; mesothorax largest, with a pair of largetegulffi.Pupa obtected.Clerk. Icones Indecorum variorum. 4to. Holm. 1759-64.Martin. Psyche, or Fig. of Exotic Lep. Ins. 4to. London, 1797, 32 pi.Fabricius. Systema Glossatorum, abstract in Illig. Mag. vol. vi. 1807, and translatedby Children in Taylor's London and Edinb. Phil. Mag. Feb. 1830.Esper. Die Schmetterl. in Abbildung. &c. 6 vols. 4to. Erlang. 1777, &c. (5 vols,of European, and 1 vol. of Exotic species).Herhst. Natursyst. der Schmetterl. 7 vols. 8vo. Berlin, 1783-95 Ditto, .aller bekannt. Insect. 8vo. Berlin, 1783-95, 10 vols. (4 occupied withLepidoptera).Gayer. Outrage zur Samml. Exotische Schmetterl. 5 Centuries, 1838.Boisduval. Hist. Nat. Ins. Lepid. (Suites a Buffon) torn. i. Paris, 1836.Giorna. Account of a singular Conformation in the Wings of Moths, Trans. Soc.Linn. vol. i.Poey. Observ. sur le Crin des Lepidopt., Ann. Soc. France, 1832.Van der Hoeven. Sur les Crochets des Ailes dans les Sphinx, &c., in Bijdragen totd. Nature., &c. tom. ii.Tide. Ueber die Auger der Raupen (Neu. Mannigfaltigkeit, 1 Jahrg. 129.).Savigny. Upon the Mouth of Lepidopterous Insects, in Bull, des Sci. tom. xiv. ,and Bull. Soc. Philomat. 1814.Herold. Entwickelvmgsgesch. der Schmetterl. Ana4tomy. u. Physiol. 4to. Casselund Marburg, 1815, with 33 pi.Bonnet. Disquisitions circa Respire. Erucarum, Mem. Acad. Paris, tom. v.BernouilU. Observationes de quondam Lepidopt. Facilitate Ova sine progressCoitu secunda excluded, in Nouv. Mem. de I'Acad. Berlin, 1772.Bernard Deschamps. Recherches Microscopical sur Reorganization des Ailes desLepidoptera (Ann. Sci, Nat., n. ser., tom. iii).Reid. On ditto, in Taylor's Lond. and Edinb. Phil. Mag. October 1 839.B. British Lepidoptera.Haworth. Prodromus Lepid. Britann. 4to. Holt. 1802 (anonymous). — Dit4to,Lepidoptera Britannia?. Svo. London, 1803-28, in four parts.Wood. Index Entomologicus, or a complete illus. Catal. of Lepid. of Great Britain.London, Svo. 1833-38.Deliver. Papllionum Britannia Icones Nomina, &c. fol. Lt)nd. 1717.Wilkes. The English Moths and Butterflies. 4to. 120 pi. London, 1747-60.Harris. The English Lepidoptera. 8vo. 1765. — Ditto, The Aurelian. fol. 1766.Dit4to, An Essay, wherein are considered the tendons, &c. 4to. Lond. 1767.X 2308 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.The present order, comprising the numerous and beautiful tribes ofbutterflies and moths, derives its Linnaean name from Xettic, a scale,Jermyn. The Butterfly Collector's Vade Mecum. 12nio. Ipse. 1824.Martyn. The Aurelian's Vade Mecum. ] imo. Exeter, 1785.Alain. A nat. Hist, of English Insects. 4to. Lond. 1720 (6 editions).Brown's Book of Butterflies, in Constable's Miscellany.Duncan, in Jardine's Naturalist's Library, 3 vol.C. European Lepidoptera.Ochsenheimer and Treitschke. Die Schmetterl. von Europa. 14 vols. 8vo. Leipzig,1807-34 ; with three supplementary volumes. An abstract of this work, as faras the Geometrical?, published by Children in Taylor's London and Edinb.Phil. Mag. 1830.Treitschke. Hiilfsbuch fur Schmetterl. Samml. 8vo. Vienna, 1834.Workhouse. Naturgesch. Europ. Schmetterl. 8vo. Frankfort, 1788-94.Freer. Beitr. aus d. Taschenb. mein. Europ. Schmidt. Augsb. 1827-30. — -Ditto, Never Beitrage. Augsburg, 1831.Lucas. Hist. Nat. Lep. europe. Paris, 8vo. 1832.Bugle. Die Tag und Abendschmetterlinge Europa. Leipzig, 1837, 4to. with 8 pi.Raupen und Schmetterlings Kalendar. Leipzig, 1837, 4to. with 1 plate.Godart. Hist. Nat. des Lepidopt. de France. 5 vols. 8vo. Paris, 1821 ; continuedby Duponchel in 4 more vols.Duponchel. Supplement to ditto, 1832, in liv raisons. 8vo. Paris. — Ditto, Iconogr.des Chenilles, 1832, in liv raisons. 8vo. Paris.Boisduval. Europ;eorum Lepidopt. Index Methodius. 8vo. Paris, 1 829. — Ditto,Icones Historiques des Lepidopt. Nouv. 8vo. Paris, 1833, in liv raisons. — Ditto(with Rambur and Grain), Collect. Iconogr. et History. des Chenilles. 8vo.Paris, 1833, in livraisons.V'dUers and Guenee. Tableaux Synoptiques des Lepid. europe. Paris, 1835.Duponchel. Catal. de Lepidopt. de la Loser, in Ann. Soc. Ent. France, tom. iii.Ramhur. Notice sur plusieurs Lepidopt. du Midi de la France, in Ann. Sci. Observ.tom. ii. 1829, and Ferussac Bullet. 1829, and Ann. Soc. Ent. Fr.1836. — Ditto on Spanish Lepidoptera, in Ann. Soc. Ent. Fr. 1836, and inhis Faun. Entomol. Annal.Grain on Andalusian Lepidoptera, in Ann. Soc. Ent. Fr. 1836.Merian. De Europaische Insecten. Amsterdam, 1730, 4to. Erucarum Artus,&c. 1747, 4to.Denies and Schiffermiiller. Verzeichniss der Schmetterlinge der legend Wiener.Vienna, 1775. — Ditto, edited by Illiger and Hafeli. 2 vols. Brunsw. 8vo.Charpentier. Die Minster Tickler, &c. des System. Verz. der Schmetterl. derWiener legend. 8vo. Brunswick, 1821.Laspeyres. Kritische Revision des Syst. Verz. Schmett. Wien., in linger's Mag.band ii. and iv.Huber. Beytr. zur Gesch. der Schmett. 2 vols. 8vo. Augsb. 1786-90. — Ditto,Samml. Europaisch. Schmetterl. Augsb. 1805. — Ditto, Gesch. .Schmetterl. 4to. Augsb. 1806 (containing the Transformations, andLEPIDOPTERA. Soeand Trrepa, wings; those organs furnishing, as usual in the Linneeanclassification, one of the chief characteristics of the order, and consequentlyits name.continued by Gayer). — Ditto, Systematt. Alphabet. Verzeichn. Europ.Schmetterl. 8vo. Augsb. 1826.Hoffmansegg. Erst. Nachtr. zu Verzeichn. von Huber's Schmett. in Illiger's• Magaz. 5 band.Pezold. Lepidopt. Anfangsgrunde Coburg, 1796, 8vo. with pi.Sepp. Bes4towing der Wondered Gods, &c. 5 vols. 4to. Amsterdam, 1760. 1834.Admiral Naauwkeurige Waarneemingen, &c. folio, 1740-62, 33 plates.Lier et Dual. Collect, des Lepid. des Pays Bas. 8vo. torn. i. 1827.Sails. Beitr. ziir Lepidopt. d. Alpin. in Alpine. b. ii. 1807.Schneider. System. Beschr. der Europ. Schmett. Halle, 1787. — Ditto, Schwedische Schmettei'l., in his Entomol. Magaz. vol. i.Tauscher. Lepid. Russia Indigent., in Mem. Soc. Moscow, tom. i. and ii.Muller, C. L. V. Lepid. Silesia. Breslaw, 1773. — Ditto, Faun. Lepid. Silesia.1802. — Fauna Lepidopt. Silesia. Breslaw, 1802, 2 heft.Meigen. System. Beschr. der Europ. Schmetterl. 4to. Aix-la-chapelle, 1828, inparts.Bore. On Danish Lepidoptera, in Kroyer's Nat. Hist. Tidskr. heft v. vi.Runner. Lepidopt. Pedemontana. 8vo. August, Taurin, 1798.Baptista Repast. List of Lepidopt. Larvae, in Italian, 1793 (in Brit. Mus. ).Schott. Raupenkalendar. Frankfort, 8vo. 1829. — Schmetterlings Kalendar, u.Syst. Verz. Schmetterl. Deutsche. 8vo. Frankfort, 1830.Vogel. Chronological Raupenkalendar. Berlin, 8vo. 1834, 41 col. pi.Eversmann. Enumeration Lepid. Flue. Volga et Montes Ural., &c. Bull. Soc.Nat. Moscow, tom. iii. — Ditto, Lepidopt. Species Orenburg, &c., Mem. Soc.Nat. Mosc. tom. viii. — Ditto, in ditto, 1 837.Ernst and Engramelle. Insectes de Europe (Lepidopt. ). 4to. 8 vols. 1779-93.Hegeer. Beitrage zur Schmetterlingskunde Sicilianisch. Wien, 1838, 4to.Keferstein. Observ. sur Apparition des Lepid. (various notices in Siberian,Rev. Entomol. tom. ii).De Sells Longchamps. Catal. Lepidopt. de la Belgique. Liege, 1837, Svo.Schaffer. Nomenclator Entomologicus. heft i. Regensberg, Svo. 1834,Leiner. Katalog Lepidopt. in Umgebung v. Constans, in Isis, 1829.Rambur. Catal. Lepid. de I'll de Corse, in Annal. Soc. Ent. France, tom. v.p. 1, 2.Thon and Schenk. Fauna von Thuringia, band i v. Schmetterl. Jena, 1837.Sodoffsky. Lepid. Livonia; Observ., Bull. Soc. Imp. Mosc. tom. i. 1829. — Ditto,in ditto, 1 83 7, several articles upon Russian Lepidoptera.Kollar. Cat. Systematt. Lepidopt Austria, in tom. ii. Mem. States de I'Autriche,1832. Vienna, 8vo.D. Extra European Lepidoptera.Lefebvre. Descript. de quelq. Lepidopt. Not. Hyperborean, in Ann. Soc. Ent.Fr. 1826.X 3310 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.The number of these insects is very great, nearly equalling any ofthe other orders, with the exception of the Cleopatra ; thus, DrBurmeister supposes them to amount to not fewer than 12,000, ornearly one sixth of the whole of the insect tribes ; and Stephens describesnearly 2000 species, or nearly one fifth of our indigenousinsects. The number of exotic species is probably even greater, consideringthe greater share of investigation which has been given tothe more minute species of the order in this country* than on the Continent,whence we may infer that much still remains to be done. Amateursenough are to be found, both at home and abroad, who contentthemselves with collecting and describing the more showy and largerPeter. Lepidoptera of the Philippine Islands, Phil. Trans. 1702.Merian. Metamorph. Insect. Surnames. Amsterdam, 1705, fol. with 60 color.pi. (various other editions,) — Review of ditto, by L. Guilding, in Mag. Nat.Hist. July, 1834.Abbott and Smith. The Nat. Hist, of the rarer Lepid. of Georgia, 2 vol, fol. Lond. 1797.Boisduvaland Leconte. Hist. Generale et Iconogr. Lepidopt. et Chenilles de Cramer.Sept. 8vo. Paris, 1829 (in livraisons).Horsfield. A Descriptive Catalogue of the Lepidopt. Insects contained in the Museumof the East India Company. London, 4to. 1828-29, 2 parts.Huber. Sailing Exotic. Schmetterl. 439 tab. 4to. Augsburg, 1806. — Beveragezur Samml. Exot. Scum. 44to. Augsburg, 1818. Index Exot. Lepid. 44to.August. Vindex. 1821.Entries. Observ. sur quelq. Lepid. du Brasil, in Mem. Soc. Nature. Mosc. tom. vii.Poey. Centurie de Lepidopt. de I'll de Cuba. 8vo. Paris, 1832.Winter. Lepid. Nov. Mus. Beryl. 4to., edited by Klug, parti. 1837.Eschscholtz. Description de Papillons Exotic. et Nouv. du Voyage autoiir duMonde du Rurick, in Kotzebue's Voyage, tom. iii.Leu'in. Prodromus En4tomology, or Nat. Hist, of Lepid. of New South Wales, 4to.London, 1805 (18 pi).Boisduval. Faune Entomol. de Madagascar, &c., Lepidoptera. Paris, 8vo. 1832.(Voyage de Astrolabe.) — Ditto, in Nouv. Ann. du Museum, tom. il.And the general works of Linnaeus, Fabricius, Rome, Rose, Shaw, Drury, Donovan,Palisot Beauvais, Sitter, De Gear, Lyonnet, Panzer, GuSrin, Klug, {Ehrenberg,)Perty, Latreille, (Humboldt,) Griffith, Stephens, Curtis, the Encyclopedia Metho-pique,Bouche (Naturgeschichte, containing descriptions of numerous \a.r\eeand pupas), &c.A recent continental reviewer has expressed his astonishment that so great aproportion of Wood's Index Entomologists should be occupied with the minuteLepidoptera. " Vorziiglich die Microlepidopteren sind mit Vorliebe und Geschick-lichkeit behandelt, und sie allen fallen tiber die Halfe des Were, da sie von denPyraliden ab mit dem eilften Heft beginner." Germar's Zeitschr fur die Entomb.vol. i. p. 351. 1839.LEPIDOPTERA. 311species of the order, but the minute species have been much neglectedeven by professed Lepidopterists ; whilst the principles of the classificationof the order, and the philosophical investigation of the charactersof the species in their different states, have been almostentirely neglected by the majority of writers ; thus even in the mostelaborate works hitherto published, such as the Weiner Verzeich7iissand Dr. Horsfield's Lepidoptera Javanica, we find so important a characteras the neuratlon of the wings entirely overlooked ; and in thestill more recent work of Boisduval, the neuration of the wings, andthe preparatory states, are alone considered as of importance. Undersuch circumstances, therefore, it is not surprising that the naturalarrangement of the entire order has still to be effected and that La-trifle'sobservation, " Lepidopterorum ordo entomologorum populus ;horus indecorum etenim instrumenta siberia simplicity ; antennae prosex diverse ; metamorphoses permultorum nobis ignores ; idcirconepotes nostri methodus optima soli confident" (genera Crust., S^c.vol. iv. p. 186.), is as correct as when it was written, thirty years ago.Materials are, however, accumulating upon our hands, which willlighten the difficulties of the task by degrees ; thus, whilst Sepp,Lyonnet, Harris, Huber, Horsfield, Stop, Lewin, Abbot, and othershave investigated the metamorphoses of many species of Europe, Java,South America, New South Wales, and North America, Curtis andHorsfield have investigated the structure of various external partsof the imago, and Lj^onnet, Herold, and Newport have most laboriouslydetailed the internal anatomy of the goat moth, cabbage butterfly, andprivet hawk moth in all their stages.The imago state is characterised by several peculiarities not occurringin any of the other orders. The body is compact, and denselyclothed with hairs or scales ; the head is free, not being received intoa frontal pro thoracic cavity, but attached by a narrow ligament ; it isfurnished at the sides with a pair of large granulated eyes *, and itshinder part often with a pair of ocelli, which are generally hidden bythe thick covering of hairs or scales : the antennas are inserted on theupper part of the head, and are generally long and multiarticulate,very variable in form, and often very complicated in the males; theThe number of facets in the eyes of these insects varies considerably : thus, in thesilkworm moth there are 6236 ; in the goat moth 1 1,,'jOO ; in the eye of one speciesof butterfly 17,325 ; or 34,650 in both eyes, according to a calculation by M. Puget,quoted by Geoffrey. (Hist. abr. Ins. vol. i. p. 4.)X 4312 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS,mouth, at first sight, appears to consist of a long and delicate spirallyconvoluted organ, which, when examined, is found to consist of twopieces, each of which is sometimes provided with a small jointedappendage or palpus at its base. This very slender proboscis *(spiritrompe, or spirignatha, as it is called by Latreille, or anglia byKirby and Spence) is employed to pump up the nectar of flowers,upon which alone it subsists, into the mouth and stomach of the insect,and which, from its peculiar construction, is admirably adapted forpenetrating to the depths of the narrowest blossoms. When at rest,it is coiled up, and defended by two large and compressed palpi,composed of three joints inserted upon a fleshy piece, soldered to thefront of the head. The peculiar structure of this instrument hadbeen long described by Swammerdam, Reaumur, and others ; but itwas to the philosophical acumen of Savigny that we are indebted for aclear demonstration of the real nature of these parts, and a knowledgeof the existence of all the organs of a mandibulated mouth inthe oral apparatus of a butterfly, modified, indeed, as may easily besupposed, to such an extent, that the author who describes twominute fleshy organs, wide apart, and placed above the base of thespiral apparatus as mandibles, the two pieces of which the proboscisis composed as a pair of maxillae, and the piece soldered flatly to thefront of the head as the lower lip, is liable to be treated with ridicule,although the situation of the various parts, and especially theposition of the palpi, proves them to be strictly analogous to theseveral organs observed in the true mandibulated insects. Thechange, indeed, which these organs undergo in the passage from thecaterpillar to the perfect state is most singular : in the mouth of theformer, for instance, the upper lip and mandibles are well developed,the mastication of leaves being chiefly performed by the latter organs,whilst the maxillae and lower lip are small and fleshy organs, the maxillarypalpi minute, but distinct, the labial palpi almost obsolete, andthe labium terminating in a spinneret ; whereas, in the imago every oneof these organs is in an exactly opposite degree of development : theupper lip and mandibles, it is true, exist (as in //V7, 95. 4. a, mandible, b,labrum), but in so rudimental a state as not to be of any use in feeding,whilst the maxillae and the labial palpi are enormously developedFabricius, who named the Dipterous insects Antliata, gave the name of proboscisto their mouth, and applied the name of lingua to the mouth of the Lepidoptera,although in strictness it ought only to be applied to a single organ of the mouth.LEPIDOPTERA. 313(j*?^. 95. 3. head of Pap. Machaon sideways, with the spiral maxillaepartly unfolded; 95. 4. c, base of maxillae ; 95. 5. f, labium ; g, base oflabial palpus, and d, rudimental maxillary palpus at the base of themaxillae ; 95. 6. labium detached, with one of the labial palpi). SomeLepidoptera, however, take no food in the perfect state, and theirmouth organs are accordingly almost atrophied ; this especially takesplace amongst the Bombycidae, where, as fig. 105. 2., the maxillae(one of which, the left, is alone represented) are so much reduced inlength as to be useless, although the labial palpi (^fig- 105. i. 3.) areof considerable size (their place of insertion mjig. 2. is indicated bythe two ovals at the base of the maxillae). In the Hepiali, however{fig- 104-. 12.) the labial palpi are even obsolete, and in the emperormoth (^^. 105. 4.), the mouth organs are only indicated by minutefleshy tubercles arranged in a circular space in the middle of theunder side of the head. In the genus Aglossa, as the name implies,the mouth is described (but erroneously) as being obsolete. Correspondingvariations of course occur in the development of thedigestive organs of the imago : thus, in some of the typical Springtidein which the spiral apparatus attains its greatest length,nearly equalling that of the entire body, the stomach is scarcelysmaller than it is in the pupa state (Newport, in Phil. Trans.1834, vol. xiv. figs. 12, 13 c, d.) ; whereas, in the Dendrolimuspine, in which the parts of the mouth are atrophied, with theexception of the labial palpi, the stomach is almost obsolete.(Suckow, Anat. Physiol. Untersuch. tab. 2. f. 10. Z».) Of the lowerparts of the mouth, the labial palpi are those which are most rarelyeffaced : next to these are to be mentioned the maxillae themselves ;the maxillary palpi being often obsolete, even when the maxillae areat their highest state of development. Thus in Papilio Machaon,Cynthia cardui, and Sphinx cetero, these palpi are scarcely discernible; whereas in Zygaena scabiosae they are more distinct (y?^. 103.10.), and still more strongly in Galleria, Crassus, and some otherof the minute Lepidoptera. (Savigny, Mem. sur les Aniin. sans Ver-teres,fasc. 1. pi. 1, 2, 3.) In Lampronia, Euplocamus, and some othersfigured by Curtis, they are still more elongated, considerably exceedingthe maxillae themselves in length.The thorax is robust and compact, the pro thoracic portion minute,owing to the fore legs performing no supplemental functions, whilstthe mesothorax, to which is attached the anterior pair of large wings,314 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.is greatly enlarged, the metathorax being again reduced in size.The prothorax bears upon its upper side a pair of organs, especiallycharacteristic of the order, namely, a pair of scales covered withhair quite distinct from the wing-covers (teguloe), which Kirby andSpence call batavia or tippets, but which have been overlooked byall other authors except Charter, who first discovered them, or elseconfounded them (as by Burmeister, Translation, p. 77.) with the trueregular : they are described as vesicles appearing full of liquid andof air, and are placed at the sides of the pronotum fig. 105. 6., beingthe two transverse oval parts figured in the transverse piecesucceeding the head) ; the prothorax is often differently coloured tothe remainder of the thorax : thus, in the large Papilionidae, it ismarked with conspicuous red spots. The mesothorax is furnished atthe sides with a pair of large triangular scales called pterygodes byLatreille, paraptera by MacLeay, or repulse by Kirby and Spence,affixed at the base of the anterior wings on the upper side, oftenclothed with hairs of a different colour to the rest of the mesonotum(as in Arctia villa). The form of these organs is very variable,giving to the thorax a diversity of appearance : thus, in the genus (belonging to the family Noctuidse), they are very large, andthe thorax is pushed forwards, forming a sort of hood over the head ;whilst, in Xylina, they are more elongated; and give to the sides ofthe thorax an elevated appearance, with the centre depressed. Infig. 105.6., the right parapteron is shaded with longitudinal lines,the left one being removed to show the mesothoracic spiracle. Thescutellum of the mesothorax occupies the hind part of this segment.The metathorax is a shorter transverse piece composed of an anteriorand posterior piece, with two lateral ones of a triangular form, theapices of which meet in the middle of the meta notum. This partisdotted m fig. 105. 6. ; its small anterior portion I have consideredas the praescutum of the metathorax, the two lateral pieces as conjointlyforming the scutum and the posterior part as the scutellum.(Griffith, An. Kingd. pi. 121. three upper figures, Saturnia pannoniamajor.) The segment immediately following this dotted portion hasamembranous wrinkled appearance in Cossus ligniperda (Lyonnet,Posthh. Mem. pi. 46. f 4. segment 4.), which might lead to the ideathat it was analogous to the semicircular membrane represented in myfig. 72. 1. and 2.t, and considered (p. 92. note ante) as analogous tothe funiculus of the petiolated species ; but on examination of otherLepidoptera. 315species, especially Saturnia pannonia major, I have found this piece tobe of a similar consistence with the other abdominal segments.The wings are attached to the lateral and superior parts of theresound meta-thorax, and are always present, except in a few species,of which the females alone are apterous, or have the wings reduced tosmall and useless appendages : these wings are of large size, and are notfolded up * ; the two fine layers of membrane of which the wings arecomposed, like the upper and lower surface of a leaf, are kept expandedby a number of longitudinal corneous veins, or nerves, as they havebeen called, but which Dr. Leach termed Pterygostia, or wing-bones.These veins here as in the Diptera and Hymenoptera, according to theirnumber and position, offer very important characters for generic distribution,but which have been too much neglected by Lepidopterists.M. Boisduval, in his recent work, has delineated these nerves in manyof the genera of butterflies ; although it is but proper to observe injusticeto our own countrymen Harris and Jones, that they longago published observations on this subject, the latter in the 2d vol.of the Linnaean Transactions, in which the same subject was welltreated. The wings in this order offer another peculiarity, since,instead of being naked and transparent, they are clothed witha double layer of minute scales, somewhat resembling those offishes. These scales, upon which the beauty of these insects soentirely depends, are easily detached in the form of a fine dust, and,when examined under the microscope, are exceedingly variable intheir form, but generally more or less wedge-shaped, or oval ; sometimestoothed or notched at the broadest end, and having a slenderpoint at the base, by which they are attached upon the membranoussurface of the wing, which, when denuded, presents the appearance ofnumerous minute impressions arranged in lines, in which the base of thescales are planted, being laid upon each other like the tiles on the roofof a house (Jig.lOS. s.). Lyonnet, in his posthumous memoirs, has filledseveral quarto plates with representations of these scales, varying toalmost every form, taken from the wings and body of the goat moth,so that the suggestion of a writer (Mag. Nat. Hist. No. 11.), that theform of these scales might be used for specific characters, is entitledto no weight. Some species have a double layer of-these scales on bothsides of the wings, the under layer usually consisting of white scales.The number of these scales is very great, there being more thanThe Pterophori offer a partial exception to this rule.316 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.400,000 on the wings of the silkworm moth according to Leuwenhoeck :in some species, however, the wings are partially, or even entirely,denuded of scales ; and in others, small patches only are thus denuded,as in the great atlas moth. In many species, these scales exhibit themost brilliant metallic tints, so that in the bright light of the sun it isalmost impossible to look upon them : such is especially the case withthe splendid blue Brazilian species of Morpho : others, again, havethe under side of the wings ornamented with beautiful silvery spots,occasioned, according to Kirby and Spence {{Introdd. vol. iii. p. 652.),by the high polish of their surface, and the purity of the white colourof the scales, contrasted with the dull opake colour of the wings. It isonly very recently that the surface of these scales has been microscopicallyexamined with the view of ascertaining the mode in which the beautifulcolours which they exhibit is produced. M. Bernard Deschampshas especially investigated these parts, which he has found to differ,not only in the granulations and strike with which their surface is covered,but also in the number of the membranes of which they arecomposed, having arrived at a knowledge of the latter curious circumstance,from the scales being occasionally imperfect in certain parts,giving an opportunity of investigating them more perfectly than whenentire ; hence he is induced to consider that all these scales areformed of two or more commonly, of three lamellae ; and it is alwaysupon the superior layer that the granulations, of which the colouringmatter of the scale is composed, are to be found : these granulationsare of a regular form, and their number is sometimes so considerable,that the scale is entirely opake ; when it exhibits strips, it is alwaysupon the second lamella that they are placed. These striae are oftenparallel, and formed of rows of minute granulations, like oval or roundpearls placed end to end. Those scales which have strife withoutgranulations, have only two lamellae ; the inferior surface of the second(when only two), or the third lamella in almost all the diurnal,and some nocturnal species, has the property to reflect prismaticcolours more intense and beautiful than those on the upper surface,which give the colour to the wing. The scales which ornament thesplendid metallic blue and green butterflies have the surface differentlyconstructed from those of any of the others. M. Deschamps hasalso described some singularly formed scales, peculiar to the males ofcertain species of butterflies, Which he terms " plumules." The specieswhich possess them belong to the genera Pontia, Hipparchia, andLepidoptera. 317Polyommatus. Some of these are of a reversed heart shape, with athin peduncle arising between the two basal lobes, the apex being terminatedby numbers of minute filaments often thickened at the tip.M. Deschampshas also made an extensive series of observations uponthe manner in which these scales are implanted into the membraneof the wing, and has shown that the firmer fixing of them in theBombycidse is owing to the base of the peduncle being clavate, andinserted into a similar-shaped cup. (Antial. Set. Nat. February1835. pi. 3, 4.)Mr. Bowerbank has also subjected the scales of several species ofbutterflies to a similar investigation, with a nearly similar result,considering that the scales consist of at least two distinct layers ;the uppermost formed of numerous longitudinal and cross striae,covered or connected by a thin membrane more or less coloured,and the under one composed of a somewhat thicker and strongermembrane, of uniform texture, and without stria?. The greatestbreadth of the dark brown scales from the wing of Papilio Paris isbut ^\-^ of an inch; the quill by which it had been attached to thewing is 5^yVo 5 ^'^^ distance of the striae from each other, ^^-j^-x ?and the diameter of the longitudinal striae themselves-n^^-^-^ of aninch. These striae Mr. Bowerbank seems to regard as canals. Theinternal diameter of these minute tubes, supposing them to be such,may be estimated at about a^^-j^x of an inch. {Entomol. Mag. No.23. p. 304.) See also Read, in Taylor's London and Edinh. Phil.Mag. for October 1839.The variations in the colours and markings of the wings are almostas numerous as the species themselves : the sexes also often differmaterially from each other ; still some general principles are evidentin the distribution of these colours and markings. Thus the Pontiacand Pierides are almost uniformly white ; Colias and its allies yellow ;the Fritillaries rich brown, spotted with black and with silvery spotson the under side ; Hipparchia and its allies ornamented with eye-likemarks ; the Mycenae copper-coloured; the Polyommati fine blue,with small eyes on the under side ; the Zygacnae with red under wings ;the Noctuidae with an ear-like mark in the middle of the fore wings ;the Geometrical with waved carpet-like marks.Another peculiarity consists in the apparatus by which the two wingson the same side are retained together in the same line during flight,composed of a loop, in which a strong bristle plays fig. 102. 8.) : the318 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.loop is formed either by an elevated portion of the membrane of thestrong central vein of the upper wing on its under surface, or by alittle tuft of raised hairs. This appears to have been first noticed byDe Geer (torn, i. tab. x. f. 4'.) and Harris (in his essay upon themembranes of the wings), and afterwards by Giorna linn. Trans.vol. i. p. 135.) in greater detail. M. Poey ann. Soc. Ent. France,torn, i.) has observed that the bristle is simple in the males, butmultiplied in the other sex ; in which, however, according to Kirbyand Spence, there is no annulus, and consequently these individualsare less fitted for flight. See also Hoeven, in Fenissac. Bull. Sci.Nat. March 1828. It is chiefly amongst the Sphingidse and mothsthat we find this apparatus, the butterflies being destitute of it.The legs of these insects are long, slender, and hairy, offering, invarious species, remarkable peculiarities in the opposite sexes, whichhave not been sufficiently studied. In general the six legs are alike,or nearly so ; but in some butterflies the fore legs are minute andrudimental. The posterior tibife are often furnished with two pair ofspurs, namely, a pair at the apex, and another pair below the middle,on the inside. This is the case in all the nocturnal and some of thediurnal species (forming the family Hesperides) ; whereas the remainderof the butterflies have only one pair at the apex of the posteriortibiae. The ungues are variable in form, being sometimes bifid.In some butterflies, also, they are attended by several curious appendages,which have been more particularly described by M. Doyereann. Soc. Ent. France, 1837), and figured in the new edition of theRegne Animal, published by Crochard. The abdomen is cylindrical,and destitute of a sting ; although Dr. Burmeister has noticed anexotic species, in the Royal Museum at Berlin, which appeared to beprovided with an instrument of this kind, but which I should beinclined rather to regard as the acute extremity of the ovipositor,which, in many species, whose larvae are subterraneous or subcorticalin their habits, is long and acute.Owing to their large size and the greater degree of attention whichhas been bestowed upon these insects, a far greater number of instancesare on record of monstrosities, produced either from accidentalcircumstances in the individual, which is otherwise perfect (as variationin size, colour, or markings), or from that imperfect species of hermaphroditewhich has been termed gynandromorphism, in whichone individual exhibits portions of the markings or structure of bothLEPIDOPTERA. 319sexes. Burmeister, Lefebvre, and Lacordaire have enumerated aconsiderable number of such instances.There is often very considerable diversity in the appearance of thesexes of these insects, the females being generally the largest, mostdully coloured, with simple antennae : they are occasionally alsodestitute of wings (as in Orgyia, Cheimatobia, Lampetia, &c.), andeven in Oiketicus and Psyche present but very little of the appearanceof perfect insects, bearing a much greater resemblance to fullgrownlarva;. In some species, also, the opposite sexes are coloured,either entirely or partially different from each other, as in the ghostmoth, muslin moth, or orange-tip butterfly, the female of which lasthas not the slightest tinge of orange on its wings. Another curioussexual diversity takes place in some of the Geometridae, the males ofwhich have a large wing-like lobe at the base of the posterior wings,giving them the appearance of being six-winged (Lobophora sexali-sat, &c.).The transformations of these insects have attracted the attention ofobservers from the earliest times, owing to their common occurrence,large size, and the beauty of the insects in their perfect state. Theeggs are far more variable in shape than in the other orders, theirsurface being often elaborately ornamented with raised lines, spots,&c., in many cases closely resembling Echini. The larvae, which arecommonly' called caterpillars, are long and cylindrical, composed ofthirteen segments, of which the anterior represents the head of theimago, and is succeeded by three segments, each of which mostlybears a pair of simple, short, and articulated feet. These segmentsRepresent the thorax, and the remainder the abdomen of the butterflyor moth. Of these segments, the four intermediate ones, as well asthe anal segment, are furnished with prolegs, as they have beentermed, being thick, short, fleshy limbs, armed at the extremity witha very great number of minute recurved hooks, and furnished withpowerful muscles, enabling the larva to retain strong hold of its placeof rest. The number of these prolegs varies, however, from ten tofour, the last pair, with a few exceptions (Cerura, Stauropus, &c.),being placed on the anal segment of the body.* The sides of thebody are furnished with nine pairs of spiracles ; the head is armedwith a pair of powerful mandibles, a moderate-sized upper lip, oftenOne of the nocturnal genera has been termed Apoda Haw., Limacodes Latr.,from being destitute of feet in the larva state.320 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.emarginate on the middle of the front edge, and the maxillae andlabium are small, fleshy, and soldered together, the spinneret arisingfrom the centre of the labium. The body of these larvae is oftennaked, but more commonly more or less clothed with hairs, spines, orwarts. Previous to assuming the pupa state, these caterpillarsundergo a series of mounting, generally four in number. When fullgrown,they prepare for duration, either by constructing cocoonsentirely formed of silk, or mixed up with various additional materials,or by securely affixing themselves in situations of safety ;some species simply suspending themselves by the tail, whilst othertribes ingeniously hold themselves up by fixing a cord across themiddle of the body. The details of these proceedings, as well as thevarious constructions of cocoons of different kinds, have been elaboratelydetailed by Reaumur in his Memoires. Bonnet, also, has publishedmany very interesting detached observations upon these subjects.The pupfe of these insects are different in their appearance,some being of a conical form, and others more or less angulated ;the former invariably producing moths, and the latter butterflies,being also naked ; the angular projections of their bodies not renderingtheir situation inside a cocoon so commodious as the conicalchrysalides.The chrysalis state of Lepidopterous insects is of that kind termedobtected ; the insect being incapable of eating or walking, with thelimbs laid close upon the sides and breast, folded up under a hardskin, on which account they are much less distinctly perceptible thanin other pupa, bearing, indeed, a great resemblance to an Egyptianmummy ; whence, Mr. Inwood, in a curious dissertation upon theEgyptian arts, has been led to consider that this and other designshad their origin in natural objects.The chrysalis, upon quitting the exuviae of the caterpillar, is softand tender : by degrees, however, its external envelope becomes hardand friable ; the surface of the body is at first moistened with a viscidfluid, which exudes from beneath the wings and the other parts whichare enclosed between these organs, and which becomes thickened,and hardens rapidly, and in so doing glues together the contiguousparts, which are consequently now enclosed in an additional envelope *;this taking place within twenty-four hours after the change, previousto which time it is easy to separate the various external organs of theSee ray memoir on Eucheira socialis, as to the disposition of the limbs in thechrysalis. (Trans. Ent. Soc. vol. i.)Lepidoptera. 321future butterfly. From the anterior extremity of the body are to beobserved several small and narrow longitudinal compartments, arrangedlike mummy bands, and extending over the breast : these arethe coverings of the legs, spiral tongue, and antennae ; the part fromwhence they seem to arise is the head, which is covered with a piecetermed the cephalotheca. On the outside of these narrow bands areto be observed two broader scales, which, covering the wings, aretermed pterotheca, arising from the opposite side to the breast, andwhich is the covering of the thorax, or cytotheca. This is followed bythe abdomen case, gastrotheca. The covering of the spiral tongueis, in some species of Springtide, detached, and forms a snout, reachingto the base of the abdomen.When ready to assume the perfect state, the chrysalis skin burstsdown the back and sides of the wing-covers, the anterior part separatinginto several parts, and allowing the inclosed butterfly to makeits escape ; which it does with its wings moist and in an unexpandedstate. They soon, however, attain their full size ; the insect dischargesa few drops of a thick fluid, and, in the case of the cocoon-makingspecies, the insect pushes its way through the substance of the cocoon,sometimes splitting or dissolving the silk in a manner not satisfactorilyascertained. Some pupae have the segments furnished withrows of recurved spines, by which they are able to push themselvesforward in the earth, or in the burrows the caterpillars had previouslyformed in wood, &c.The food of this order of insects consists almost exclusively of vegetablematter, no part of the different kinds of plants being free fromtheir attacks, although the leaves are the support of by far the greatestportion. I have had occasion to remark, in Loudon's ArboretumBritannicum, that plants of the same natural family are especiallyliable to the attacks of allied species of Lepidoptera, the affinities ofthe one confirming those of the other ; and M. Boisduval asserts thatan imported plant will be attacked by insects having a strong naturalrelation with those which fed upon it in its native clime hist. Nat.Lep. p. 52.). Some species of caterpillars are indeed polyphemus, butthe majority confine themselves strictly to a single species of plant,and their allies are attached to the same group of plants. Species ofbutterflies, allied to P. Machaon, feed upon Umbelliferous : those speciesof Papilio of North America, which are distinguished by theirVOL. II. yS22 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.yellow spots, live upon laurels, especially the sassafras ; those of thegroup typified by P. Thomas or P. Agavus feed upon the orange tree.The species of Thais are appropriated to the Aristolochias, and theParnassus (Doritis) to the Saxifrages. Pieris attacks the Cruciferae;Colias, the herbaceous Leguminous ; Danais, the Asclepiadeee ; Helixthe Passifloree ; Argynnis, the violet ; and Hipparchia, theGramineae.The geographical distribution of this order has been but littlestudied. Dependent as its species are almost exclusively upon thevegetable world, the same rules which regulate the latter will of courseto a great degree apply to the former ; and whilst particular tribesaffect peculiar situations in a given country (as, for instance, Doritismountainous districts), where peculiar tribes of plants are found, othertribes of great extent frequent other countries to which the tribes ofplants to which they are attached are especially confined ; thus, theHeliconides do not occur out of South America, the country of thePassifloracese : Casting and Erycina are also (almost exclusively) inhabitantsof the same country. The gigantic Ornithopteri inhabitthe islands of the Indian Archipelago, whilst the nearly equal-sizedMorpheus are natives of Brazil. Africa, owing to its arid soil and far-spreadsand deserts, is but poor in the diurnal species, whilst SouthAmerica, owing to exuberance in vegetable life, abounds with them,so that it may be considered that at least one third of the diurnalLepidoptera are natives of that portion of the New World. Owing,probably, to this dependence upon the distribution of vegetables, certainspecies as well as genera are on the other hand Cosmopolites :thus, whilst Cynthia cardui occurs throughout Europe, Senegal,Egypt, Barbary, Cape of Good Hope, the Islands of Mauritius, andMadagascar, China, Bengal, Java, New Holland, Brazil, and NorthAmerica, Vanessa Antioch and Atalanta, Lyca^na Phineas, tXrc, arealso very widely extended through the northern hemisphere, andsome genera, such as the beautiful Deiopeitie, are natives of almostevery region. It is, however, by the publication of local Faunas, thatwe shall be best enabled to obtain a correct view of this subject, andtherefore too much praise cannot be given to the compilation of sucharticles as Keferstein's observations on the "Apparition des Lepidoptera" rev. Entomol. No. 10.), Hess, On the Lepidoptera of the Alps,Beske's Catalogue of Hamburg Lepidoptera, Body St. Vincent's Lepidopteraof the Canary Isles, Fridvalsky's Lepidoptera of Hungary,LEPIDOPTERA. 323Lepechin's List of the Orenburg District, SodofFsky on those of Livonia,Brown's List of Swiss Butterflies in 3Iag. Nat. Hist. vol. viii., &:c.The relations of these insects with the other orders are various.Latreille considers them on the one side to be related to the Hymenoptera,the elongated tongue of Bombus and Apis leading towardsthe typical structure of the Lepidoptera, and on the other side thewant of conformity which exists between the mouths of the larva andimago, indicating the relation which exists between the Lepidopteraand Diptera. Mr. MacLeay, however, considers them to be intermediatebetween the Homoptera and Diptera in the haustellated circle ;the Homopterous genus Flataaaa, and especially Flataaaa limbata Fab.,being supposed to bear a distant affinity to certain extreme Lepidopteraas apparent from having been connected by Linnaeus and Patriciuswith such trivial names as Phaloenoides, and from the admissionof Latreille, that the Fabrician Flatae " ressemblent a de petits phalangesou raieux encore a des Pirates." The immediate transitionbetween Homoptera and Lepidoptera is supposed to be exemplified inthe Homopterous genus Aleyrodes, or the Tinea proletella of Reaumurand Linnaeus.The Dipterous genus Psychoda Za^r. {Tinearia Shell), and theLepidopterous genus Pterophorus Latr. (JPhalenes titles De G.), areassumed to be the connecting links between the Diptera and Lepidoptera.The Lepidoptera are also at the same time regarded byMacLeay as forming a passage between the Trichoptera (amongst theMandibulata) and the Haustellata. In the eruciform appearance oftheir larvae they are to a certain extent related to the Tenthredinidae,the larvae of which greatly resemble the caterpillars of this order ;but the closest affinity is that which exists between them and the LinnaeanPhryganeae. Thus, whilst Reaumur insists upon this affinity, asproved by the general appearance of the insects, De Geer, upon thecorrespondence between the form of their wings and the internalorganisation of the larvae, and Kirby upon the resemblance of thetrophi of the Trichoptera and these insects, other and equally strikinggrounds of relation are to be found between the two orders ; the case-bearinghabit of the caterpillars existing in certain groups (Oiketicus,Psyche, and some Tineaee), the nature of the clothing of the wings ofPhryganea repeated in certain Tineidae, the spinose tibiae of bothgroups, the elongated antennae of the Atlas and Leptoceri, all tendto prove this relationship so strong as to render it almost impossibleY 2324 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.in certain cases to decide to which of the two orders an insect maybelong. Such is especially the case with Psyche, which Mr. Newhavenplaces amongst the Neuroptera, and the Acentropus GarnonsiiCurt. (Acentria nivosa StephJ), placed by Stephens in the orderNeuroptera, and hy Curtis in the Trichoptera, on the ground that themaxillary palpi are strongly developed, and the labial palpi absent.(brit. Entomol. p. 497.) This character he has, however, set aside intreatingof the genus Eriocephala, a curious group of minute (supposed*)moths (Tinea castella Linn. S)C.), in which the labial palpiare minute, and the maxillary greatly elongated as in the Trichoptera,and in which the anterior tibiae are furnished with an inner spine, acharacter which is asserted to be possessed by no true Trichopterousinsect. Acentropus, it is true, is destitute of any such spine, but thenits four hind legs are also destitute of spurs, which would remove itboth from the Trichoptera and Lepidoptera, and such, indeed, wasthe cause which induced Mr. Stephens to place it amongst the Neuroptera; but, notwithstanding the want of this character-j-, Acentropusappears to me to belong decidedly to the order Lepidoptera, possessingtwo characters peculiarly characteristic of the order which Mr. Curtishas overlooked, namely, a pair of large mesothoracic paraptera, orregular, and the hook and bristle above described ; neither do I thinkMr. Curtis justified in regarding the palpi of Acentropus as maxillaryappendages, deeming them rather to be labial palj^i.The classification of this order, as before observed, has hithertobeen greatly neglected with respect to the true relations of the variousgroups founded upon a careful investigation of their, often recondite,characters. Linnaeus, in the earlier editions of the Systema Naturce,adopted only two genera, Papilio and Phalaena. In the later editions,The existence of a species possessing a character not according with that of therest of the order is not sufficient ground for considering such character not to becharacteristic of the order ; and hence the possession by Eriocephala of maxillarypalpi enormously developed, would neither be sufficient in itself to remove it fromthe order, nor to authorise us in not considering the comparatively superior lengthof the labial palpi over that of the maxillary, as characteristic of the order ; butEriocephala has other characters at least as strongly divaricating from the typicalstructure of the Lepidoptera, namely, the neuration of the wings, the formation ofthe labial palpi, and the general habit of the insect.f If the existence of an internal spur on the anterior tibia; were the real characteristicto distinguish a Lepidopterous from a Trichopterous insect, a greatnumber of species, belonging unquestionably to the former order, would require tobe removed from it, especially amongst the diurnal species.LEPIDOPTERA. 325however, he added a third, Sphinx, dividing Papilio into five, and Phalaenainto eight sections. Latreille adopted these three groups, towhich he gave the sectional names of Diurna, Crepuscularia, andNocTURNA. Mr. Stephens, rejecting the last of these three sections,has proposed another arrangement, dividing the order into six primarygroups, namely: 1. Diurna : 2. Crepuscularia : 3. Meridians:corresponding with the Linnaean Phalaena Bombyx, and comprisingfour families, Hepialidse, Bombycidse, Notodontidae and Arctiidae :4. NocTURNA, corresponding with the Linnaean Phalaena Noctua, andcomprising two families, Lithosiidge and Noctuidae : 5. Semidiurna,corresponding with the Linnaean Phalaena Geometra and Pyralis, andcomprising three families, Geometridae, Platyptericidae and Pyramids :and 6. Respecting, corresponding with the Linneean Phalaena Tortrix.Tinea and Alicia, and comprising four families, Tortricidae,Yponomeutidae, Tineidae, and Alucitidae. It cannot, however, be deniedthat the first of these primary groups is of higher value, and presentsmore exclusive characters than any of the rest. The preceding, togetherwith other classifications proposed by Dumeril, Lamarck, Dalman,&c., are for the most part founded upon considerations derived fromthe perfect state of the insect ; or if the preparatory states are takeninto account, it is only in a secondary manner. It will be easily conceived,however, from the general principles enforced in the precedingpages of this work, that arrangements founded upon the transformationsof these insects, or upon a natural combination of their relationsinter se, are, at least in my opinion, entitled to far higher weight thanthe preceding ; and although we are still lamentably deficient in theknowledge of the transformations of exotic species, and indeed stillpossess, at best, but a most superficial knowledge of exotic Lepidoptera,more especially of the nocturnal species yet every attempt madeto distribute the order upon principles resting upon these considerationshas proved far more successful than any others. Indeed,whilst it is only recently that zoologists in general have arrived at thetruth that an animal cannot find a natural and definitive place amongstits relations, until, not only its own entire adult organisation is fullyinvestigated, but, also, all the peculiarities which it exhibits in itsprogress to maturity are known, Lepidopterists have long adoptedthe latter principle, owing, it must be confessed, to the great difficultywhich attends the investigation of this order, and, it must be confessed,to the dislike which the possessors of rare and beautiful specimens haveY 3326 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.to Injure their collections by sacrificing them to the dissecting knife.There are, it is true, still some Lepidopterists who insist upon theinutility of inquiries into the preparatory states, and the sufficiencyof characters from the imago, especially M. Duponchel (ann. Soc.Ent. de France, 1837), but it appears to me that nowhere are theyof more value than in the present order, for as Boisduval well observes,Les organes, qui, dans les autres ordres, jouent le premier role dansI'etablissement des copes, sont dans celui-ci d'un faible secours."hist, Nat. Ins. Lepidopt. vol. i. Introdd. p. ii.)Messrs, Denis and Schiffermuller in an anonymous work publishedat Vienna in 1776, being a systematic catalogue of the Lepidopterafound in the environs of that city, have employed the larvae exclusivelyto characterise the divisions of the order to which, however, theygave no names, but simply indicated them by letters, almost everyoneof which constitute modern genera. Their arrangement is asfollows.Sphinx divided into seven families. A. Larvae acrocephalce ; Sph. ocellata (Sme-riotous). B. Amphcephalce : Sph. Convolvuli (Sphinx). C. Calculates: Sph.Euphorbia (Deilephila). D. Opthahnica : Sph. cetero (Stirps Eumorphse Huber).E. Elongate : Sph. Stellatarum ( Macroglossa). E. Suhpilosce : Sph. Api-formis(Sesia). G. PhalcRniformes : Sph. filipendulae (Zygaena).BoMBYX divided Into 20 families. 1. Larvaj with 16 feet. A. Larvaj sphingiformes :Bom. versicolora (Endromis). B. VerticiUatcE : Bom. Pyri (Saturnia). C. Theresa: Bom. Rubra (Penthophora Gerwar). D. Nodosa: Bom. Salicis (LeucomaStephen). E. Since : Bom. Casa (Arctia-scars). F. Celeripedes : Bom. lubriclpeda(Spilosoma Steph.). G. JFasciculatce : Bom. pudlbunda (Dasycheira Steph.). H.Cristata: : Bom. curule (Closer iiZ^^. ). I. Collar : Bom. Quercifolia ( Gastro-pachaOc/is. ). K. Villosce : Bom. Quercus (Lasiocampa i^c/jr. ). L. PUoscb : Bom.lanestris(ErIogaster Term. ). 'M Suhpilosm : Bom. Bucephalus (Pygaera). N. Lig-oiivorcB : Bom. Cossus (Cossus). O. ItadicivorcB : Bora. Humuli (Hepialus). P.Noctniformes : Bom. Cassia (Persia S'^ep/f.). Q. G geometric amies : Bom. AlpinePterostoma Germ. ). R. GibhostB : Bom. Dromedarius ( Notodonta). 2. Larvaewith 14 feet. S. Furcata : Bom. Vincula (Cerura). T. Cuspidata : Bom. Spicula(Platypteryx). 3. Larvae without conspicuous feet. U. Limaciformes : Bom.Testudo (Limacodes).NocTU^. 1. Larvae with 14 feet. A, LarvcB tentaculafcE : Noc. Ulmii (Uropus).2. Larvae with 1 6 feet. B. Bomhycifonnes : Noc. trident ( Acronycta). C. : Noc. Quatre (Lithosia). D. Rhomhoidm : Noc. Paliolalis (Hercyna).E. Pubescentes : Noc. Algae (Bryophila). F. Continence : Noc. bimaculata (Mi-delia).H. Tenuistriatce : Noc. flavicincta (Polia). L Variegated : Noc. Absinthii(Cucullia). K. Albosparsce. : Noc. exoleta (Xylina). L. Alhopunctatce : Noc. instability(Orthosia). M. Albilateres : Noc. Pistacina (Orthosia B. Steph.). N.Terricoke : Noc. sufFusa (Agrotis). O. Largo-striata : (several groups). P. 06-liquo-striatcR : Noc. meticulosa (Phlogophora). Q,. ArctostriatcB : Noc. Comma(Leucania). R. Scutellum : Noc. vaccine (Erastus). S. Ochrocephala : Noc.LEPIDOPTERA. ' 327cltrago (Cynthia). T. Parricide : (several groups). V. Furtive : Noc. (Apamaja). W. Curvilinear : Noc. Ononis (Heliothis). X. Ciliated :Noc. Framing ( Catocala). Y. Pseudo-geometrical : Noc. triplasia ( Abrostola). 3.jLarvEe with 12 feet. Z. Larvas seinigeometnB : Noc. Festus; ( Plusia), A A. serpentine: Noc. lunar (Ophiusa).Geometry. 1. Larva) with 12 feet. A. Larvae seminoctuales : Geo. marga-criteria (EUopia). B. Stolo7i former : Geo. Cythisaria (Geometra). C. Corticin(B :Geo. historia ( Amphidasis). D. Pedunculares : Geo. roboraria (Boarmia). E.SurcuUformes ; (several groups), F. Ramiformes : Geo. Alniaria (Ennomos). G.Striata:: Geo. defoliaria (Hybernia). H. Strigillatce : Geo. pendularia (Camera).I. Rigid : Geo. Pullets ( Gnophos). K. Noctuiformes : Geo. rhamnata ( AcisL. Rugosa : Geo. bipunctaria (Parentis). M. Squamosce : Geo. fulvata(Cidaria). N. Signature : Geo. Adustata (Zerene). O. Punctata: Geo. dealbata(Idea). P. Filiformes : Geo. vibicaria (Bellona).Py Salis, ToRTRix, TiNEA, and Alicia, are arranged according to the formsand colours of the imago, their caterpillars being so little known.Papilio. a. Larvae tortriciformes : Pap. Malvffi (Hesperia). B. Bomhyci-formes : Pap. Apollo ( Doritis Fab. ). C. Variegated : Pap. Machaon ( Papilio). D.mediostriatae : Pap. Cratajgi (Pieris). E. Pallidiventres : Pap. Hale (Colias).F. Suhfurcatce: Pap. .^geria (Hipparchia). G. Cornice : Pap. Ilia (Natura).H. Subspi?iosce : Pap. Camilla (Limenitis). I. Acutospinosa; : Pap. Atalanta(Vanessa). K. Collosphwsce : Pap. Paphia (Argynnis). L. PseudospinoscB : Pap.Phoebe (Melissa). Larva onisciformes : M. Ohlongo-scutata : Pap. virgaureae(Lycsena). N. Gibboso-scutatce : Pap. Meleager (Polyommatus). O. depress: Pap. Prune (Thecia). P. Ignota : Ascalaphus !Dr. Horsfield, in his work upon the Lepidoptera of Java, haspursued a somewhat similar course, having paid particular attentionto the transformations of the Lepidoptera of that island during along residence, whence the leading divisions of the Weiner Verzeick-miss were found to accord almost precisely with those which Dr.Horsfield had proposed to himself previously to his becoming acquaintedwith that work. Dr. Horsfield endeavoured to follow upthe quin arian and circular principles of MacLeay, and accordinglydivided the Lepidoptera into five primary sections, namely', ,Sphingidse, Bombycidae, Noctuidee, and Phalaenidae, without,however, venturing to characterise these primary sections, inappropriatelynamed, as it appears to me, as though they were families.The butterflies (PapiHonidae), which Dr. Horsfield has most especiallyinvestigated, constitute five stirpes, which, in accordance with the principlesof MacLeay, he arranges and names from the analogies whichthey exhibit to the orders of Ametabola, namely!. Vermiform Stirps,corresponding with the Lycaenidae of Stephens; 2. ChilognathiformStirps (Colias, Papilio, Doritis, &c.) ; 3. Chilopodiform Stirps (4328 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.plea, Vanessa, Argynnis, &c,) ; 4. Thysanuriform Stirps (Natura,Morpho, Hipparchia, &c.) ; and, 5. Anopluriform Stirps (Erycina,Hesperia, &c.). The stirps are related inter se by means of aberrantgenera, whereby not only the progression of affinities is maintained,but the circle of the diurnal Lepidoptera, completed by means ofBarbicornis (my Jig. 101. 5.), which is supposed to connect thePapilionides and the Hesperides.The Springtide are also supposed to exhibit five types of form inthe larvae. These are exemplified by Zygaena, Macroglossa, Sme-riotous, Acherontia, and Sphinx ; egeria and its allies being supposedto possess a different metamorphosis, are omitted, being considered,at least in part, to enter into the next tribe ; Zygagna, andits allies, ought also to have been rejected from the Sphingidse, withwhich they exhibit but little relationship.The Bombycidse, also, although admitted to be less generally knownin their early states, exhibit five prominent forms: — 1. Fasciculatae,typified by Laria and Arctia ; 2. Verticillatse, typical genera Lima-codesand Saturnia ; 3. Pilosa;, typical genus Lasiocampa ; 4. Ignistypical genera Pygsera, Cossus, and Hepialus ; 5. Cuspidatae,typical genera Cerura, Notodonta.The five stirpes of the Noctuidce are also formed, although onlyprovisionally, from the larvae: — 1, Nuda, typical genera Agrotis,Maestro, Polia, &c. (which are considered as typical of the tribe) ;2. Uniforms, typical genus Lithosia, with which, possibly, many ofthe Tineaee may also be associated ; 3. Fascinate ; 4. Ciliated, typical generaCatocala and Abrostola ; 5. Semigeometrae, type Plusia.The remaining tribe, Phalaenidae, also exhibits, among the larvae ofthe insects which compose it, five types of form, the precise limitsof which require more detailed investigation. They are : — 1. ,Phal. Margaritaria, &c. ; 2. Geometry, or true loopers ;3. Pyralidae (containing in the Weiner Verzeichniss two families, answeringto Herminia and Botys ; 4. Tortrices ; 5. Tineaee.The arrangement of the last four of these tribes given above isadmitted to be but a provisional sketch, of which the outlines requireto be filled up in future numbers of the work. It is consequently tobe regretted that only two parts, comprising but a portion of thediurnal Lepidoptera, have hitherto been published. Dr. Horsfieldendeavours to complete the Lepidopterous circle by means of Hesperia,which in its structural characters and tortriciform larvae (whichLEPIDOPTERA. " ' ' '.^I " 329roll up leaves, &c.), exhibits a decided departure from the typicalDiurna, and a tendency towards some of the nocturnal Lepidoptera/asthe Tortrices. Affinities also of a more general nature exist betweenthe Papilionidse and Phalaenidae. The situation of the genus Ptero-chorus, which, according to Reaumur and the Weiner Verzeichniss,is to be considered as intermediate between the diurnal and nocturnalLepidoptera, he does not attempt to determine. With theexception, therefore, of the diurnal species, but little progress is heremade in the classification of the order. A plan is indeed indicatedfor its natural arrangement ; but it appears to me that the nocturnalgroups will be found, when more satisfactorily investigated, by nomeans to correspond with these views.A more ingenious arrangement of the order has been attempted byMr. Newman in his Essay, " Sphinx Vespiformis." Proceeding uponthe principle that seven is the typical number of groups in everyhigher group, and that one of these seven groups contains types of allthe other six, which are arranged around it as a centre, touching itscircumference by means of aberrant genera — each of the six outercircles also coming into contact with the two adjacent circles bysimilar aberrant genera — an arrangement is proposed which certainlyinvolves a greater number of affinities than are to be traced in anyprevious classification. His plan of distribution may be learned fromthe diagram shown in next page.The same objection appears to me to exist here as in the classificationsabove noticed, namely, that the minor divisions of the nocturnalLepidoptera are elevated to a rank equivalent to that of thewhole of the Diurna.A more recent author, M. Boisduval, in his Hist. Nat. des InsectesLepidoptera, has obviated this difficulty, by dividing the Lepidopterainto only two primary groups, for which, in order to avoid the incorrectnotions produced by the terms diurnal and nocturnal (many ofthe species of the nocturnal Lepidoptera being, in fact, day-fliers),he has proposed the names of Rhopalocera (club-horned) for thebutterflies, and Heterocera (varied-horned) for the moths, includingthe Sphinges, which he does not consider a distinct primary group ;and as this appears to me to be an advantageous step, I shall hereadopt it.MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.The first section of the Lepidoptera*, that of the RhopaloceraDumer.y Boisdd. (Diurna Z«<r.), corresponds with the genus Papilio Linn.,BiBnoGR. Refer, to the Diurnal Lepidoptera.Peter. Pavilion Britannife^Icones, &c. fol. Lond. 1717.Jones. A New Arrangement of Papilio from the Nerves of Wings, in Trans. Linn.Soc. vol. ii.Schilling, in Isis, 1834, Arrangement of ditto from Nerves.Clerk, Icones Insect, variorum, 4to. Holm. 1759-1764.Levin. The Papilio of Great Britain. London, 1795, 4to.Bergstraesser. Icones Pupil. Diurn., dec. III., Hannoviae, 1779-81.Sober. Nouv. Papillons en Siberia, Mem. Nat. Mosc. 1806.LEPIDOPTERA. RIIOPALOCERA. 331and derives its former name from its chief character, that of havingthe antennae, which are very thin and elongated, terminated by a knobi^fig' 95. 7.) ; in a very few species, however, Barbicornis fig. 101. 5.),Bonelli. Desc. 6 n. sp. collected in Sardinia (Mem. Acad. Turin, torn. xxx. ).Herald. Entwickelungs. der Schmetterl. 4to. Cassel and Marburg, 1815.Coloured Specimens to illustrate the natural History of Butterflies, fromthe Collection of Mr. Lee, Hammersmith. London, 1806, folio.Swainsonon. Sketch of a natural Classification of the Diurnal Lepidoptera, in Philos.Mag. t. i. 1827. — Ditto, in his Zoological Illustrations.Lacordaire. Review of ditto in Guerin's Mag. Zool. No. 2. (Bulletin Zool.)Histoire naturelle des Papillons de Surinam. Amsterdam, 1828.Entries. Schmetterlinge von der Antilles, in Nouv. Mem. Soc. Nat. Moscow,tom. iii.Dalman. Essai d'une Classif, System, des Papillons de Suede, in Swed. Trans.1816.Eversmann. Papilionidae of Russia, in Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscow, 1837.Latreille and Godart. Encyclop. Methodique, tom. ix. 1824.Godart. Hist. Nat. Papillons Diurn. des Environs de Paris. Paris, 1820.Caterer. Hist. Nat. Lepid. Divines du Haut Thin, 8vo. Paris, 1834.Duponchel. Division du Gen. Satyre en 9 groupes. Ann. Soc. Ent. de France,1833.Bonaparte. (Carlo Lucian) Cenni sopra le Variation a cui anno soggette leFarfalle de Gruppo Melitaea, in Antologie, No. 1 25. 1831.Dale. Observ. on the Influence of Locality, &c. on Butterflies, in Entomol. Mag.July, 1833. — Ditto, in Mag. Nat. Hist., various notices.Lefebvre. Various detached Memoirs, in the Annales Soc. Linn. Paris, and Soc.Entomol. de France.Nickel. Bowmen's Tagfalter. Prague, 1837.Lacordaire. Notice sur les Habitudes des Lepid. divines de la Guyane Frank., inAnn. Soc. Ent. France, 1833.Erichson. Lepidoptera of Luzon, in Nov. Acta Cur. Nat. Bonn, vol. xvi.Westwood, in Transactions of Entomol. Society, vol. i. (Eucheira socialis), vol. ii.(Thecla Isocrates).Morose. Memoir on Erycina in Ann. Soc. Ent. de France, 1837.Sicken, gen. Sommer. Beytr. zur Ins. Java (Pupil.) in Nova Act. Nature. Curios.Bonn, t. XV.Boisduval. Observations sur un Mem. de M. Zincken- Sommer, in Annal. Soc.Ent. France, 1832.Adieux. Beverage zur Pap. Priscus, in Der Naturforseher, 1778.Ueber linen Sjhmetterlingszwitter Papilio Cinxia, in Froriep's NotifiedMais, 1825. No. 210.Anonymous. British Butterflies ; their Distinctions, &c. Birmingham, 1828.12mo.Duncan. Natural History of British Butterflies. Edinburgh, 1835. — Ditto,Foreign Butterflies. Edinburgh, 1837 (in the Naturalist's Library).And the general works on Lepidoptera above referred to.S52MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Fig. 95.Petavia (fig. 101.3.), and some species of Morpho*, the antennaeare filiform, and even slightly pectinated, without any knob ; in othersthey are hooked at the tip, the ocelli are wanting, the spiral tonguei^Jig' 95. 3.) always elongated, the wings not confined together bymeans of a hook and bridle f, and carried erect when in repose{.fid' 95. 1.). In some few, however (Hesperia), the fore wings aloneare elevated when at rest. The hind tibiae are ordinarily furnishedonly with a pair of spurs at the apex, although in Hesperia there is anadditional pair near the centre, as in the moths. The flight is constantlyduring the day. The larvae (^^. 95. 9.) are of varied shape ;they have always six pectoral, eight abdominal, and two anal feet ;but the pupae {^Jig. 95. lo.) are generally angulated {fg. 98. 3.), andalmost always naked ; a very few species, however, roll up leaves,which they web together, and therein assume the pupa state, which istermed Chrysalis or Aurelian, from the golden colours exhibited bymany species. This section comprises the well-known tribes of butterflies,which, both from their elegant forms and beautiful colours(which are as varied and brilliant on the under as the upper side ofthe wings), may almost be mistaken, as Moore sings, forwinged flowers or flying gems."Spenser well describes some of the chief characteristics of thisfavourite tribe of insects in the following lines: —Latreille {Regne An. torn. v. p. 386.) describes a genus Zcpliyrius Dalni. ashaving the tips of the antenna nioniliform ; founding his observation upon Dal-man'sAnal. Ent. p. 102. The genus is, however, synonymous with Polyommatus.f From the observations of Mr. Haworth {Lep. Brit. p. 19.) upon the strongflight of the males of the purple emperor (Apatura Iris), it would appear that themales of that species possess this socket and spring, as he terms this apparatus, andof which the females, which fly but little, are destitute.LEPIDOPTERA. — RHOPALOCERA. 333The velvet nap which on his whigs doth lie,The silken down with which his back is dight,His broad outstretched horns, his airy thighs,His glorious colours and his glistening eye."The number of species of butterflies is very considerable. Latreilleand Godart described not less than 1804< in the Encyclopedie method.,of which 237 are natives of Europe, and considerable additions havebeen made to the number. They vary greatly in size, the giganticIndian Ornithopteri being at least nine or ten inches in expanse,whilst some of our little British blues are not an inch across thewings. In their colours they are also equally variable, for, being bornto flutter in the brightest sunshine, they are (like all sun-lovinganimals) much more gaily coloured than their nocturnal brethren.Their flight is also as varied as that of the feathered tribes, and theskilful collector knows at a distance the flight of the different genera,and even occasionally that of particular species. The power of flightdepends considerably on the robustness of the thorax and the strengthof the wing veins ; thus some of the Nymphalidfe are far more powerfulfliers, even than the great Swallow-tailed butterflies : such, forinstance, is especially the case with Charades Jason (Jasius act.) ;others, as the Pontiac, fly with an undulating flight, whilst Apaturasails over the topmost branches of the oak and theswift CamillaFlies o'er the unbending corn, and skims along the main,"with such graceful elegance, that an old Aurelian is described byMr. Haworth as going to the woods long after he was unable to followit, and taking his seat on a stile " for the sole purpose of feasting hiseyes with her graceful evolutions." The knowledge of the diversityin the flight of the different tribes is, as Lacordaire well observes, "lefruit d'une experience toute personnel, et ne pent guthrie se transmittedpar de simples descriptions." (Ann. Soc. Ent. de France,1833, p. 382.) This author has, however, published a long andvery interesting account of the butterflies of French Guiana in thememoir here referred to, and particularly described the mode offlight, habitats, &c., of the various groups. The prevalence of particularcolours in certain groups has been above alluded to : thusamongst the Pierides it is either white or orange tipped withblack ; in the Hipparchus, dull brown ; in Polyommatus, blue ; in Lysfugit copper; the Nymphalidffi have their wings varied with334) MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.beautiful eyes or spots. The Fritillaries are fulvous, varied on theunder side with pearly patches. Various species of butterflies are remarkablefor their periodical or irregular appearance : of these thespecies of Colias, or clouded yellows, as they're termed by collectors,Cynthia Cardui and Vanessa Antioch, are pre-eminent ; thus the last-namedinsect, according to Mr. Haworth {Lep. Brit. p. 28.), will notbe seen for eight, ten, or more years, and then appear as plentiful asbefore ; indeed, about seventy years ago, it suddenly occurred in suchprofusion as to obtain the name of the Grand Surprise from theAurelian of that day. Mr. Haworth conjectures this may be owingto the eggs having, like the seeds of plants, lain dormant, not hatchinguntil some extraordinary but undiscovered coincidences awake theminto active life ; others attribute it to the failure of their naturalenemies, as the Ichneumonss and soft-billed birds, and others to anincreased temperature. But these are mere conjectures, and seemto want confirmation from the circumstance noticed by Stephens(Ilhcsir. Haust. vol. i. p. 10.); that Cynthia Cardui, although periodicalin some places (" occurring every third or fourth year mostcopiously, and breeding even in the metropolis itself;" Stephens,vol. i. p. 48.), appears constantly in others; and see Bree, in A/rt^.Nat. Hist. No. 39.The majority of these insects are but short-lived, but certain individualsof some species survive the winter, passing that period of theyear in a state of lethargy. It has been generally supposed that these(which chiefly belong to the g nus Vanessa) were females which hadbeen produced late in the preceding autumn, and which, althoughimpregnated at that time, had delayed the act of oviposition until therenewal of the season brings forth a fresh supply of food for theiroffspring. M. Boisduval, however, opposes this, stating that theseindividuals had undergone a state of lethargy from a much earlierperiod (having observed Vanessa Polychloros and Utica in this statein August), and that their impregnation had not taken place until thefollowing spring.* Mr. Stephens states that both sexes of Gonepte-ryx Rhamni hybernate. Other species appear to be double-broodedin the course of the year (Papilio Machaon, Gonepteryx Rhamni,&c.) ; some of these, however, in certain seasons, seem only to besingle-brooded (as Polyommatus Argiolus).See hereon Brown, in Mag. Nat. Mist. No. 39., and Bree contra, in ditto,No. 42.LEPIDOPTERA. RHOPALOCERA. ScThe sexes, although generally resembling each other, offer occasionallyvarious distinctions, especially in colour, the males insuch cases being almost invariably more gaily coloured : this is especiallythe case in the Polyommati, Naturae, and Mycenae. In thesethe upper surface alone offers this distinction ; the males of Carabines have a bright orange spot at the tips of the forewings. In Thecla Quercus, however (as proved by the dissections ofDr. Horsfield), the individuals which have a bright purple patch onthe upper surface of the wings, and which have been by all otherwriters described as the males, are proved to be the females. Themales of other species of the genus, as I have ascertained, are ornamentedwith purple reflections. Some Ardennes have black longitudinalribs on the fore wings of the males ; and Mr. Haworthdescribes the female of Vanessa Atalanta as differing from the malein having a minute white dot in the central red fascia of the forewings. Mr. Barrington has noticed a difference in the colouringof the purse of the two sexes of Pap. Machaon mag. Nat. Hist.No. 6.). Very few species of butterflies are gregarious in the larvastate ; those, however, of the Glanville fritillary live in societiesnot consisting of a hundred individuals in a kind of common tentwhich they construct upon the plantain. Several species of Vanessaare also social in this state, frequenting the nettle (V. Article andV. lo) ; as are also those of Papilio Archelaus, which live upon theorange trees in French Guiana (Lacordaire in Ann. Soc. Ent. deFrance, 1833, p. 385.). But a more perfect state of society is exhibitedby a Mexican butterfly (Eucheira socialis Westw.), the caterpillarsof which construct a very strong parchment-like bag, in whichthey not only reside, but undergo their change to the pupa state.trans. Ent. Soc. vol. i. p. 38.) A similar occasional habit of congregatingis exhibited by these insects in the perfect state. Suchcannot, indeed, be said of the great numbers of white butterflieswhich may occasionally be seen resting around the edges of pondsand other damp places, of which I have occasionally been witness ;but an immense swarm of Cynthia Cardui was observed in theCanton de Vaud in 1828, forming a column from ten to fifteen feetbroad, traversing the country from north to south. Bonelli alsoobserved a similar flight of the same species in the preceding year atthe end of March. {{Mem. Soc. Phys. de Genie.) De Loche alsodescribed a similar flight of C. Cardui, at the close of the last century336 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.turin Trans, vol. vi. ; and see Blyth, in Field Nat. p. 470.); andCaptain Lyon, in his Travels in mexico (vol. i. p.70.), mentions havingobserved butterflies assembled in vast numbers, settled in patchesseveral square yards in extent. M. Donzel has published a curiousmemoir upon the flight of butterflies whilst coupling (A?in. Soc. Ent.de France, 1837, p. 77.), showing that whilst the males of PontiaBrassicse, &c., Colias and Polyommatus, support the females, it is thelatter which support their partners in the genera Thais, Thecla,Argynnis, Melitcea, Hipparchia, and Pieris (P. Cratsegi, formed byDonzel into the genus Leuconea).In respect to their transformations, these insects exhibit three principalvariations, the chrysalides being either suspended, girt, or envelopedin a cocoon. In the first of these, the caterpillar, when fullgrown,spins a small web upon the under side of a leaf or twig, and,holding this by its hind pair of anal feet, it drops its head down, whenthe skin bursting, the head of the chrysalis appears. By degrees thecaterpillar skin is pushed upwards, until it is reduced to a minuteshrivelled mass, which, however, still serves as a support to thechrysalis, by the pliability of the terminal segments of the body.Still retaining this situation it contrives to disengage the extremityof the body through the slit side, to extend it upward, and to fastenit to the little cone of silk by means of various minute hooks.After it has accomplished this delicate task, it gets rid of the oldexuviae by giving the body a jerking kind of a twirl, by which theslough is detached, and then falls. In the girt chrysalides, the caterpillarsnot only attach themselves by the tails, but also, by throwingthe head from side to side, spin a number of threads across the middleof the body. The skin of the caterpillar then bursts, and is sloughedoff"; the contractions of the body forcing it beneath the girth. Thenumber of the species which enclose themselves in cocoons is butsmall. Some of these spin a slight silken case, whilst others makefor themselves a more substantial covering, by fastening several leavestogether with threads, after the manner of the Tortricidae. In thetwo former variations the chrysalis is always angulated, but in thelatter it is conical, like that of the moths.It is to be observed that those chrysalides which are simply suspendedalmost always produce tetrao butterflies ; a curious fact,because, if any butterflies required more than the rest a perfect pairof fore legs, we should have thought it would have been those whichLEPIDOPTERA. RHOPALOCERA. 337are suspended head downwards in the pupa state, and which have toascend the slight exuviae of the chrysalis case ; whilst the hexapodbutterflies, being girt so as to lie in a horizontal position, have only tocreep out of their case. Some exceptions occur against this rule,as in the case of the gregarious Mexican butterfly, described by meunder the name of Eucheira socialis ( Trans. Ent. Soc. vol. i. pi. 6.),which, although simply suspended by the tail in the chrysalis state, isprovided with perfect fore legs. The Libythias also, which have suspendedpupae, are also furnished, at least in the females, with six feet.The Peridromides, on the other hand, have the chrysalides girt, andyet they possess only four perfect feet.The pupae of many butterflies belonging to the families Heliconand Nymphalidae are ornamented with golden spots, whencethey were termed Aurelian, or chrysalides. This appearance wasseized upon by the alchemists in support of their doctrines ; butReaumur in France, and Lister and Ray in England, clearly provedthat it originated in the shining white membrane seen through thevery slender and transparent outer skin. It is requisite also, for thepreservation of this appearance, that the inner membrane be moist,and hence the gilding disappears when the absorption of the fluidshas been effected by the inclosed insect's approach to perfection. 'Ray has related various experiments upon this subject in his Letters.(Edited by Derham, pp. 82. 86. 88. 90.)Some species of these insects have afforded materials to severalentomologists for the production of elaborate memoirs upon theiranatomy. Swammerdam, especially (in his History of Insects), investigatedthat of the great cabbage butterfly, and the tortoiseshellbutterfly of the nettle. Herold, also, in his Entimckelungs. derSchmetteriinge, has also studied the former species, especially tracingthe variations which its internal organs undergo during the process oftransformation.Linnaeus divided the genus Papilio into five principal groups.A. Equites. — Having the fore wings longer from the posterior angle to the apexthan to the base; subdivided into Trees (Trojans), having red spots on thebreast, and Achivi (Greeks), having no such spots.B. Heliconiiii. — Wings narrow, entire, often almost naked.C. Danaii. — Wings entire ; subdivided into Candide, with white wings, and Festive,with variegated wings.D. Nymphales. — Wings dentated ; subdivided into Ocellati, or those with eye-likespots, and Phalerati, or those with simple spots.VOL. II. Z338 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.E. Plebeian. — Of small size ; larvae often short and thick ; subdivided into Rurales,or those with dark spots, and Urbicolse, or those with pellucid spots. syst.Nat. torn, ii. p. 744. note. )Latreille divides them, in the Regne Animal, from characters takenfrom other parts of the insect as well as from its preparatory states,into two primary, and various secondary, sections, as follows : —1. Those which have only one pair of spurs at the extremity of the tibiEe ; the fourwings are elevated in repose ; and the antenna; are clavate or filiform.a. Those which have the third joint of the labial palpi either rudimental, or, ifpresent, clothed with scales, and the claws of the tarsi are large ; caterpillarsnearly cylindrical.The Hexapoda, which have all the feet fit for walking, and nearly alikein both sexes ; the pupa is girt, as well as attached, by the tail ; andthe central cell of the hind wings is posteriorly closed. Genera Papilio,Zeliraa, and Parnassius, which have the anal edge of the hindwings hollowed, or folded; and Pieris (Pontia) and Colias, whichhave the same edge produced under the abdomen, forming a kind ofgutter,** The Tetrapoda have the fore legs evidently shortened, and unfitted forwalking, either in both sexes or in the females alone ; the chrysalisis simply suspended.•}• Those in which the fore legs, although smaller, differ but little informfrom the others ; the central cell of the hind wing isclosed ; and the labial palpi are small. Genera Danais, Eu-plea,Idea, Heliconius, and Acreea.j-j- Those which have the two fore legs strongly folded up, and eithervisible, but very hairy, or very small and concealed ; the hindwings have the central cell generally open ; the labial palpi arelarger. Genera Cethosia, Argynnis, Melissa, Vanessa, Libythea,Bibles, Nymphalis, Morpho, Pannonia, Brassolis, Eugenia, ,Hipparchia (Satyrus Latr.).b. Those which have the third joint of the labial palpi naked ; the claws of thetarsi are minute ; the caterpillars are like wood-lice ; and the chrysalidesgirt, as well as attached at the tail.Those which have the antenna clavate.those with the fore legs of the males, at least, much shorter thanthe others. Erycina.If Those with the fore legs alike in both sexes. Myrina, Polyom-natus ( Hyaena, Thecla).** Those with the antenna setaceous, and [slightly] plumose. GeneraBarbicornis and (but erroneously) Zephyrus.2, Those which have the posterior tibise furnished with two pair of spurs ; the twohind wings are horizontal in repose ; and the antennae are often hooked at thetip ; the caterpillars also roll up the leaves, and spin a slender cocoon of silk,wherein they are transformed into chrysalides, without angular eminences.Genus Hesperia, to which Latreille adds Urania Fab.LEPIDOPTERA. — RHOPALOCERA.Thus it will be seen that there are five principal groups, typifiedby the genera Papilio, Heliconius, Nymphalis, Polyomniatus, andHesperia.Latreille has also made various suggestions as to the correlativenessof these different groups; as, for instance, the connection of the truegenus Papilio with the variegated Danaides on the one side, and theParnassus on the other. He suggests, also, that the diurnal Lepidopteramay be divided into two principal groups, according with the suspendedor girt position of the chrysalides.By this proposed distribution of the butterflies into two principaldivisions, the Erycinae and Polyommati would be united with theHexapoda of Latreille, an arrangement which we shall see has beenpartially adopted by Dr. Horsfield.Mr. Swainsonon, in an attempt to arrange the butterflies according tothe quin arian views of MacLeay (published in Taylor's Phil. Mag.March, 1827), has given the following plan of distribution, in whichthe first and fifth families are related in the majority of their characters; and it will be seen that they agree with Latreille's typicalgroups above mentioned.1. Typical group f Pupa suspended ; anterior legs imperfect 1. Nymphalidae.T, 1 , J -s Pupa braced, and "iPupa angulated ^ ^^^^^ I anterior le-s effect P' P^PilK"'*^*-'Pupa braced, and I ^ " ^3. Hesperides.2. Aberrant groupsfolliculatedTPupa braced: larva; onisciform ; anterior 7 ^ -n i ^-j/ ■ c ^ f 4. Polyommatidae.legs semipertect ) ■'Pupa suspended j anterior legs imperfect 5. Heliconiidae.Here we find, however, the Hesperides intervening between thePapilionidae and Polyommatidae, which agree in their braced nakedpupae ; and, notwithstanding the relation of such insects as LeptocircusCurious*, and many of the tailed Erycinidae and Theclse.fDr. Horsfield, whose views upon the distribution of the butterfliesare founded upon a very comprehensive view of the characters of theinsect, in all its stages, and especially with reference to the quinarian,circular, and analogical principles of MacLeay, has divided the sectionMr. Swainsonon places this insect in the genus Urania ! zool. Illustrtr. pi. 106.)\ In the Zool. Illustrations (fol. 135.) Mr. Swainsonon has given the following as thefive families of butterflies : —1. Typical. Papilionida?.2. Subtypical. Nymphalidje.3. Aberrant. Hesperiidae, Erycinida?, Satirical.Z 2340 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.(to which Dr. Horsfield gives the family name Papilionidae*), intofive stirpes, each supposed to be connected with the two adjoining,and the terminal to be in like manner allied to the first, so as to formacircle ; these stirpes being named in accordance with their supposedanalogies with the Ametabolous orders, and following eachother in the same order as the latter occur in the Horn Entombp. 390. 392., the Ametabola not only pointing out the naturalorder of various minor subdivisions, but representing many annuloseforms in their simple elementary state. These analogies, althoughemployed by MacLeay, especially with reference to the Cleopatra(see ante, vol. i. p. 39.), are much more clearly exemplified in theLepidoptera ; and hence Dr. Horsfield considers that all the variousforms of the larvae of the diurnal Lepidoptera can, without exception,be reduced to the five stirpes described below, which are constructedaccording to the plan of the orders of the Ametabola.The first, or Vermiform stirps, has the larva of an oblong linearform, attenuated at both ends ; in some cases depressed, or slightlyconvex ; in others cylindrical-gibbous, appearing to consist of numerousscuta or shields, distinctly divided by transverse striae, having a smallretractile head, and very short, scarcely perceptible feet, and is of asluggish appearance. ' These larvae bear a strong analogical resemblanceto some of the Vermes (considered by MacLeay as possessingthe least complicated structure), but having a more apparent analogyto the osculant group in the neighbouring circle of the Crustacea,which comprehends Oniscus, Armadillo, and Apelles. Dr. Horsfieldfound five varieties of the metamorphoses of this stirps in Java. Thepupa is obtuse at both ends, particularly at the anterior ; is nearlysmooth, and is vertically suspended in the same manner as in thetypical stirps ; its head upwards, either erect or bending forwards,fixed by the tail and girt across the middle. The perfect insect isalso comparatively simple, the whole of the stirps having been comprisedin the lowest rank of the Linnaean arrangement under thename of Plebeii rurales, many of which are nevertheless exceedinglybeautiful. The palpi are slender and of great length, extending inIt will be seen that the nomenclature of Dr. H. is at variance with that ofMacLeay; the latter dividing the order Cleopatra into five primary groups, namedfrom their analogical resemblance to the orders of Ametabola ; whilst Dr. H. namesthe primary groups as families in idle, and the secondary groups from such analogicalresemblance.LEPIDOPTERA. RHOPALOCERA. 341Myrina to the middle of the antennae ; the third joint either nakedor covered with minute scales ; the antennae gradually clavate, orwith a thickened compressed club abruptly inflected or bent outwards; the feet are slender, the anterior pair never spurious, perfect,and alike in both sexes ; the hinder wings entire, or tailed ; the bodysmall, slender, and compressed ; and the proboscis short, or moderatelylong.This stirps comprises the normal genera Petavia (nearly related tothe Hesperiidae, and forming the transition from the Anopluriform tothe Vermiform stirpes), Polyommatus, Hyaena, Thecla, and Myrina ;aberrant genus, Symetha.In the Chilognathxform or Multiform stirps, the larvae (whichare considered as typical of the whole of the order Lepidoptera) arelong and cylindrical, attenuated at both ends, and transversely striatedas in Colias (at the confines of the Vermiform stirps, thus determiningthe natural situation of this genus), or regularly cylindrical andslightly hairy, as in Pieris and Pontia, or distended about the fourthor fifth segment of the body, and tapering gradually towards the tail,and more abruptly to the head in the typical group, the true Papi-lines,acquiring tubercles, which in the remote genera increase inlength, and show the gradual transition, through Euplcea and Helicon*, to the Chilopodiform stirps which succeeds ; the head is attachedto the body by a very small articulation, and appears, whenexserted, separated from it ; behind it is a bifid fleshy organ or furcula.The pupa is attached, as in the preceding stirps, but it has peculiaritiesof greater perfection : it is naked and angulated, terminatedin the typical forms at the upper extremity by two processes, in thosenear the Vermiform stirps by "one short process alone ; those approachingthe next stirps have the suspension of that group. The imago isconsidered by Dr. Horsfield as the perfection of the whole order, thestirps comprehending as it does the Pavilions Equites and Danaii ofLinnaeus, and his Heliconiiii standing at the immediate confines inthe succeeding group : their wings also (according to Jones in Linn.Trans.) being more perfectly nerved f , the palpi in the typical speciesThe analogy between the larva of Helicon and Craspedosoma, which isintermediate between the Chilopoda and Chilognatha (see Hor<^ Ent. p. 351.), determinesthe situation of the former genus in the Lepidopterous circle between theChilopodiform and Chilognathiform stirpes.t In a preceding page Dr. Horsfield expressed the opinion that lulus was theZ 334'2 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.are shorter than the head, their third joint is very minute, and theyare concealed by a very dense covering of long bristly hairs. In Papiliothey are never exserted ; in Colias, near the preceding stirps,they are moderately long ; in Terias an evident diminution is apparent,and in the following genera the decrease is more sudden. Poly-meatusPhaedrus Latr. appears to form a natural connecting linkbetween Myrina (belonging to the Vermiform), and Colias (to theChilognathiform stirps) ; the feet are generally long and robust, andthe whole of them are perfect, and fitted for walking; the antennaeare marked with defined rings at the numerous joints, are elongate,filiform at the base, and terminated in the typical group by a cylindricalclub attenuated at both ends. The normal genera belonging tothis stirps are, Colias, Gonepteryx and Papilio (divided into threesections), and the aber rants are Terias, Pieris, Pontia, Leucophasia,Lucina, Thais, Doritis, and Selim.In the Chilopodiform or Scolopendriform stirps, the appendagesof the larvcB, noticed as simple and fleshy on the body of those of Eu-pleaand Helicon *, become rigid and armed with transverse spines,typical form of the order ; the uniform stirps consequently becomes the perfecttype of the diurnal Lepidoptera. Dr. Horsfield, however, adduces no other groundsfor this superiority than the position assigned to these insects by Linnaeus, andthe more perfect veining of the wings. Mr. Newman, however, denies this superiorityto Papilio, considering Bombyx Atlas as the centre of all Lepidoptera ; thegroup Phalaena, combining in itself types of the other primary divisions whichPapilio does not, and, moreover, possessing the characters which Mr. Newmanassumes to be pre-eminently those of the lepidopterous type, viz., an insect withoutanglia or palpi, with very pectinated antenna?, and enormously expansive wings, andnocturnal flight. If indeed we admit the least perfectly organised individuals in anorder to be its types, there may be good ground for such a selection of characters ;but I confess that I should have selected for the types of the order those in whichthe mouth is best developed, and in which there is the least diversity in the sexes.The females of some of the Bombycidfe are as imperfect as their larvae (Oiketicus,Psyche), and in many their imperfect development is indicated by their sluggishhabits, occasioned by a deficiency or inertness of sense : the true type of any groupmust of course possess the characters of such group in the highest state of development,and it will of course be the farthest removed, or bear the slightest resemblanceor relation to the conterminous groups. M. Boisduval observes, " si comme dansautres branches de la Zoologie, on voulait mettre en tete les individus d'une organisationsuperieure, on devant commencer par les Sphinxes." (hist. Nut. Ins,Lep. p. 169.)These two genera are considered to form the transition between this and thepreceding stirpes; their larvae having a striking affinity with the Chilopodiform stirps.Lepidoptera. IlIIOPALOCERA. 343which are said to cause irritation when touched similar to the bite ofa Centipede, which they also resemble in their terrific appearance.This spinose character, which is but slightly developed in Melitcea,more strongly in Argynnis, and which reaches its maximum in Vanessa,is pre-eminently typical of the stirps, and clearly distinguishesit from the next stirps which has been united with it by most entomologists.The pupa is naked and angulated, greatly diversified onthe surface, and ornamented with golden or shining dots, and it isgenerally suspended by the tail, with the head directed downwards.The palpi of the perfect insects, which are the types of the stirps,project beyond the head, the last joint being distinct and downy ;the antennae are of moderate length, with an abrupt club, broad andcompressed in the typical species ; the anterior feet are spurious andimperfect, and applied to the under side of the thorax. Vanessa istypical of this stirps, which passes off to the next by Apatura, Lime-nimis,&c. The normal genera are Euplcea, Idea, Acrsea, Vanessa,Cynthia, Melitcea, Argynnis, Bibles, Limenitis, and the aberrautsHelicon, Cetera ? Libjithea and Neptis ?In the Thtsanuriform stirps the larva is characterised by tworigid setae or spines, varying in length and size, appended to the posteriorextremity of the body, and pointing directly backwards, as inthe LepismEe. The pujm is smooth, shining, diversified in form, andattached by the tail only. The perfect insects are remarkable for theprevalence of a brown colour, which in many species assumes a brilliantblue gloss ; their palpi and feet nearly resemble those of the precedingstirps ; their antennae are filiform, with a slender and verygradually incrassated club, which occupies a very large portion oftheir entire length. The normal genera are Apatura, Paphia, Amathusia,Morpho, Melanitis, Hipparchia, Nemeobius (forming the transitionto Erycina ?), and the aber rants are Cethosia and Brassolis. ThisThis gradual change of character which takes place in the metamorphosis of thesecond stirps, as it approaches the confines of the third, is confirmed by the structureof the anterior feet, Helicon and Idea forming the union, having an intermediatecharacter, these organs being abbreviated in both these genera; the tarsi notdistinguishable into five joints, but the joints being united, and their situationindicated by several spines crowded together ; but on entering the Chilopodifornistirps, the anterior feet of both sexes are constructed on a different plan, not being,as in Colias and some of the Vermiform stirps, partially reduced in size, butspurious and imperfect.Z 4St MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.stirps, it will accordingly be seen, is founded almost exclusively onthe two anal appendages of the larvae.In the Anopluriform stirps, the larva is characterised by a headcomparatively of excessive size, and by the abrupt posterior terminationof the body, without any caudal appendage. The pupa isnot naked as in the other stirpes, but is concealed by a cocoon,or by a covering of a convoluted leaf, and its surface is smooth, resemblingthat of the nocturnal Lepidoptera. The characters of theimago are variously modified in the Erycinae *, which approach thepreceding stirps, in the Hesperia, the types of the present, and inthe Range, which Dr. Horsfield also adds to the stirps. They howeverremain for fuller investigation hereafter. The typical generabelonging to this stirps, are Erycinae, Emesis, Dans, Lemons, ,Hesperia, Thyself, Melius, Pamphila, Ismene, Tamarisk, andthe aber rants Nymphidium, Helicopis, Urania, and Barbicornis. Theconnection between the Anopluriform and the Vermiform stirps is consideredas evident, from Linnaeus having termed the one Plebeii urbisand the other Plebeii rurales. The circular progression of thesefive stirpes, and their various affinities manifested by the larva, areingeniously illustrated by a diagram exhibiting the most prominentforms of each of the stirps, and of some of the ben-ant forms indicatingtheir gradual approach to each other.I have thought it advisable to give this sketch of Dr. Horsfield'swork, not only from the importance of the views which it contains(without, however, entirely concurring therein), but also from thework being unfortunately in but few hands.M. Boisduval, an author, who has long, and almost exclusively, studiedthe Lepidoptera, has published another distribution of the butterflies.He admits, however, the impossibility to form an arrangementin a continuous series, from the many relations which each group, bothof genera and species, possesses, of which he gives several strikinginstances, especially the genus Pieris of Latreille ; some species ofwhich (genus Leptalis) completely resemble Heliconiiii ; others (genusEuterpe) " se lient insensiblement" with certain species of Papilio ;others " ofFrent un certain rapport" with the Parnassus (Doritis), whilstWhilst the feet in the typical Anopluromorpha are perfect, Erycina at theconfines of the preceding stirps has the feet of the males spurious, whilst they areperfect in the females, thus strikingly exemplifying the transition.LEPIDOPTERA. RHOPALOCERA. 345Others " passent insensiblement" to Colias, and others to Danais. Helikewise founds his arrangement upon a consideration of the charactersof the larva, which have often "plus de valeur " than those of theimago, although ordinarily the one confirms the other. The followingis an abstract of his arrangement of the Rhopalocera, or diurnal Lepidoptera,which he forms into three sections and fifteen tribes.Section 1. Succinct. Chrysalis attached by the tail, and also girt.A. Six feet in both sexes ; caterpillars elongate.Tribe 1. Papillonides [more properly Papilionides]. Anal edge of hindwings concave ; ungues simple.Tribe 2. Pierides. Anal edge of hind wings without concavity ; ungueswith one tooth, or bifid.B. Six feet in both sexes ; caterpillars very contracted.Tribe 3. Eumenides. Larva unknown; last joint of palpi much shorterthan the second.Tribe 4, Licences. Larva onisciform ; ungues very minute.C. Four feet in the males, and nearly always six in the females ; caterpillarscontracted.Tribe 5. Erycinides, Ungues very minute.D. Four feet in both sexes ; caterpillars elongated.Tribe 6. Peridromides. Caterpillars with spinose elongations ; chrysalisvery angular; ungues slightly bifid.Section 2. Suspense. Chrysalis suspended only by the tail.A. Ungues of tarsi simple. (Four legs in both sexes.)Tribe 7. Danaides, Caterpillars with from one to five pairs of simplefleshy prolongations ; wings broad.Tribe 8. Heliconides. Caterpillars spiny throughout their whole length;wings narrow, long.B. Ungues of tarsi strongly bifid. (Four legs in both sexes.)Tribe 9. Nymphalides. Caterpillars spiny throughout their wholelength, or attenuated behind with spines only on the head ; analedge of hired wings forming a gutter ; discoidal cell always open.Tribe 10.- Brassolides. Caterpillars thick, pubescent, often with 2 analpoints, and spined on the head ; anal edge of hind wings forming astrong gutter ; discoidal cell always closed.Tribe 11. Morphine. Caterpillars spiny, attenuated at the extremity ;wings broad ; anal edge of hind pair forming a gutter ; discoidalcell always open.Tribe 12. Satyrides. Caterpillars attenuated, nearly fish-shaped, with2 anal points ; head rounded or bifid above ; discoidal cell alwaysclosed ; nervures of fore wings often dilated at the base.Tribe 13. Bibles. Caterpillars spinose, terminated by two anal points;palpi long, antennae linear ; anal edge of hind wings scarcely prominent,costal nervure of fore wings dilated at base.E. Four feet in the males and six in the females; caterpillars elongated.Tribe 14. Libythides. Caterpillars not spiny, slightly pubescent ; chrysalisshort, scarcely angular ; palpi very long, beak-like.546 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Section 3. Involuti. Chrysalis enclosed in a cocoon ; antennae distant at thebase, six feet in both sexes ; caterpillars with the neck narrowed.Tribe 15. Hesperides.The tribes Erycinides and Nymphalides require a more correctinvestigation into their preparatory states, so that it will, perhaps, beconsidered necessary still further to split them ; thus the larva of Vanessaand Apatura, in the latter tribe, are very different. M. Bois-dualcommences the arrangement with the genus Papilio, althoughhe considers it would be natural to commence the series with theTetrapoda, as is the custom amongst the German Lepidopterists, andto place the Hexapoda before the Hesperides. In this case the suspensewould commence the series, and the Succinct would precedethe Involuti ; but as it is impossible to arrange all these genera in acontinuous line, it is immaterial with which the arrangement is commenced.Dr. Horsfield, we have seen, commences his arrangementwith the Lycaenides, or Vermiform stirps, considering them the mostsimple of the whole tribes of butterflies ; but, as he adopts the circularviews of MacLeay, it is equally immaterial from what point of thecircle he starts.After this revision of the arrangements of the chief modern Lepi-dopterists, my account of the different groups into which the butterfliesare divisible must necessarily be short. Anxious to place theclassifications of the different orders on the same footing, I shall not,with Dr. Horsfield, adopt primary divisions with the family terminationin idle and secondary divisions named from analogical relations,neither shall I, with Boisduval, adopt so great a number of tribes,founded, in many cases, as it seems to me, upon characters which,although in one part of the order they may possess great weight, inothers become almost valueless. More especially shall I hesitate toadmit the propriety of regarding as distinct groups such as agreetogether in the general chai-actors of the perfect state, but disagreein the form of the larvae. This latter, we have seen, is the chiefcharacter of one of Dr. Horsfield's stirpes, whereas the single genusPapilio possesses several very striking forms, and Doritis (Parnassius)is as much entitled to a primary rank as Hipparchia, its caterpillarbeing much farther removed, even from the Papilionideous type, thanthat of Hipparchia, possessing, although the latter does, a forked tail,like a Lepisma. It will be seen, on reviewing the arrangements noticedabove, that whilst Papilio, Lycsena, Nymphalis, and Hesperia are ad-lepidoptera.PAPILIONID^. 347mitted on all hands to be types of distinct groups, others regardedas of primary importance by some writers are considered by otherseither as subordinate or osculant forms; thus, Hipparchia (SatyrusLatr.'), treated as a distinct type by Horsfield and Swainsonon, is consideredas subordinate by Latreille and Boisduval ; whilst Helicon,regarded as a primary group by Swainsonon and the French writers, isthought by Horsfield to be osculant. Erycina is another of theseperplexing groups respecting which so little is in truth known ; andwhich has accordingly been placed with the Hesperides by Horsfield,and with the Lycaenidse by Swainsonon. In the following arrangementI have endeavoured to combine the views of my predecessors. I accordinglyconsider the Heterocera as formed of two primary groups,named Nudi and Involuti, from the naked or covered condition of thechrysalis, answering to the genera Papilio and Hesperia of Patricius,regarding the characters exhibited by the latter or the familyHesperiidae in all its stages as of far higher rank than those of anyof the other groups. The Nudi I divide into the following families: — 1. Papilionidse, including the Pierides ; 2. Heliconiidse, comprisingthe Danaides ; 3. Nymphalidse, including the Hipparchiidse(Satyrides Boisdd., or Thysanumorpha Cornfields as well as Boisdd-dual's10th, 11th, and 13th tribes; 4, The Erycinidae ; and, 5, theLycaenidee. A progression through these various families has beenalready shown by Dr. Horsfield to exist between the Papilionidas andHeliconiidae : from these to the Nymphalidae, and thence by Hip-parthiato Erycina, the progression is natural, whilst Erycina is intermediate,according to Latreille, between Hipparchia and Hyaena.Between this last tribe and the first or Papilionidae (both having girtpupee), Polyommatus Phaedrus is regarded as the connecting linkby Dr. Horsfield, and thus the Involuti (fam. 6. Hesperiidae) wouldbe thrown out of the circle were we to adopt this regular series,unless we adopt Mr. Swainsonon's plan, and consider it as intermediatebetween the Polyommatidae (Lycaenidae) and the Papilionidae.The first family Papilionid^ Leach comprises the giants of thediurnal tribes, and is distinguished by the perfectly ambulatorystructure of the fore legs in both sexes (fig 95. i. Papilio MachaonS *) ; the ungues distinct and simple, or bifid ; antennae having aAll the figures upon this block (95. ante, p. 332.) represent details of Papilio348 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.distinct club, but never hooked at the tips, and the girt condition ofthe chrysalis (except in Doritis) ; the discoidal cell of the hind wing isclosed. The other characters of the family, which is equivalent withDr. Horsfield's luliform'stirps, will be found in a preceding page(341.) in the account of his arrangement.This family comprises two very distinct subfamilies or tribes, asthey are called by Boisduval ; namely, the Papilionides and Pierides.In the Papilionides the anal edge of the hind wings is concave orfolded. The middle longitudinal nerve of the fore wings posteriorlyemits four nerves, whereas there are only three arising from thisnerve in all the other butterflies. They have the palpi very short{^Jig- 95. 3.), not extending in front of the eyes, with the third jointscarcely distinct ; the club of the antennae i^jig. 95. 7.) forms anelongated mass ; the ungues are entire and simple ; the wings arebroad with the discoidal cell always closed ; the abdomen free andnot received in a gutter. The caterpillars (fig. 95. 9.) are slow,cylindrical, thickened, never villose nor hairy, with two retractiletentacles placed on the neck, in the shape of a fork, arising from acommon tubercle, and which the insect throws out when alarmed,emitting at the same time a disagreeable odour ; by this means thelarvae are supposed to keep the Ichneumonss at a distance.There is considerable diversity in the appearance of the larvae ofthe restricted genus Papilio (excluding Ornithopterus) ; some, asP. Machaon, are cylindrical and smooth ; others (P. crassus) areprotected by rather long fleshy prominences ; others (P. PolydorusHorsfield, pi. 3. f. 17.) are short and thick, with numerous shortfleshy points, and some resemble snails (P. Podalirius Curtis, B. E.pi. 578.), and a very great number (P. Arjuna Horsfield, pi. 4.f. 11., P. Mammon /Z»/«f. pi. 3. f. 2.) have the two anterior segmentsattenuated, and capable of being retracted under the third and fourth,which are dilated and ornamented with eye-like spots, like those ofsome of the Shingles. The larva of P. dissimilar {Horsf. pi. 8. f 1.) isMachaon; 95.2., the head from above ; 3., ditto sideways; 4., the labrum, mandibles,and base of the maxillae ; 5., the labium, the base of one of the labial palpi,and base of one of the maxilla?, to show the rudimental palpus ; 6., the labium, withone of the labial palpi; /., tip of antennae ; 8., fore leg of the male; 9., caterpillar,with the nuchal tubercle exposed, attached by the tail, with a girth round themiddle of the body heady for duration ; 10., the pupa.LEPIDOPTERA. PAPILIONIDiE. 34'9furnished with recurved points, a pair on each side of the five jointsfollowing the first, and a single one on each side of the following segments.The larva figured by Mad. Marian as that of Pap. Protesilaus,has all the characters of one of the Nymphalidae, such as Argynnis.The larvae of the Ornithopteri, at least judging from Dr. Horsfield'sfigure of that of P. Ambrosius (O. Helicon JBdv.), has the segmentsarmed with thick, obtuse, fleshy prominences, and each of the retractilenuchal tentacles is enclosed in an external case.The species of Papilionides are for the most part tropical ; fourspecies only are found in Europe, two of which, P. Machaon andP. Podalirius, have occurred in England.These insects, from the beauty of their colours and large size,were styled Equites by Linnaeus. Many of the species have the hindwings produced into a pair of tails, whence they have obtained thename of Swallow-tails. Their flight is rapid. Some of these insects,placed by Linnaeus in his two sections Equites Trojan and Achivi,have been since discovered to be but the sexes of one species ; thusMr. MacLeay possesses a specimen, the right side of which is Pap.Polygon, a male Greek, and the left Pap. Laodocus, a female Trojan(linn. Trans, vol. xiv. Append). An instance of two Greeks thusunited is described in the Encycl. Method., the right side being Pap.Ulysses, and the left Pap. Diomedes.Doritis Fab. (Parnassius Latr.) is especially interesting, from theform of the larva, which has more the appearance of that of one ofthe BombycidsB than of a Papilio Linn. Its neck is also furnishedwith a retractile tentacle ; and the cocoon is enclosed in a loosecocoon of leaves fastened together, the chrysalis being apparentlyattached also by the tail. The females are also furnished with a largecorneous valve at the anus. The species frequent alpine regions,D. Apollo being a reputed British species.M. Duponchel has published a notice relative to the genus Thais,some individuals of which remained two seasons in the chrysalis state,being the only instance on record of such an occurrence amongst thebutterflies. ann. Soc. Ent. de France, 1835, p. 66 L)The subfamily Pierides comprising the Danaii candide of Linnaeusor the families D. and E. (larvae medio-strange and pallidiventris)of the Weiner Verzeickniss (Jiff. 96. 1. Mancipium Carabines),is at once distinguished from the preceding by the hind wingsMODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Fig. 96.forming a gutter for the reception of the abdomen. The palpiare porrected, with distinct joints (fig. 96. 2. represents the headof Pontia Rape, with the palpi opened, one of them being denudedin this figure ; the minute labrum and mandibles are perceivedabove the base of the spiral maxillae, the two large oval basesof which are attached to the head as well as the labium, from thesides of which the large labial palpi take their rise; /%. 96. 3. headof the same insect seen sideways; Jig. 96. 4. tip of antennae of ditto;96. 3. ditto of Gonepteryx Rhamni) ; the fore legs are long and perfect,without the dilated spine (fig. 96. 6.) ; the ungues are bifid,often with a long pulvillus and a narrow hirsute appendage on eachside (fig' 96. 7, 8. ungues, &c. of Pontia Brassicae) ; the caterpillarsare finely pubescent and attenuated at each end without any nuchaltentacle (fig. 96. 9. larva of Pontia Brassicae ; 96. lO. larva of Gonept.Rhamni) ; the chrysalides angular, slightly compressed, and terminatedin a point at each extremity, so as in some species to assumethe appearance of a curved canoe (fig. 96. 10. pupa of Pieris Cras; 96. 12. ditto of Gonepteryx Rhamni).These insects, which include our common well-known white gardenbutterflies, never acquire the size, nor are they equal in beauty norso varied in their colours, as the preceding subfamily ; white, orange,and brimstone being their prevailing tints. The last-named insectsare, however, occasionally very destructive, the larvae feeding for themost part upon cruciferous plants, and especially attacking the gardenspecies, stripping cabbages, &c. of their leaves. These species, whichcompose the genus Pontia of Stephens, are either extremely variable,or several species have been confounded together. Mr. Stephens hassupported the latter opinion by various statements relative to theLEPIDOPTERA. — HELICONIIDA. 351period of the appearance, food, &c. of the different supposed species;and the subject has been and still continues to be discussed. (SeeIllustrtr. Haustell. vol. i. p. 17 — 24. 146. ; Curtis, the Naturalist'sLibrary ; and various papers in the Mag. of Nat. Hist, by the Rev.W. T. Bree, vol. iii. p. 242. ; Jennie, No. 8.)Fig. 99. 1, 2, 3. (copied from Herold) represents the egg of PontiaBrassicEe, the young caterpillar in the position in which it is enclosedin the egg, and the same in the act of bursting forth from theegg, the covering of which is subsequently devoured by it.Pieris Cratsegi, the black-veined white, although so abundant anddestructive on the Continent, as to have been called by Linnaeus thepest of gardens, is of considerable rarity in this country. Accordingto Godart its larvae live in society under a silken web, in which theyform small cases to secure themselves against the winter, and whichthey only quit at the arrival of spring, returning to it at night.The males in the genus Colias exhibit a character overlooked byentomologists, which serves well to distinguish the species. It is akind of glandular sac placed upon the anterior edge of the hind wingsnear their base. It is large in C. Medusa, small and lenticular in C.Myrmidons, and wanting in C. Hale and Chrysostom, &c. (ann.Soc. Ent. de France, 1836, p. xi.)M. Rambur has published an account with figures of the transformationsof the Spanish Pontia Supreme (forming his genus Zegris),which differs from all the rest of this subfamily, and approaches theWrites in having the chrysalis enclosed in a " reseau de sole assezfort." ami. Soc. Ent. de France, 1836, p. 576.)The larva of the Indian Pontia Belisama (Horsff. Lep. Jav. pi. 4.f. 10.) is clothed with long slender hairs, thus differing from the restof the family.The second family, HeliconiidjE, including Boisduval's two tribesDanaides and Heliconides (j%. 97. 6. Helicon Lycidas Bdv.^, isdistinguished from the former by the small size of the fore legsfig. 97.3. fore leg J* ,4. ? of Euplcea Plexippus Linnet, and from thefollowing by the fore tarsi being articulated in the typical species.The tarsal ungues are large, entire or bifid, and with a long andgenerally bifid appendage on each side {fig- 97. 5. ungues of hindfeet of Euplcea Plexippus; 97- H. ditto of Helicon Calicoes). TheMODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Fig. 97.discoidal cell of the hind wings is always closed fig. 97. 9. hind wingof Helicon diaphana) ; the antennae are slightly clavate fig. 97.10. tipof antennas of Helicon) ; the palpi are short, and wide apart at thebase fig. 97. 7. head of Helicon diaphana); the second joint beinggenerally clothed with hairs directed upwards at its extremity fig.97. 8.) ; the wings vary in shape, but are often very long and narrow.The caterpillars are cylindrical and either spinose fig. 97. 12. larva ofAcra;a Violate), or furnished with several pairs of long fleshy appendages; that of H. Euterpe is robust and depressed, with a series oflong fleshy lobes ; that of H. Calliope short and cylindrical, clothedwith slender spines and tufts of hair. Those of H. Psidii are smooth,and that of H. Rimini is covered with very long white hairs. That ofD. Plexippus Limi., Cramer, Say, and Peak {Lep. Americana, pi. 7.Archippus Smith and Abbot) is pale, with zebra-like marks, and twolong retractile horns arising from the second and last segments of thebody {fig- 97. i.). The chrysalides, moreover, are only suspendedby the tail ; they are often ornamented with brilliant golden spotsfig. 97. 2. pupa of Danais Plexippus Linn. ; 97. 13. pupa of AcraeaViolet.)These insects are much more varied in their colours than thePierides, but cannot vie in splendour with the Nymphalidae. Theyare entirely exotic, of a moderately large size. In many of the speciesthe wings are but slightly covered with scales, and even in a veryfew species they are quite denuded (H. diaphanousLacordaire's observations upon such of these butterflies asinhabit French Guiana fain. Scent. de France, 1833) are veryinteresting. A curious circumstance has been recently publishedrelative to one of the species Euplcea (Danais) hamata MacLeay, anLEPIDOPTERA. ■NYMPHALIDjE.S53inhabitant of New Holland, where it abounds to such an extent, thatit is employed as an article of food by the natives, who call themBugong, and collect them by bushels, and then bake them by placingthem upon heated ground. (Bennett's Wanderings, vol. i. p. 265. ;Kirby, Bring. Treat, vol. ii. p. 350.)The third family, Nymphalid^ Swainsonon fig. 98. l. Vanessa C.album), comprising the greater portion of Dr. Horsfield's Chilopodi-Fig. 98.form, and the whole of his Thysanuriform stirps, as well as Bois-dual'sfamilies Nymphalides, Brassolides, Morphine, Satyrides, andBibles, and probably also his Peridromides * (Per. Arethusa Bdv.Hist. Nat. Ins. Lep. pi. 7. c. 5. ; P. Amphion Linn., Cramer, 54-. E.F., South America), and Libythidesf , is distinguished by the rudimentalstructure of the fore legs in both sexes: fig. 98. 4, 5, 6, 7.),Although agreeing in the general characters of the imago with the Nymplia-lidae, this genUs has the chrysalis girt across the middle, like that of Papilioaccording to Laeordaire. {Aiui. Soc. Ent, France, 1833, p. 392.)f The angulated outline of the wings and the structure of the tarsal ungues inthe interesting genus Libythea correspond with those of the typical NymphalidEe.The caterpillar, however, resembles that of Pieris, but the pupa is simply suspendedby the tail ; the females, also, according to Boisduval, have six feet, whilst the maleshave only four. The discoidal cell of the hind wings is described as open by Bois-dual,but it is figured as closed in the new edition of the Regne Animal, (^Ins.pi. 136. f. 1. e. ) The great length of the palpi is not sufficient to raise it to therank of a distinct family or tribe. This genus is therefore intermediate betweenthe Nymphalidse and Eucheira socialis Wcstw., which, although having a simplysuspended chrysalis, is furnished with six feet. It is, therefore, as an aberrantgroup of Nymphalidae that this latter genus ought probably to be ranged.\ In the Ardennes, the fore legs of the female, although small, have the tarsicomposed of five distinct joints, each armed with a pair of minute spines {fig.QH. 4.and 5. fore leg $ ; 6 and 7. fore leg $ of Argynnis Paphia).VOL. II. A A354 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.which are thickly covered with hair; the labial palpi are proportionablylonger; the wings more robust; the posterior grooved to receivethe abdomen, and with the discoidal cell either open, as in ApaturaIris {^fig. 98. 11.), or closed by a slender nerve, as in Argynnis Aglaia(fig. 98. 10.) ; the tarsal ungues are entire, with a long entire or bifidappendage, and a long pulvillus {^Jig. 98. 8, 9, ungues of ArgynnisPaphia, and 99. 4. ungues of middle legs of Vanessa). The caterpillarsare variable in form (fig. 98. 2. larva of Vanessa Polychloros ;98. 12. larva of Apatura Iris ; 99. 5. larva of Hipparchia Typhon),and the chrysalis is simply suspended by the tail (fig. 98. 3. pupa ofV. Polychloros ; 98. 13. ditto of Apatura Iris). Many of the species areamongst the most beautifully varied in their markings and colours,whence the names of the Linnaean sections Nymphales, Ocellati, andPhalerati, and such English names as the peacock, painted lady,Camberwell beauty, and red Admirable butterflies. In many species,the under side of the wings is splendidly ornamented with numerouspearl or silvery spots. These have from this spotted appearanceobtained the English name of Fritillaries, from the spotted flower ofthe same name. Others of them have the upper surface of the wingsadorned with the most splendid silvery blue, belonging to the genusMorpho, which comprises also some of the largest of known butterflies.Others are of a changeable gloss of intense purple in themales (Apatura Iris, or the purple emperor). A very few species,also, have the hind wings produced into several tails, whence theywere placed by Linnaeus amongst his Equites (Charades Jason*Linn). These two last-named groups have the head of the larvaearmed with strong horns, the body naked, and the tail furcate (^fig-98. 12.).The species forming the genus Hipparchia (Satyrus Latr.; Jig. 99.7. Hipparchia Typhon ; 8. head of ditto ; 9. palpus of ditto denuded ;10. apex of antennae; li. base of hind wing) have the larvae fig. 99.6. larva ; 99. 6. pupa of H. Typhon) also distinguished by the lattercharacter ; they are, however, of a feeble construction in the imagoM. Duponchel has published an interesting memoir on the transformationsof this insect (ann. Soc. Exit. de France, 1837), from which it appears that themode in which its caterpillar undergoes its mounting differs materially from thatof other butterflies, the head, from its peculiar form, being disengaged and cast offentire some time before the rest of the body is denuded : its transformations arealso described and figured in the Fauna Reign. Napoli.LEPIDOPTERA. NYMPH ALIDiE.Fig. 99.state, and cannot bear comparison with the former, which are themost robust and active of lepidopterous insects. The caterpillars ofthis numerous genus confine themselves to the various kinds ofgrasses. It is only, however, during the night that they feed ; andsome species, according to M. Marley (ann. Soc. Ent. France,1838), not only retire to the earth to undergo their chrysalis state,but those of H. Circe, Arises, Semele, and Filia form large ovalcocoons, composed of grains of earth mixed with a little silk. Thoseof H. Aera and Janira, however, suspend themselves by the tail.M. Duponchel has published a memoir on this genus in the Arm. Soc,Ent. de France, 1833, p. 97., in which he divides the species intonine groups, founded upon the characters presented by the antennaeand nervures of the wings. M. Lefebvre has also published a revisionof the marbled whites (Leucomelaniens) in the same Annales (torn. i.p. 80.).'M. Vaudouer has published some curious observations upon thelethargy of the caterpillars of Melitaea Dia, and Euphrosyne. Somecaterpillars reared from eggs of the latter insect, when about a monthold, fell into a lethargic state at the end of June, in which theyremained until the following spring : a few, however, revived inAugust, and became butterflies the same autumn. The same experimentmade upon the caterpillars of M. Dia produced the sameresult. Hence appears the reason why these butterflies are socommon in spring, whilst so few are found in autumn. (ann. Soc.Linn, Paris, September, 1827.) The caterpillar of Aconthea primary(JSorsJield, pi. 8. f. 6.) is a most singular creature, having avery great analogy with Scutigera, each side of each segment beingfurnished with a very long and slender setose filament, half as long asA A 2Sc MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.the entire body. The caterpillars of Vanessa {^fig. 98. 2.) are armedwith long and rough spines, arranged in transverse whorls upon thesegments, except the first. Those of the fritillaries are also similarly-armed,but have two long spines on the neck. Those of Lime-nimis*have the segments furnished with fascicles of hair down thesides ; and several of the segments have also a pair of obtuse hairyspines on the back.The species of this family are extremely liable to sport into varieties.This is especially the case with the Hipparchus, in some speciesof which scarcely two individuals are alike. The fritillaries, also, arevery subject to vary ; and the varieties have occasionally been describedas distinct. Several interesting varieties have been figuredby Curtis, Stephens, and by the Rev. W. T. Bree mag. Nat. Hist.vol. V. p. 667. and 749.).Mr. Newport has described and figured some singular minutepapillae arising in great numbers upon the extremity of the maxillseof V. Atalanta, as well as the hooks by which the two maxillae areheld together. (Art. " Insecta," in Cycl. Anat. Phys. 1839, p. 35.)M. Wesmael has described and figured a singular gynandromor-pious individual of Argynnis Paphia, in which the right side has thecharacters of the ordinary male, except that the outer margin has arow of spots as in the female. The fore wing on the left handexhibits " un melange de la coloration du male et de celle de lavariety femelle, le valaisien ;" and the hind left wing is exactly colouredas in the female of that variety. bull, de V Acad, de Bruxelles,tom. iv.) Ochsenheimer has described a nearly similar individual ofthe same species. In my late travels on the Continent, M. Wesmael,of Brussels, showed me a specimen of Nymphalis Populi, describedand figured by him in the same work, which, although arrived at theperfect state, still retains the head-cover of the larva, beneath whichhe discovered the cephalotheca of the chrysalis, and beneath this thehead of the imago ibid. tom. iv. No. 8.)M. Duponchel has published a memoir upon Limenitis Sicilia, with figures, inthe Annales Soc. Linn. Paris, 1827. Mr. Curtis's figure of the larva of L. Camillais asserted by a writer in the Entomol. Mag., No. 18., not to belong to that species.f Muller, in Der Naturforscher, st. 16., has described a similar circumstanceoccurring in one of the Noctuidae.LEPIDOPTERA. — ERYCINIDiE,The fourth family Erycinid^ {fig- 100. i. Erycina (Hehcopis)Cupid) is distinguished b}'^ the males having only four ambulatoryFig. 100.feet, whilst the females have six ; or, in other words, the fore legs ofthe males are rudimental {fig- 100. 4. fore leg $ , 100. 5. ditto $ ofEmesis Drupadi Horsff.) ; the anal edge of the hind wings is butslightly prominent, the discoidal cell is either open or closed, eitherentirely or partially, by a false nervure. The claws of the tarsi areminute, and scarcely perceptible ; the caterpillars are very short, pubescentor hairy, and the chrysalis is short and contracted ; that ofErycina (Helicopis) Cupid is encased in a curled-up leaf (fig 100. 3.),the larva (fig. 100. 2. after Stoll) having a large head, and beingclothed with long hairs. The larva of Erygona Midas is very short andthick, with a large head, armed with two upright sharp horns. Theseinsects, which are almost exclusively confined to South America, areof small size, and often of very brilliant colours ; their colours arealso often very varied, and their wings are marked with spots. Someof the species have the hind wings produced into two * or more tails,often of very great length, thus resembling the genera Papilio andThecla ; others in the form of their wings bear a certain resemblanceto the Hipparchus, Heliconiiii, Nymphales, &c. Their flight, according toM. Lacordaire, is very rapid, and the majority of the species rest withtheir wings extended on the underside of leaves. M. Boisduval introducesinto this family the genus Nemeobius Stephh. (Pap. Lucina Linn.,fig. 99. 14.; 15. head; 99. 16. palpus ; 99. 17. tip of antenna of ditto),an extremely interesting British species, differing in many importantM. Morose has published a monograph of some of the species with two longtails (genera Erycina, Doria, and Zeonia Bdv.), in Ann. Soc, Ent. France, 1837,pi. 14.A A 3358 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.respects from the family Nymphalidse, in which it is arranged byStephens, with the remark, however, of its varying therefrom. It istrue that the general appearance, colours, and markings of the butterflyseem to indicate a relation with Melitaea; but the imperfect structureof the fore legs in the male, whilst they resemble the others in thefemale, the minute simple ungues, the posterior tibiae destitute ofspurs, the onisciform larva (fig. 99. 12,), and the girt chrysalis(fig. 99. 13.), are characters indicating a much closer relation to someof the Erycinae.One of the most curious species in the family is the BarbicornisBasilisk God. fig. 101. 5.; 6. head and antenna ; 7. palpus; 8. foreleg),an inhabitant of Brazil, and remarkable for the anomalous structure ofits antennae ; the veins of its wings agree, however, with those of mostof the Erycinae, as figured by Boisduval.The fifth family, Lyc^nid^ Leach, Polyommatidae Sivainson, orthe Vermiform Stirps of Dr. Horsfield fig. 100. 8. Thecla Quercus)comprises a numerous assemblage of small and weak, but beautifulbutterflies, distinguished by the minute size of the tarsal claws, theapparent* identity in the fore tarsi of both sexes, the fore legs beingfitted for walking ; the last joint of the palpi is small and naked fig.100. 6. head of Polyommatus ; 7. ditto of Myrina) ; the anal edge ofthe hind wings slightly embraces the abdomen ; the discoidal cellof the hind wings is apparently closed by a slender nerve. Thecaterpillars have a great resemblance to woodlice fig. 100. 9. larvaof Thecla Quercus ; the points beneath indicate the situation ofthe head and feet ; and fig. 100. 10. represents the three terminal segmentsseen beneath, which are soldered together on the upper side),and the chrysalis is short, obtuse at each end, and girt round themiddle as well as attached by the tail fig. 100. ll). Several distinctgroups exist in this family, namely, the Blues, Polyommati ; theCoppers, Mycenae ; and the hair-streak Butterflies, Theclae. SomeThe tarsi of both sexes have been described by Horsfield, Curtis, &c., asidentical ; but, in examining Thecla Isocrates, I discovered that the tarsi of themales consist of a long, simple joint {fiff. 100. !■:!.(?, 13. $ fore leg), and I subsequentlyfound the same to be the case in the Polyommati fig. 16. (? , 15. 5^ fore tarsusof Pol. Corydon). Fig. 100. 14. is the middle leg of Thecla, alike in both sexes, exhibitingthe femoral spur and tibial notch.LEPIDOPTERA.•LYC^NIDit;.of the latter especially have the hind wings produced into very longtails. The majority have the entire under surface of the wing, or,at least, the anal angle, ornamented with eye-like spots of variouscolours. The flight of these insects is feeble and slow.Dr. Horsfield has especially investigated the transformations ofmany of these insects, in his Lepidoptera Javanica, the larvae ofwhich vary very considerably it* their form, some exhibiting muchless resemblance to woodlice than others ; some are very rough onthe upper surface of the body, and that of Thecla Xenophon hasseveral rows of fascicles of hairs. They have hitherto been observedto feed only upon the leaves of different trees and plants in the larvastate ; but a beautiful Indian species (Thecla Isocrates Far.) resideswithin the fruit of the pomegranate, several (seven or eight) beingfound within one fruit, in which, after consuming the interior, theyassume the pupa state, having first eaten as many holes as there areinsects through the rind of the fruit, and carefully attached itsfootstalk to the branch, by a coating of silk, in order to prevent itsfalling (Westwood in Trans. Ent. Soc. vol. ii. p. 1.).Dr. Horsfield has figured a singular genus with its details (SymethaPandu H. pi. t.'. f. 2.) from Java, in which the basal joint of all thetarsi forms a very broad and long plate, the other joints being veryminute, and, indeed, obsolete in the fore leg of the male.Fig. 101.A still more curious genus, figured by Dr. Horsfield, and placedby him as one of the normal genera of the present family, althoughforming the transition to the Hesperides, is Petavia (P. Sa-uni,^^. 101. 1.; 2. body sideways, showing the feet; 3. apex of antennae; 4. hind leg, Polyommatus Pelagius, Encycl. Meth.).A A 4-360 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.The sixth family, Hesperides, corresponding with the PlebeianUrbicoli of Linnaeus (fig. 101. 9. Hesperia Comma), is a very distincttribe of butterflies, constituting, indeed, a primary division, Involuti,approaching, in many respects, to the moths, as already indicated.The six feet are of uniform size in both sexes, the hind tibiae havinga pair of spurs at the apex, and another pair near the middle of thelimb (^jig.\Q\. 12, hind leg); the lower wings are generally horizontalduring repose * ; the antennae are wide apart at the base, andare often terminated in a very strong hook (^fig> 101. ii); and thelabial palpi have the last joint very small ; the maxillae are exceedinglylong {^Jig. 101. 10. head sideways).The caterpillars, of which, however, but io^^' are known, are cylindricalwithout spines with the anterior segments narrowed, and thehead very large; they roll up leaves (Poey, Cent. Lep. Cuba, pi. 4.,H. Parisians), in which they construct a very slender silken cocoon,wherein they are transformed to chrysalides, which are entire, withoutangular prominences (Swainsonon, Zool. Illustrtr. vol. i. t. 16., IsmeneCEdipodea). These chrysalides are further attached by the tail aswell as girt round the middle (fig. 101. 13. larva, and 14. pupa, ofH. Tages, enclosed in a silken cocoon, after Guerin).The species are of comparatively small size, and of obscure colours,but some are ornamented with pellucid spots, and others have thehind wings furnished with long tails.These butterflies have the body very robust, and their flight isaccordingly very strong and peculiar, whence they have obtained thename of skippers, indicative of their peculiar short jerking kind offlight. They frequently settle on flowers, leaves, or branches, H.Tages (according to Dr. Abbott, Linn. Trans, vol. v. p. 276.) fliesearly in the morning, its flight being extremely short and very near theground. Mr. Curtis mentions the curious circumstance, that oldspecimens, when alive, have frequently lost one or both of their palpi,an accident he had only observed amongst the Pyralidae.Reaumur has figured the transformations of H. Malvae (ilf/ew.Ins. tom. i. pi. 11.), the caterpillar of which rolls up leaves, formingthem into an oval ball for the period of duration. The history ofvarious other species is represented in Abbot and Smith's work onthe Lepidoptera of Georgia.In some species all the wings are horizontal when at rest (Tamarisk SeleucusFah., Swains. Zool. Ill, vol. i. pi. 33.)LEPIDOPTERA. IlETEROCERA. Scythesecond general section of the Lepidoptera, that of the CeteroBoisdd., corresponding with the Linnaean genera Sphinx andPhalaena, derives its name from the diversified formation of theantennae, which are never terminated by a club, like those of thebutterflies, but are generally setaceous, filiform, or fusiform, those ofthe males being moreover often furnished with more or less developedlateral appendages, forming branches ; the wings are ordinarilyfurnished with the spring and socket apparatus, above described :the caterpillars are even more varied than in the Rhopalocera, butthe pupae are generally of a conical form, without angular projections,and they are ordinarily enclosed in a cocoon of varied construction,the quiescent state being often undergone in the ground. The groupthus constructed will be seen to correspond with the genus Phalaenaalone, of the earlier editions of Linnaeus's Systema Nature ; with thesections Crepuscularia and Nocturna of Latreille, and with the CreePoraeridiana, Nocturna, Semidiurna, and Respecting ofStephens. * (See ante, p. 325.)It is here most especially that we have to lament our great ignoranceof exotic groups in their preparatory, as well as of their precisestructure in the imago states ; and it is owing to this that we areunable to form due notions of the relative value of the charactersupon which the various primary groups of moths have been constructed,and are thereby prevented from defining these variousgroups so accurately as is done in other and better studied tribes ;for instance, it is impossible not to be convinced, upon the mostcasual glance, that the four groups, of which the Crepuscularia havebeen composed, are held together by the slightest ties, and yet we arenot sufficiently acquainted with the general grouping of the Nocturnato decide upon the propriety of cutting up the former group, and placingits dismemberment amongst them, or retaining them as a heterogeneousgroup. Urania, Castnia, Agarista, Sphinx, ^geria, and Anthrax(Zygaena Fab.^, are groups of equal value amongst themselves;and on account of the peculiar conformation of their antennae, they wereunited into one group by Linnaeus, who, it is well known, consideredthis character as of the highest importance. Take, for instance,the three English groups, Sphinx, ^geria, and Anthrocera, and weMr. Bird (Ent. Mag. vol. ii. p. 40.) has objected to Mr. Stephens's employmentof these terms, having captured the males of a vast number of the Meridiangenera during the night, they having been attracted to the light of a lamp.362 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.find the first isolated ; the second, in its fenestrated wings approachessome of the Springtide, but its metamorphoses are totally different,resembling those of Cossus ; whilst Anthrocera, on the other hand, is,in its preparatory states, a Bombyx, and in its final one probably intermediatebetween Macroglossa and Pyralis; ^geria, nevertheless, is notfarther removed from Sphinx than is Castnia or Urania, nor than Hepia-lus or Lithosia are from Attacus, in the tribe of Bombycidee. Geometra,Tortrix, Noctua, &c., in their extended state, are groups admirably defined,and yet it is impossible to look at Euclidiaia, Cosmetic, Nola, orPlatypteryx, without perceiving, either that we must extend the limitsof our families, so as to admit these anomalous groups, or else mustcreate a far greater number of families than has hitherto been done.The works of foreign authors, who have elsewhere so materiallytended to forward our acquaintance with the insect tribes here (thatis, more especially amongst the smaller European, as well as the Exotictribes), give us but little assistance. On reviewing the sketchgiven in a previous page (p. 325.) of Mr. Stephens's arrangement ofthese groups, we find them to correspond nearly with the Linnaeangrouping*, but I cannot understand wherefore Lithosia is introducedinto the same group with Noctua, whilst its legitimate station seemsto be intermediate between the aberrant Bombycidae and the Ypono-meutidae ; neither can I understand why Pyralis is united with Geometry,agreeing neither in habit nor transformations. Platypteryx,on the other hand, agrees with Geometra in the habit of the imago, butinits transformations it is much nearer to Cerura amongst the BombyxAs to the Respecting, comprising all the minute moths, theymay be said to be still in a state of chaos, as any one may be convincedby comparing the works of Haworth, Curtis, and Stephens,Mr. Stephens's arrangement of these tribes is exhibited by him in the followingsketch, published in the Introduction to his Systematic Catalogue, with a view toprove the circular distribution of the order ; —^geriidas : Sesiidte. Papilionida; : Nymphalid^.II. Sphingidffi : Hesperides. I.ZygsmAse. Lycsenida;.Notodontidae : Hepialidse. Geometrical : Platyptericid».III. V.Bombycida;: Arctiida?. Pyramids.Lithosiidffi : Tineidse.NoctuidiE IV. VI. Tortricida?.Pterophorida;. Yponomeutida>.LEPIDOPTERA. IIETEROCERA. Sandthe little unity of principle existing between them, or by examiningthe lists of the minute tribes given by continental authors, who,content with the showy objects in the order, almost overlook theminute, but highly interesting, and often exquisitely beautiful species.-If we cast our eyes over the sketch of the distribution of these tribes,given by Dr. Horsfield (see ante, p. 328.), we shall find still less reasonto be satisfied, either as regards the primary or the secondarygroups. Compare, for instance, the Sphingidae^ where four generaare regarded as primary types of form, with the Phalaenidse, whereeach type of form is of as a high a rank as the whole of the Springtide.If the arrangement of Dr. Horsfield, founded as it is upon thequin arian principles of MacLeay, presents us with too ^e^ primarygroups amongst the moths, that of Latreille is, on the other hand, tobe guarded against as establishing too many, in other words as regardingas primary groups those which are only secondary. He distributesthe Crepuscularia into four primary sections, and the Nocturna intoten, namely, 1. Hepialites. 2. Bombycites. 3. Pseudo-Bombyces(Arctiidae, Notodontidae, and Lithosiidae). 4. Aposura (genera Ceruraand Platypteryx). 5. Noctuelites. 6. Tortrices. 7. Phalanges.8. Deltoides (Crassus rostratus Fahr., &c.). 9. Tineites, includingBotys, Galleria, and all the small moths except, 10. Pterophorites.This arrangement of the families appears to me on the whole morenatural than any other hitherto proposed, and especially than that ofthe German naturalists. The section Aposura ought, however, to berejected, consisting as it does of two genera, having no other relationthan that their larvae are destitute of anal feet ; the Tortrices alsounnaturally break the transition from the Noctuidae to the Geometricso beautifully effected by Catocala, Plusia, and other half-loopers, astheir larvae are termed, and Ophiusa, Erastria, &c. Again, the 9thtribe, Tineites, requires further dismemberment. With regard, therefore,to the primary groups of the Heterocera, I candidly admit thatI am not able to offer a satisfactory classification, although it seemsunquestionable that Sphinx (or the hawk moths), Bombyx (or thefeather-horned full-bodies), Noctua (or the thread-horned full-bodies),Geometra (or the loopers), Pyralis, Tortrix, and Tinea, are, as Linnaeusconsidered them, amongst the primary types. I shall, therefore,proceed to the consideration of the secondary' groups or familiesindependent of their primary tribes, which may be arranged as fol-sciMODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.lows : 1. Springtide. 2. Uraniidse. 3. Anthrocerid£e. 4-^geriidae.5. Hepialidae. 6. Bombycidse. 7. Arctiidse (including the Noto-dontidge). 8. Lithosiidse. 9. Noctuidae. 10. Geometrical. 11. Pym12. Tortricidse. 13. Yponomeutidae. 14. Tineidae. And 15.Alucitidse.I leave it as a matter undecided whether the Uraniidae be nearerrelated to the butterflies than they are to the Anthroceridae. Shouldthe former opinion be maintained (as in the arrangement of Latreille),the family ought to precede all the rest. I cannot, however, withLatreille, introduce them amongst the true butterflies.The first family Sphingid^ * comprises the most robust and powerfulinsects in the order, generally distinguished by their strength of flight(whence their English name hawk moths) and large size. The spiraltongue is often extremely long, exceeding the whole body in lengthin some species ; (fig. 102. 14. Macroglossa stellatarum, with the spiraltongue extended ; 102. i. head of Deilephila Celerio) ; the antennaeare prismatic, and terminated by a little feather, or thread (fig. 102. 5.apex of antenna of Acherontia Atropos ; 102.6. transverse sectionof antennae of Sphinx Ligustri after Newport) ; the labial palpi arebroad and compressed, and closely covered with scales, the terminalBiBLiOGR. Refer, to the Sphingid^.Scheven. Anmerk. zur Gesch. der fleckigen Charmer (in Freshly's N. Mag. vol. i.1782.).Bergstraesser. Sphingum Europ. Larvaj, &c. Hanau, 1782. 4to.Fussy. Von der Sphinx (Enother(F, in Mag. Entomol. 2 bd. «rFeistharnel. Rescript. d'une Nouv. Espece de Sphinx [Sph. Amelia), in Bull. Sci.Nat. 1827.Passerini. Observation sopra la Sphinx Atropos. 8vo. Pisa, 1828.Rossi. Letter sulla Farfalla a testa di morte, in Opus. Scslti, torn. v.Notes on Deilephila Ei/phorbice, in Ent. Mag. Oct. 1 824.Dorvioij, in Annal. Soc. Ent. France, 1836 sphinx Neri).Newport, in Phil. Trans. 1832. and 1834 (Anat. Sphinx Ligustri).Boisduval, in Mem. Soc. Linn. Paris.Dalman, in Trans. Swed. Acad. 1816.Poey. Centurie Lepid. Cuba (pi. 5. Amphonyx Duponchel), and the general Worksof Fabriciics, Drury, Cramer, Godart, Palisot Beauvois, Boisduval, Donovan,Abbot and Smith, Curtis, Stephens, &c.M. Lefebvre de Cerisy, several years ago, prepared a monograph of the Sphingida",with figures (for which he obtained very considerable materials fi'om the collection ofMr. Haworth) ; but this monograph has never yet been published.LEPIDOPTERA. — SPIIINGID^.Fig. 102.joint being generally almost indistinct fig. 102. 4. lab. palpi of Deil.Celerio); the labrum and mandibles are minute fig. 102. 2,); themaxillary palpi are minute and 3-jointed in Sphinx Celerio fig.102.3.) and Ligustri, according to Savigny and Newport ; the body islong, and acute behind, the wings, especially the hinder pair, small;the caterpillars are naked, cylindrical, and 16-footed ; they are ordinarilyfurnished with a short horn on the back of the eleventh segment; they are also ornamented with pale oblique stripes upon thesides of the body fig. 102. 9. larva of Smerinthus Utilise). Theydescend into the earth to become pupa, which are naked, conical, andoften furnished with a detached horn, containing the spiral tongue,extending upon the breast fig. 102. 12. pupa of Sph. Ligustri),which is, however, wanting in those species which have the tongueshort fig. 102. 13. front of body of pupa of Smerinthus Filiae). Thewings are retained in their situation during flight, by means of thespring and socket above described fig. 102. 8., and see ante, p. 318.).Various modifications occur in the characters of the imago in thisfamily. The antennae in Smerinthus are serrated and ciliated,especially in the middle and in the males ; the labial palpi have thesecond joint slender in Daphnis Neri, but very much swollen inDeilephila and Smerinthus. The maxillae vary considerably in length,exceeding that of the entire body in Sphinx, but scarcely exceedingthat of the head in the Death's-head hawk moth (Acherontia Atroposfig. 102. 7. head of ditto), and in Smerinthus not longer than thelabial palpi ; this variation in length corresponds with the rapidity offlight, and the habit of the insects of extracting the nectareous juicesof tube-bearing flowers by means of their elongated tongue. Theextremity of the abdomen is, in some species, elongated, and very^66 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.acute, and in others broader, and furnished on each side with a brush :others, again, vary from the types of the family by having the wingsmore or less denuded of scales (Sesia), whence the species, which areof smaller size than the typical species, have received the names ofS. fusiform is and bombyliformis, in allusion to their analogical resemblanceto drones or Bombylius. These last-mentioned species, as wellas those with tufted abdomens, fly during the day, the latter thenceobtaining the name of humming-bird hawk moths ; whereas the othersfly during the twilight, darting about with the greatest rapidity, orhovering, hawk-like, in front of flowers, from which they extract thenectar with the assistance of their elongated tongue. Mr. Stephenshas separated these day-flying species as a distinct family., Sesiidse ;but the identity in their more decided characteristics, and especiallythe conformity in their preparatory states*, are sufficient to prove themto belong to the same natural group, constituting, however, so manyaberrant genera : thus, whilst Macroglossa bears a relation to certainNoctuidae, Sesia approaches ^geria ; some of the Smerinthi, especiallyfrom North America, approach certain Bombycidae, in which wealso find an equal diminution in the length of the spiral tongue, and inwhich the hind wings in repose extend beyond the fore wings at thesides : thus, we perceive that the preparatory states afford the bestcharacters of the family.The caterpillars of the typical species are remarkable for the attitudewhich they ordinarily assume, whence they have obtained thegeneric name of Sphinx, from their supposed resemblance to thefigures of that fabulous creature. Some of these caterpillars are alsoremarkable for the faculty they possess of elongating and contractingthe three anterior segments of the body, giving them somewhat theappearance of the proboscis of an elephant, whence they have obtainedthe name of elephant sphinxes. By the French they are namedchenilles cochonnes (fig. 102. 10. and ii. front of body of larva ofMetopsilus Emperor). It will be seen by referring to a preceding page(328), that Dr. Horsfield divides the Sphingidse (which he considersSesia (S. bombyliformis, &c. ) is certainly the most aberrant genus in thefamily, the caterpillars being slightly pilose ; and when about ten days old, theyhave several furcate spines upon each segment of the abdomen, that entirely disappearvphen they are full-fed, according to information given by Mr. Dale toMr. Curtis. The full-grown caterpillar is however evidently Sphingideous. Theperfect insects make a loud humming during flight.LEPIDOPTERA. SPUINGlDiE. 367as one of the five primary sections of the Lepidoptera) into fivegroups, of which four are represented by the genera Macroglossa,Smerinthus, Acherontia, and Sphinx, whilst the fifth has for its typethe very distinct genus Zygsena. This arrangement cannot, however,be considered a natural one, since the four first-mentioned generapossess distinctive characters, inter se, of far slighter value than thosewhich separate Zygfena from any of them ; in other words, these fourgenera are but types of genera in one family, whilst Zygaena is thetype of a distinct family. The larvae of the Smerinthi are, it is true,covered with minute granular tubercles, and the head is conical, butsurely these are the characters of a genus, and not of a stirps orfamily. In a very few species the caudal horn of the larva is nearlyor entirely obliterated, as in the North American Sphinx Coniferarum(Abb. and Smith's Lepid. of Georgia, vol. i. p. 42.), a species closelyallied to Sph. Celerio and Plebeian, placed by Mr. Stephens in the samegroup with the true elephant moths, but which, in this respect, is asfar removed from them as the Sphinges Euphorbia and Galli, whichhave been miscalled spotted elephant hawk-moths.With respect to the mode in which they undergo duration, thereis a slight variation, the majority descending into the earth, andforming an oval cell, whilst a few form a leafy cocoon on the surfaceof the ground. In their perfect state they offer no other variation inhabits,than as connected with their more or less powerful or sluggishmovements, or with the crepuscular or diurnal period of theirflight.The Death's-head moth (^Acherontia Atropos) is the largestEuropean Lepidopterous insect, and derives its name from the singularskull-like patch on the back of the thorax. This marking,together with the shrill sound which the insect emits when alarmed,has rendered it an object of alarm to the ignorant in seasons whenit has abounded, as in 1826, when the most ridiculous statementsappeared in the public prints respecting them. This noise has beenthe subject of much investigation, which must still be considered asunsettled. By Reaumur and Roesel it was supposed to be caused bythe friction of the labial palpi against each other ; and by Passerini,that it was produced within the head, in which is a cavity connectedwith the spiral tongue (Osservazio?ii, Sc. Pisa, J 828; and A?in. Set.Nat. vol. xiii. p. 332. ; and Still. Sci. Nat. February, 1829; and ditto.368 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.February, 1831.). M. de Joliet attributes it to the action of theair being suddenly impelled against the scales at the base of thewings by the action of the latter (as cited by Engramelle). Such isalso the opinion of Vallot (in L'Institiit, 1834, p. 4'.), whilst M. Loreattributes it to the escape of a current of air through certain cavitiesat the base of the abdomen, which are furnished with a beautifulpencil of hairs. M. Moreau has also described this apparatus as thecause of the sound. (rami. Soc. Ent. France, 1837. p. 69.)It is to be observed, however, that this opinion, supported as it isby analogy with the Cicadae, appears to be negatived by the fact,that many mute Lepidoptera are furnished with these cavities andpencils of hairs. (See my figures of Noctuidse.)This gigantic insect has the habit of frequenting the hive for thepurpose of robbing the bees of their honey, as described by Kuhn,Huber, and others ; these authors conjecturing that the hostility ofthe bees is disarmed by the noise emitted by the moth. This moth,when it bursts from the chrysalis, has its wings, antennae, and legsenveloped in a fine membrane resembling tissue paper, which preventsthem from adhering, and rapidly dries, opens, and drops off asthey unfold. This pellicle I regard as the analogue of the Pseudoskin of Ephemera (see ante, p. 28. note). Goeze (Z)erNaturforscher, st. 17.) has published a singular variety of the larvae ofEach. Atropos. Freshly also figured some varieties in the larvae ofDeilephila Livonia (march. tab. 4. 33. Sph. Koechlini), supposedto be caused by the diversity of the food of the larva.The species of Smerinthus appear to be subject in a remarkabledegree to gynandromorphism, a considerable number of instancesof this kind having been recorded by different authors, which I havecollected in a memoir read before the Entomological Society, inwhich I have also described and figured some very interesting individualsreared by Mr. House, being hybrids between S. ocellatus andS. populi, which are the only instances hitherto recorded of a similarresult produced by a forced union of the sexes of distinct species. Iam indebted to W. Raddon, Esq. for one of these very interestingspecimens. Deilephila Euphorbia is stated to remain in the pupastate occasionally for two years, a wise provision of nature, resultingfrom the habit of this insect in frequenting the sand hills nearthe coast, which, constantly shifting with the changes of the seasons,might destroy the entire brood were it not for such a protection.LEPIDOPTERA. URANIID^. 369Acherontia Atropos, on the other hand, assumes the pupa state at thebeginning, and becomes an imago at the end of the autumn.I regret that want of space prevents me from giving an abstractof Mr. G. Newport's elaborate researches in the internal anatomy ofSphinx Convolvuli *, published in the Philos. Transactions.The second family URANiiDiE-j- comprises several very anomalousexotic genera, which, indeed, seem so little allied together, as torender the adoption of the family provisional. Latreille named themHesperia Sphinges from their apparently occupying a station betweenthe Hesperus and Sphinges ; indeed the typical genus Urania wasplaced by him amongst the butterflies after Hesperia : the discovery,however, of its preparatory states proves it to belong rather to theHeterogeneous section of the order, its day-flying habits not beingalone sufficient to remove it from that section ; the possession also ofocelli, the spring and socket of the wings, and the peculiar directionof the nerves, equally prevent it from being united with the DiurnalLepidoptera, as Dalman well observes. The splendid colours of thetypical Urania are, it is true, indicative of diurnal flight, and givethem, in conjunction with their form, all the appearance of a butterfly,to which the tailed hind wings add considerably ; but there are otherspecies (Nyctalemon Orontes and Patroclus and Sumatra Lungs, &c.Dalman), which in their more sober colouring would be considered asAn instance is recorded in the Zoological Journal (No. 17.), in which severalmales of this species were attracted to a situation where the female had passed over.f BiBLioGR. Refer, to the Ubaniid^.Boisduval. Anomalies du G. Urania, in Ann. Soc. Ent. France, 1833. — Ditto, inNouvelle. Annal. du Mus., pi. 8. figs. 1, 2.MacLeay. Transform, of Urania, in Trans. Zool. Soc. vol. i.Westwood, in Drury's Exot. Entomol., 2d ed. vol. ii. pi. 23.Swainsonon. Zool. Illustrtr., 2d series, pi. 129, 130, 131.Duncan. Foreign Butterflies, 1837.Dalman. On G. Castnia, in Swed. Trans. 1824. — Ditto, Prodromus Mon. G.Castile, 4to. Holm. 1825. (and in Thon's Archiv. vol. ii., and Bulletin Soc.Nat., Oct. 1829.)Gray, in Trans. Ent. Soc. London, vol. ii.VOL. II. B B370 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.moths, and some of these seem so nearly related to Coronis, whilstUrania is in several respects so close to Agarista (in its larva, palpi,and antennae), that I am induced to unite them into one family, astep which seems to be supported by the neuration of the wings.Even between Castnia and Urania, Mr. MacLeay has no doubt thatthere exists "some close kind of relation." trans. Zool. Soc. vol. i.p. 188.) How far their relation to the Anthroceridse by means oftheir transformations is to be considered as closer than to the Hesperides,remains for future consideration. I cannot, however, but addthat Urania appears in some respects to approach Erebus, especiallyin the palpi*, and Mr. MacLeay notices the resemblance between theeggs of Urania and Catocala, to which last genus also Castnia mustbe allied. The antennae are long, but never prismatic as in theSpringtide, nor terminated by a pencil of hairs, but are variable inform; in Urania they are slender, filiform, and gradually attenuatedto the tip; in Coronis and Castnia, however, they are clavate at thetip ; the maxillae are elongated ; the palpi are distinctly 3-jointed ; inUrania and Agarista they are elongated, the second joint very compressed,and the third slender and naked ; the fore tibiae are spurredfig. 103. 2.).The accounts published of the transformations of Urania (Cy-dionDalm., Leilus Swains.) have varied considerably; MadameMerian having described a larva and imago from Surinam supposedto be those of Urania Leilus, the former armed with very long andstrong spines as hard as iron wire. M. Sganzin, on the other hand,asserts that the larva of Urania Rhipheus (Thalia Rh. Duncan,For. Butt. pi. 28.) is a semi-hooper, and its chrysalis naked, suspendedby the tail and girt round the centre. (Anomalies du g.Uranie par Boisduval, Ann. Soc. Ent. Franc. ] 834, p. 248., andNouv. Ann. du Mus. p. 260.) But the elaborate account publishedby Mr. MacLeay upon the habits and transformations ofUrania Fernandinae, proves that its larva fig. 103. i.) closelyresembles that of Agarista, being cylindrical with long delicatesetae, and that the pupa as in that genus is enclosed in a cocoon,but of so lax a nature as to allow the inmate to be seen. Mr. MacLeaydoes not mention whether the chrysalis is attached by its tailas in the butterflies ; but since his return from Cuba he has been so• I find that Fabricius had placed some of the France with Erebus, thus anticipatingmy supposition of this relation.LEPIDOPTERA. ANTHROCERIDtE. 371kind as to show me the cocoon, and to inform me that the chrysalis isloose. This chrysalis is of the conical form. The flight of UraniaFernandinae is diurnal, and exceedingly swift, somewhat like that ofApatura Iris, sporting about the topmost branches of forest trees ; andwhen it alights, its four wings are expanded horizontally, as representedby Mr. Swainsonon (Zool. III., n. sen, pi. 129.).Agarista consists of New Holland insects, having much more theappearance of moths, but with filiform antennae slightly thickened inthe middle and terminated in a point. The transformations of A.Glycinae have been figured by Lewin in his work on the Lepidopteraof that country (copied by Guerin, Icon. pi. 83., and Griffith's An. K.Ins. pi. 53.) ; its larva having considerable resemblance to thatof PygEera bucephala with slender hairs ; its cocoon is elongated, attachedto the twigs of the tree, somewhat like that of Anthrocerafilipendulae, but sufficiently open to allow the chrysalis to be seenthrough the meshes.The transformations of Castnia and Coronis have not been observed ;the former of these genera, according to Mr. Swainsonon (Zool. Ill,vol. iii. p. 149.), sits when at rest with its wings deflexed.The third family* Anthrocerid^-|- (Zygaenides Lair.) comprisesa rather numerous group of species of small or moderate size, distinguishedby their brilliancy of colour and diurnal flight (/iff. 103. 3.Anthrocera filipendulae, ^ff. 103. 12. Ino Statices ^ ), having the antennaenever terminated by a pencil of hairs, and either simple in bothsexes and fusiform, or thickened near the middle, nearly setaceous,and pectinated in the males (Jiff- 103. 4. tip of antenna of Anti.BiBLioGR. Refer, to the Anthrocerid^e.Boisduval. Essai d'une Monogr. des Zygtenides, 8vo. Paris, 1829. — Ditto, Hist,Nat. Lepidopt., pi. 14, 15, 16.Fristhamel. Descript. de la Chimera febris, in Ann. Soc. Ent. France, 1832.Villiers. Notice sur rAccouplement de deux Bygones d'especes differences, inDitto.f The name Zyga?na having been preoccupied in Ichthyology, has been rejected byMr. Stephens in favour of Scopoli's name Anthrocera ; Mr. Stephens has neverthelessretained the family name Zygajnida, which must evidently be thrown down.BB 2MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Fig. 103.filipendulae, Jig. 103. 13. tip of antenna of Ino Statices <? ) ; thehead fig. 103. 8. head of Anti. scabiosae) is furnished with a pair ofcell behind the antennae ; the labial palpi are small, or but of moderatesize, with the terminal joint distinct fig. 103. ll. labium andlab. palpi of Anti. scabiosae) ; the maxillae are greatly elongatedfig. 103. 8. 10. ; fig. 103.9. labrum and mandibles of Anti. scabiosaeafter Savigny) ; the maxillary palpi are short and 3-jointed ; thewings are always deflexed in repose, exhibiting in many species anumber of denuded spots ; the nervures are very numerous ; the legsare long, with the posterior tibiae furnished with four spurs [fig. 103. 5.) ;the abdomen is never terminated by a broad pencil of hairs.The caterpillars fig. 103. 6. larva of Anti. filipendulae; 103.14that of Ino Statices) are sluggish creatures, of a cylindrical form, generallyclothed with short hairs, without any spine at the hind part oithe body ; and considerably resemble those of several of the BombyxThese caterpillars feed on various species of Leguminous ;and, when full grown, construct a close cocoon of silk, which theyattach to the stems of grass and low plants, out of the upper end ofwhich the pupa partially works itself, as represented m fig. 103. 7.,being the cocoon of Anti. filipendulae. The pupae are of the ordinaryconical form, without any angular prominences fig. 103. 15.pupa of Ino Statices, after Lyonnet, in whose posthumous memoirsare contained memoirs upon Anthrocera and Ino). The larva ofProcess Viris is very destructive to the vine in Tuscany. (See ,Memorie sopra due Specie d'Insetti nocivi ; and Bill. Set. Nat.Feb. 1831. See also Pallas, Travels in South Russia, vol. ii. p. 241.,quoted by Kirby and Spence, Introdd. vol. i. p. 206-) The larva ofAgape infanta nearly resembles that of Anthrocera ; but that ofLEPIDOPTERA iEGERIID^. 373Sjmtomis Phegea is much more hairy, resembling the caterpillars ofsome of the Arctiidae, the hairs arising in bundles. (Guerin, Icon.B. An. pi. 84. b.; and Griff., An. K. Ins. pi. 120.) M. De Villiershas published an account of the circumstances connected with thecoupling of two distinct species of the genus Anthrocera, whencesome of the supposed species of this genus are considered to behybrids. (Latin. Soc. Ent. de France, tom. i.) In their diurnalflight and fenestrated wings, these insects appear to approach the-^gerias ; but the relation between them appears to be but remote,as does also their supposed affinity to the Pyralidae, the various charactersbetween the latter seeming to indicate no higher relation thanone of analogy ; for nothing can be more dissimilar than the slow,heavy flight of Zygaena and the active movements of the Pyralidae.Some of the exotic species of this family are exceedingly beautifulin their colours ; and those of the genera Glaucopis and Agapehave the antennae strongly bipectinated in both sexes. Latreilleconsiders them as probably allied to Callimorpha amongst the nocturnalLepidoptera.The fourth family j^geriidje*, or the Besides of Latreille, consistsof a moderate number of very interesting insects, remarkablefor their great resemblance to various Hymenoptera and Diptera,owing to the elongate form of the body, and the nakedness of thewings, which are more or less transparent in many of the speciesfig. 104. 3. I'rochilium bembeciforme 3 ; 104. 6. Germ tipuli-formis $ ). The antennae are simple, fusiform, or thickened towardsthe tips, and generally terminated by a small pencil of hairs {fig^104. 9. tip of antenna of ^Slg. tipuliformis ; 104,, 5. ditto of Troth. bem-beciforme <y ). The ocelli are distinct, and the labial palpi elevated,BiBLiOGR. Refer, to the ^geriid^e.Laspeyres. Sesise Europaese Iconium, &c. Beryl. 1801. 4to.Ncivman. Sphinx Vespiformis, an Essay. London. — Ditto, in Entomol. Mag.,No. 1.Worth, upon an Insect very destructive to Peach Trees, ^geria exitiosa Say, inJourn. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelph. Decem. 1823, and Ferussac Bull. Jan.1825.Stephens. Burner. Ennramelle, Godart, Wood, Sc.B B 3S74.MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Fig. 104.with the second joint long and slender, and the last distinct, andpointed at the tip fig. lOi. 4. head of Trochiliurn ; 7. ditto ofegeria ; 8. labial palpus of egeria denuded). The spiral tonguevaries in length, being not longer than the palpi in Trochiliurn ; thelegs are long, the posterior with very long spurs. In Trochiliurn, theposterior tibiae are very thickly pilose. The abdomen is elongated,and generally terminated by a brush, capable of opening and closingat will. The wings are furnished with but comparatively few nervures.The larvae of these insects are fleshy grubs, of a cylindrical form,and with naked bodies destitute of a caudal horn. They have sixpectoral, eight ventral, and two anal feet. They live in the interiorof the branches or roots of trees, of the debris of which they constructa cocoon, or at least a partial one, in which they undergo theirtransformations to chrysalides, the abdominal segments of which arearmed with transverse rows of recurved points, whereby the chrysalisis enabled to push itself through the cocoon, and half out of the holein the stem, which the larva had previously made, having had theinstinct to turn round in its burrow, so that the head of the pupamight be towards the orifice. Figure lOi. i. represents the larva,and lOi. 2, the pupa of Trochus. bembeciforme (CrabroniformisHmvorth), a species which lives upon the willow (Salix Caprea),the young wood of which it perforates occasionally to such an extentas to become a serious injury. (Bree, in Mag. Nat. Hist., n. s., vol. i.p. 19., and Loudon's Garb. Brit. p. 1482. ; Lewin, in Trans. Linn.Soc. vol. iii. tab. i. ; and Bloomer, in Mag. Nat. Hist. No. 21.)The larva of a curious American species, remarkable for the diversityof the sexes (vEg. exitiosa iSag), is very destructive to peachtrees in the United States. ( Worth, ut supra citat.)LEPIDOPTERA. HEPIALIDJE. 375The larvae of egeria culiciformis and JE. formiciformis feed upon thewood of the apple, and that of ^geria tipuliformis upon the pith ofcurrant trees, about which the perfect insects may be seen flying, inthe hottest sunshine, with great activity, or basking upon the leaves,alternately expanding and shutting their fan-like tails. (See Hayward,in Mag. Nat. Hist. No. 17.)M. Boisduval has described the transformations of Tigris celestinain the Annates des Sc. Nat. August, 1828.The species of Trochilium, on the other hand, are extremely sluggishin the perfect state, usually resting on the trunks or leaves ofthe trees on which they have been produced, and flying heavily ; apeculiarity connected with the smallness and weakness of the spiraltongue, in which respects, as Mr, Stephens suggests, this genusapproaches nearer to the Bombycidae than ^gei'ia. Independentof the interest which these insects possess from their striking analogyto other insects (whence the names of hornet hawk-moths, and thespecific names Crabroniformis, Tipuliformis, Asiliformis, Ichneuraoni-formis, Vespiformis, &c.), these insects are especially worthy ofremark, on account of the difficulties connected with their naturalsituation amongst the Lepidopterous tribes. The ordinary locationassigned to them, with the other species of Linnaean Sphinx, solely,as it would seem, from the structure of their antennae, and the analogicalrelation existing between them and the clear-winged Springtide,is disproved by their habits and transformations ; in whichlatter respect they closely approach Cossus amongst the Hepialida^.Mr. Newman, indeed, on this account introduces them into his familyCoss (including Hepialus, &c.) ; but there are so many charactersin the imago state, in which the egeria differ from all the Hepia-lidae, that I prefer following Latreille and Stephens in keeping themdistinct.The fifth family Hepialid^ * is the first group belonging to thesection Nocturna of Latreille (differing from his Crepuscularia inBiBLioGR. Refer. to the Hepialid^.Lyonnet. Traite Anatomise de la Chenille qui ronge le Bois de Saul. La Have,4to. 1760-1762. ; and the general works oi Fabricius, Esper, Huhner, Donovan,Godart, Haworth, Stephens, Wood, Cramer, §-c. ^B B 4Modern CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.having the antennae gradually attenuated to the tip or setaceous), andis distinguished by having the antennae very short and filiform (yfig-104. 13. ant. of Hepialus Humuli ? ), never feathered to the tip ; thespiral tongue is either obsolete or very short]; the palpi are also generallyobsolete (fig. lOi. 12. head of H. Humuli 5 ) ; the abdomenis elongated, as are also the wings, which are deflexed in repose,the extremity of the former being attenuated into an ovipositor ofconsiderable length, so as to be capable of being withdrawn, or introducedinto the crevices of the bark of trees, &c. ; the thorax isnever crested; the nerves of the wings are far more complicated thanin any of the preceding groups fig' 104<. 16. nerves of HepialusHumuli ? ). The caterpillars are fleshy, naked grubs, with a fewstraggling hairs ; they are 16-footed (having 6 pectoral, 8 ventral,and 2 anal feet ; fig. 104. 10. larva of Hepialus oblique). They feedupon the wood of standing trees, or the roots of vegetables. When fullgrown,they construct a cocoon of the morsels of wood or vegetablesupon which they have been feeding.The abdominal segments of the chrysalis are armed with transverserows of fine reflexed spines, which assist the insect whilstpushing itself to the day, immediately before assuming the perfectstate.This and the two following families constitute Mr. Stephens'sgroup of Meridians, consisting of the four families Hepialidae,Notodontidae, Bombyclda?, and Arctiidge, the circular arrangementof which is proposed to be effected in the following manner (^Sgst.Cat. Introdd. p. xi).Hepialus.Notodonta.Pygasra.II.Endromis.Aglaia.Saturnia.Lasiocampa. III. Eutricha.Cnethocampa.Eriogaster.Cossus.I.ZeuzeraOiketicus.Limacodes.Dasychira.Pysche.Nudaria.IV. Penthophora.Arctia.Hyperaemia.Callimorpha.The species of the typical genus Hepialus {^fig. 104. 11. H. oblique)have the antenna; very short, and either simple or serrated.They are called Swifts, from the rapidity of their flight, which takesplace during the twilight; the sexes vary very considerably in appearanceand structure ; those of the typical species, H. Humuli, areLEPIDOPTERA. HEPIALID^. 377the most striking in this respect, the wings of the males being purewhite, and those of the females yellow, varied with darker markings ;the former sex has obtained the name of the Ghost moth from its peculiarhabit of hovering with a pendulum-like motion for a great lengthof time in one situation (often in churchyards), where the female isconcealed in the grass, its white colour rendering it very conspicuous:the other species are more discursive, flying about low herbage at theroots of grass. The feet in this genus are destitute of spurs, the posteriortibiae in the males being very thickly clothed with long hairs onthe outside i^fig- 104. 14.) ; the same part in H. rectus is remarkablydilated, and the tarsi are wanting (De Geer and Van Heyden in BulletinSc. Nat. January, 1831,) (Jiff- lo. 15.) ; the mouth is entirelyobsolete ; the larvae are subterranean, feeding on the roots of plants ;and the females have the power of discharging their eggs singly to agreat distance, with considerable force, when alarmed.The Goat moth (Phal. Bomb. Cossus Li7in., Cossus ligniperdaFar.) is one of the largest British Lepidopterous insects. Its largered fleshy larvae, equalling in size a man's finger, have been regardedby Ray and Linnaeus as the Cossus of the Roman epicures ; it feedsupon the wood of willow trees, which it perforates in every direction,and from its size so greatly weakens them, that they are often blowndown with the first strong wind ; the antennae are pectinated to the tipin both sexes ; the labial palpi are present, although the other parts ofthe mouth are obsolete. The inimitable dissections of Lyonnet of thelarva, contained in his Traite Anatomise de la Chenille qui rongele Bois de Saule (4to. La Have, 1760 and 1762), and of the chrysalisand imago, published in his posthumous memoirs, may be accountedthe most elaborate and complete of any hitherto published.De Geer and Reaumur also exercised their talents upon this species.The insect, previous to bursting forth, and whilst still a chrysalis,pushes itself half out of the orifice formed by the larva, with the assistanceof the spines on the abdominal segments, and the imago leavesthe exuviae thus sticking out of the trunk when it has escaped. Thecaterpillars emit a very strong scent, whence the English name of themoth, and also discharge a fetid liquid, which probably serves tomoisten the wood. In default of their usual food, these larvae havebeen observed to feed on the bodies of other insects (Duponchel inAnn. Sci. Nat, June, 1831 ; see also Loudon's Gard. Mag. Nos. 78.91. and Arboretum Britann. p. 1386, for further notices of its history).MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Fig. 105.Fig. 105. 5. represents a portion of the wing of this insect, to showthe manner in which the scales are arranged, and jig. 105. 7. theanterior, 8. the intermediate, and 9. the posterior tibiee, to show thespurs.The Wood leopard-moth (Zeuzera ^sculi) is distinguished by thebeautiful structure of the antennas of the males (fig. 105. 15. male,16. female antennas.) The larva of this insect feeds upon the woodof apple, pear, and other fruit trees ; like that of Cossus, it is a nakedfleshy grub, and has the prothorax defended above by a broadhorny shield. There are notes relative to this insect, published inNos. 6, 7, and 8. of the Mag. Nat. Hist., 1st series, and GardenersMagazine, Nos. 78. 91., and Arboretmn Britann. p. 887.The Continental genus, Stygian, placed by De Villiers (ann. Soc.Linn. Paris, v. 473.) between ^geria (Sesia) and Anthrocera (Hyaena),is considered by Latreille as more closely allied to Cossus. Thesituation assigned to these insects by Latreille, at the head of theNocturnal Lepidoptera, evidently originates in the similarity of theirtransformations with the iEgeriidas (although Latreille interposes theAnthroceridae between them). There appears, however, to be butlittle relation in the imago state, either in respect to their habits orstructure, so that it may be questioned how far the relation is morethan one of analogy ; at all events, I hesitate as to the propriety ofplacing the iEgerige in the same natural group with Hepialus andCossus, as Mr. Newman has done. Mr. Stephens suggests a relationwith Smerinthus, and Mr. Curtis with Stauropus through Zeuzera.Latreille, on the other hand, has always placed Saturnia immediatelyafter Zeuzera ; but I do not find that he has ever expressed anyopinion on the affinity of these genera. Looking at the structure ofLEPIDOPTERA. BOMBYCID^. 379the imago, independent of metamorphoses, the genus DryocampaHarris (Phalaena pellucida Abbot and Smith), and still more strikinglyOiketicus Kirbii, seem to form the connecting links betweenthe Hepialidse and the remainder of the Bombycidse.The sixth family Bom bycid^ *, corresponding withLatreille's sectionBombycites, and Stephens's family Bombycidae, comprises some of themost gigantic species of the order, and is distinguished by the genereRefer, to the Bombvcid^ and Arctiid^.Germar, System. Gloss. Prodromus sisters Bombycum Species, &c. 4to. Leipzig,1810-12.Malpighi. De Boiiibyce. London, 1694. 4to., with fig.Disderi, in Turin Trans, vol. ii.Roxburgh. Account of the Russel and Arrindy Silkworms, in Trans. Linn. Soc.Lend. vol. V.Gautier. Lepid. Nocturnal. France, No. 1.Curtis. His4tory of the Browntail Moth. Lond. 1782. 4to.Marsham. Obs. on Phal. Lubricipeda, &c., Linn. Trans, vol. i. 1797.Kefersfein. Ueber der Bombyx der Alter, in Germ. Mag., 3 band. 1818.King, in Symbols Physica ( Gastropacha Acacia. )Feisthamel. Notice sur le g. Megasoma (Gastro. Acacias, &c. ) Ann. Soc. Ent. deFrance, 1832.Dallinger. Ueber die Fichtensplnner. Wittenberg 1799. 8vo. with 3 plates.Villiers. Obs. sur le B. Pithyocampa, God. Ann. Soc. Ent. de France, 1832. —Ditto, Observ. sur I'Ecaille Undique, in Ditto, 1832.Nicolai. Die Wander oder Processions rape. Berlin, 8vo. 1833.Dorthes, Recherches sur la Chenille Procession, in Journ. de Physique, torn. 37.BoiirboTi, in Ferussac Bull. 1831.Sykes, on the Kolisurra Silkworm, inTrans. Royal Asia. Society, vol.iii. Lond. 1834.Timber. Description of a new Silkworm from Japan (Noctua Series), in NeueAbhandl. der Schwed. Akad., 1781, in Swedish.LamarePiquot. Memoire sur le Bombyx Paphia, ou Goutypoka des Indus, introduitdans rile.Olivier. Obs. Genera. sur les Chenilles Fileuses, et Descr. d'une Nouv. Esp. deBombyx, in Journ. d'Hist. Nat. torn. i.Esper. Beobacht. an einer Zwitterphalane der Bombyx Cj-ataegi. Erlangen, 1788.Adieux. Beitrage einer twitter von Phal. Pannonia major, in Der Naturforscher,1778.ZinckenG.Sommer. Ueber Sacktrager (Psyche), inOermar's Mag.'d, Entomology i.380 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.ally obsolete structure of the mouth, which is often destitute of palpi ;and the maxillae, when present, are so small as to be useless, and notspirally folded up fig. 105. 4. head of Saturnia Pannonia majorbeneath, showing the rudimental state of the mouth ; in^^.105. l.,headof Bombyx (Minas) Polygon Savigmj, the labial palpi, fig. 105. 3.,are distinct, but the maxilla;, ^^. 105. 2., are very short) ; the body isvery thick and hairy fig. 105. 6. thorax of Saturnia Pannonia major,the striated part being one of the regulate, and the dotted part themetathorax) ; the antennas of the males are generally very stronglybipectinated to the tip (fig. 105. 14. antenna of Saturnia Pannoniamajor S '■> fig 106. l. one of the joints of ditto showing its double expectations); the wings are large, and either extended horizontallyor deflexed at the sides, the costa of the posterior pair extendingbeyond that of the anterior ; the thorax is not crested, the legs are ofthe ordinary structure ; but Dalman has described a North Americanspecies (B. cyllopoda) in which the hind legs are spurious, like thefore legs of the Nymphalidae canal. Entomol. Obs. vol. ii. p. 102.).The larvae are naked fig. 105. lO. larva of Bombyx mori), and oftenhave a transverse series of warts upon each segment, each furnishedwith a diverging coronet of hairs fig. 105. 13. young larva of SaturniaPannonia minor) ; they are 16-footed, having six pectoral, eightventral, and two anal feet ; they do not inhabit portable cases ; theirfood consists of the leaves of various plants. They enclose themselvesin cocoons of pure silk, frequently of a firm and rigid texture, andwhich is rarely subterranean. The pupae are not armed with transverseseries of rigid points upon the abdominal segments fig. 105. ii. pupaof Bombyx Mori), The males, according to Mr. Stephens, in generalfly swiftly in the day-time, from about noon to four or five o'clock inthe afternoon, and again in the evening ; but the females are verysluggish and inactive. The prevailing hues are grey or fawn colour,and many of the larger species have the wings ornamented with eye-likespots.The larger species of the family, which have the wings extendedhorizontally whilst in repose, were formed by Linneeus into a separateGuilding. Nat. Hist, of Oiketicus, in Trans. Linn. Soc. vol. xv.Guerin, in Mag. Zool. 1831. (Descr. Gymnautocera. )Bulletin de Ferussac, May 1831. (Bombyx Herbarium) ; and the general workson Lepidoptera above referred to.LEPIDOPTERA. BOMBYCID^. 381section of his Phalaena "named Attacus (Saturnia, Schrank). Amongstthese the giant Atlas-moth, Saturnia Atlas, from China, the S. Cecropiaand Luna, which have the hind wings produced into a tail, and S.Cynthia and Militia, the cocoons of which are employed in India forthe production of silk, are amongst the largest species. From a communicationmade to Latreille of a Chinese manuscript upon the subjectof the silk trade, it appears that the caterpillars of these two speciesare the wild species of silkworm of China. The former species, B.Cynthia, is the Arrindi silkworm of India, of which, as well as of theRussel silkworm, Dr. Roxburgh published a long account in theTrans. Linnaean Soc. vol. vii. with plates. For further details relativeto the last-named species, see also Ann. Sci. Nat. Aug. 1831,and Bull. Sci. Nat. Fencssac, Sept. 1831. See also Col. Sykes'sMemoir on the Kolisurra silkworm of the Deccan above referredto.Humboldt has also described a Mexican moth (Bombyx Matron)which is social in its habits, the larva forming nests of a dense tissueand brilliant whiteness, which are employed by the natives in the manufactureof silk. (political Essay of New Spain, vol. iii. p. 59.)The fine North American species, Saturnia Promethean, exhibits aninteresting peculiarity of habit in the construction of its cocoon, whichit forms within a leaf of the Sassafras tree, having previously, however,fastened the stalk of the leaf to the stem by a strong silken web,whereby it is prevented from falling with the other leaves. (Peale'sLepidopt. Americana, part i.)The majority of these species have the centre of the wings ornamentedwith a talc-like spot. Others have a large eye-like spotat the same place (Saturnia Pannonia minor, &c.). This species, whichis the only example of this particular group found in England, and isone of our most beautiful moths, constructs a remarkably interestingcocoon, the extremity not being close, but terminated by a convergingcircle of very stiff hairs, which enables the insect to make its escapefrom within, but completely prevents all ingress.* The larva of thebeautiful American Saturnia Luna, distinguished for the length of theSee'on the habits of this insect Loudon's Mag. Nat. Hist., No. 6. A writerin the Entomol. Mag., vol. iii. p. 206., has stated the curious but rather doubtfulfact, that a large caterpillar of this insect having formed its cocoon, producedtwo winged individuals, a male and a female. Kleesius also, as quoted by Kirbyand Spence, asserts that he had once two specimens of Gastropacha quercifolia,382 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.tails of the hind wings, resembles that of the Emperor moth, exceptthat the warts on the segments are smaller (abbott and Smith).The common silkworm fig. 105. ic), which is the larva of BombyxMori fig. 105. 12.), is too well known to need description. Accordingto Latreille, who has minutely investigated the history of silkculture, this moth was a native of the northern provinces of China,whence, in the reign of Justinian, it was imported by the missionariesto Constantinople, and thence to Sicily, and to other parts of thesouth of Europe, where it has long been an extensive object of commerce,and where the greatest care is taken in the management andrearing of it. Silkworm gut, so much used by anglers, is also manufacturedfrom the larvae.It would be out of place in this work to enter into any details relativeto the history of the silk trade, or of the manufacturing process.I shall therefore only allude to the remarkably sluggish character ofthe perfect insect, and the absence of any disposition on the part ofthe caterpillar to wander from the trays on which it is fed, peculiaritieswhich eminently fit it, as suggested by Mr. Sells, for the subjectof so extensive an occupation.The following stanza relative to the habits of the silkworm in theWelsh language is a literary curiosity, being entirely composed ofvowels.O'l wiw wy i weu e a, ari weuauO'i wyau a weua ;E' weua ei we aha',Ari weuau yw ieuau ia.I perish by my art,Dig my own grave ;I spin my thread of life,My death I weave.The silkworm has been long known in the south of Europe to besubject to a disease called kincardine, which destroys the insect, andat the same time covers the body with a white efflorescence. The realnature of this disease remained unascertained until 1835, when M.Bassi proved it to be a minute fungus (Botrytis Bassiana) in a stateof vegetation, which had by degrees occupied the whole of the interiorof the body, and then burst through the skin. M. V. Audouin hasfollowed up this singular discovery by numerous experiments and mi-producedfrom one pupa, which was large, being full two inches long, and one thick.Wm. Knott, Esq. has informed me of an instance, in which two chrysalides ofthe Emperor moth were contained in one cocoon ; and several (two, and even asmany as three or four) chrysalides of the lackey-moth have been observed in alarge common cocoon by Mr. Marshall, as he has himself ii. formed me.LEPIDOPTERA. BOMBYCID^. 383microscopical researches, the result of which he has published in twoMemoirs in the Annales des Sci. Nat. for 1838.The works of Count Dandolo on the silkworm {Engl. Transll.) ;the volume upon the silk manufacture in Larder's Cabinet Cyclops; the American work entitled the Silk Cultivator hy Enrich ;the valuable analysis by Dr. Ure trans. Entomol. Soc. vol. i.App. p. 50.) ; Latreille in Ann. Sci. Nat., May 1831, and in hisCours dEntomol. ; a Memoir on silk worms in America in Trans.Philadelph. Soc, 1786, 1789, vol. i. 2d ed., and vol. ii. ; and a Memoirby Laving in the Turin Transact, tom, xxxvii., 1834', may be consultedon the subject of the silk culture.Other species, which have the palpi porrected, and the hind wingsin repose extending considerably beyond the costa of the anterior,form the genus Gastropacha ; G. quercifolia, the type has all theappearance of a bundle of dried and shrivelled up leaves. The larvahas the sides of the body furnished with fleshy appendages, concealingthe feet ; it is very large and hairy, as it is also in other species,called edgar-moths, from the cocoons being smooth, firm, and oval, andexactly resembling eggs (Lasiocampa Quercus, Tripoli, &c.). M.Guenee has made some observations on the construction of one ofthese cocoons (that of B. lanestris), with respect to the absorptionand renewal of the very small quantity of enclosed air by the chrysalis.ann. Soc. Ent. de France, 1835, App. p. 63.)M. Villiers, in his Memoirs upon Bombyx Pityocampa and Cheloniautica, has noticed a peculiarity in the structure of the undersideof the breast, near the base of the abdomen, and which he likens tothe drums of the Cicada. ann. Soc. Ent. de France, 1832, No. 2.)Some of the species (Clisiocampa Neustria, Eriogaster lanestris,&c.) are eminently gregarious, inhabiting a general nest in the larvastate, which they extend from time to time, quitting it during thenight in search of food, but constantly spinning a line of silk in orderto direct them on their return before morning : they finally quit thenest before changing to pupae. Some of these remain two or moreyears in the pupa state, especially Eriogaster lanestris, as described byMr. Haworth {Lepid. Britann. p. 125.); and others (Cnethocampaprocession) are remarkable for the regular professional marches oftheir social caterpillars. (Reaumur and Nicolai, Processions Rape,Berlin, 1833.) Some of these caterpillars are very handsome, beinglongitudinally striped with different colours, whence they have obtained384 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.the name of lackey caterpillars. Clisiocampa Neustria has the instinctto arrange its eggs in a close spiral coil round the youngbranches of fruit trees.Many of these moths are remarkable for the instinct which themales possess of seeking their females from very great distances, andin situations apparently inaccessible to them, in great numbers. Thishabit, which collectors call " smiling," is turned to good accountwhen they happen to rear the females of rare species, as they aresure to secure numbers of males if the females be taken to the woods.Mr. Haworth has given an account of this habit {Lepid. Britann.p. 82.), and mentions an instance in which a male moth found its wayinto the pocket of a collector, who happened to have a female in hiscollecting-box. The means by which these males are apprised of thepresence of their partner's at such distances is at present only conjectural.Other instances are recorded, where male moths have comedownchimneys. (Davis, in Loudon's Mag. Nat. Hist. No. 4. Jurinehas also described some singular instances of this kind in his Nouv.Methods de classes les Hymenopt. Pres. p. 9.)A circumstance also, of great physiological interest, has been observedwith several species of these insects, namely, the productionof fertile eggs without impregnation. Burmeister has collected anumber of such instances {Handhucli, Translation, p. 312.) ; and M.Cartier communicated to Lacordaire {{Introdd. a VEntomol. tom. ii.p. 383.), that he had obtained, without impregnation, three generationsof Hypogymna dispar*, the last of which consisted entirely ofmales, which, of course, put an end to the experiment.The transformations of many of the species of this family are illustratedin the works of Reaumur, De Geer, Rose, Schaffer, Sepp,Huber, Admiral, and other works expressly devoted to the metamorphosisof this order.The seventh family, Arctiid^, with which 1 have united theNotodontidae of Stephens, nearly corresponds with the third sectionof the Nocturna of Latreille, or the Pseudo-Bombyces, andcomprises those species which have the wings deflexed in repose,Mr Davis also informed me of a similar occurrence, observed by Mr, Tardy,in one of the edgar moths.LEPIDOPTERA. ARCTIID^.Fig. 106.the posterior pair not extending beyond the costa of the anterior :they are connected together by a spring and socket ; the antennae ofthe males are strongly bipectinated or serrated ; the spiral tongue iseither obsolete, or of very small size ; and the labial palpi are generallyshort, and obtuse at the tip, with the last joint very small. Thecaterpillars vary very considerably, being in some species naked, butvariously tubercled ; in others, thickly hairy ; and in some, furnishedwith long fascicles of hairs. They feed entirely upon the externalparts of plants, and enclose themselves in cocoons when about toundergo their transformations.The family comprises many very distinct types of form, but allappear to have a connection inter se ; whence I find it impossible todraw a line between those which form Stephens's two families, Noto-dontidas and Arctiidee. The structure of the mouth will not assistin the inquiry, because Pygaera, Cerura, &c., amongst the Notodon-tide, have the maxilla, and even the maxillary palpi (as discoveredby Curtis), developed as strongly as in Spilosoma and Arctia ; whilstthere is as great a variation in the transformations of the genera ofeither group, as there is between the respective species of the twogroups ; hence I have followed Latreille in keeping them under onefamily.Of these insects, Notodonta and its allied species ai-e distinguishedby the fore wings being toothed, or having elevated portions along theinner margin.There is considerable diversity in the appearance of the larvae ofthese prominent, as they have been termed, but the majority arefurnished with several tubercles on the back, and the anal feet arespurious in some species (^^fig- 106. 2. larva of Lophopteryx carolina;VOL. II. c c386 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.106. 3. ditto of Notodonta dromedaries). The larva of Endromisversicolor is also naked, with a pyramidal horn on the eleventh segment; in this respect approaching the Sphingida?, as it also does inthe ordinary position of the body, and the oblique stripes at its sides.But the most extraordinary larva in the family is that which has beentermed the lobster caterpillar (that of Stauropus Fagi), and whichhas the second and third pairs of legs greatly elongated ; the intermediatesegments of the body with elevated conical tubercles; and theapex of the body is swollen, terminated by two long slender appendages,without any anal feet ; and this part of the insect, as well asthe head, is generally elevated in repose Ochsenheimer, probablyon account of the want of anal feet in the larva, placed this insect inthe genus Cerura ; but Mr. Curtis thinks it makes a near approachto Notodonta tepid, a situation which appears to me most natural,when we consider the variations in form of the larvae of the prominentmoths.Latreille considers that some of these prominent, especially Ptero-stoma alpine {fig- 106. 4.), establish the passage between this familyand the Noctuidse, by means of the genus Calyptra (the herald moth),which he places at the head of that family. Some prominent havealso the thorax crested, a peculiarity more especially found in the Noc-tuidae. Pygsera bucephala also approaches the Noctuidae in the larvaburying itself in the earth without forming any cocoon. Mr. Curtisconsiders the last-named genus as very nearly related to the Noto-conte. Its larvae, for some time after they are hatched, live in society,arranging themselves closely, in regular rows, upon a leaf, commencingat one end, and eating their way to the other.The types of the family are distinguished by their larvae beingvery thickly clothed with long hairs, whence they have obtained thename of xcoolhj hears fig. 107. 3. larva of Arctia Casa). Such areespecially the larva of the various species of tiger moths, and othersnearly allied to them. These are amongst the most beautiful of allthe species of moths, the fore wings being ornamented with white andbrown, or black, and the hind wings red, with black or blue markings.Some of these caterpillars are extremely destructive, from their polyphemushabits. Of these, Porthesia auriflua may especially bementioned. This species, in 1782, abounded to such an extent, thatfears were entertained for the preservation of fruit trees, hedges,and even growing corn and grass. So great, indeed, was the dreadLEPIDOPTERA AKCTIID^. 387of this new calamity, that prayers were ordered to be read in all thechurches to avert its effects, (W. Curtis, A short History of theBrown-Tail Moth. London, 1782. 4to.) Hypogymna dispar andPsilura monarch are occasionally exceedingly destructive in Germanyto the forests, which they completely strip of their foliage.Dr. T. W. Harris has published a memoir on the American salt-marshcaterpillar (Spilosoma aria), which is equally destructive toall kinds of herbage in certain seasons. massacres. Agricola. Repos.vol. vii. 1823.)Other larvae (especially those of Orgyia, fig. 106. 5.) are furnished'in addition to the long slender hairs all over the body, with severalshort, thick, truncated tufts of hair on the back as well as at the sides,with several other longer and more slender tufts of hairs, each hairbeing thickened at the tip. (Swammerdam has published the detailsof the history of O. antiqua, in the 33d plate of his Book of Nature.See also Bree, in Mag. Nat. Hist. No. 10.)Of these tufted larvae, the majority produce species not materiallydiffering in the sexes ; but some, forming the genus Orgyia, havefemales with the smallest rudiments of wings, and large swollenabdomens, and which are exceedingly sluggish in their habits, whilstthe males are constantly on the wing, flitting about in the hottestweather of autumn ; thence, probably termed vapourer moths {fig^106. 8. Orgyia antiqua $ ; 9. ^ ; 5. larva; 6. pupa $ ; 7. pupa $ of thisinsect).M. Rambur has figured a curious species (Trichosoma Corsican),allied to the tiger moths, having similarly spotted wings, but in whichthe wings of the females are not above one-third of the ordinary size,but with all the markings of the species. (A7i?i. Soc. Ent. de France,1832. pi. 8.) In a later number of the same work he has publishedanother species, T. Boeticum, in which the female is almost apterous(1836, pi. 19.).The family likewise comprises several other genera, anomalous asrespects their transformations. Of these, Cerura Schrank, or thepuss and kitten moths, are the first to be noticed ; these have thelarvae with only 14 feet, 6 pectoral and 8 ventral ; the anal pair beingobsolete, or rather converted into a furcate appendage at the extremityof the body, containing a pair of long slender filaments capableof being withdrawn or exserted at pleasure fig. 107. 2. Cerurafurcula; 107. i. young larva of Cerura vinula, in a state of inaction).cc 2388 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Fig. 107.Mr. Dale mag. Nat. Hist. No. 19.) makes the following singular statementrespecting some of these insects : — "I once had a specimen ofBombyx Menthrastri, and six of Ophion villae [ichneumon] hatchedfrom the pupae of Bombyx vinous, which is certainly a curious fact."An instance is also recorded in the same work, in which the larva ofCerura vinula had been observed to exhibit electrical powers.The larvae of the genus Limacodes Latr. (Apoda HaivortJi) areinteresting from the onisciform structure of their larvae, which havethe feet so short (the prologs being retractile) as to appear destituteof legs (^fig.XOn. 4. larva, 5. cocoon, 6, pupa, and 7. imago of Lima-codesTestudo ; 107.8. larva of a North American species, figuredby Abbott and Smith). A remarkable species, apparently belongingto this group, is figured by Lewin in his work on the Lepidoptera ofNew South Wales.The genera Oiketicus * and Psyche are remarkable for the habitwhich their larvffi have of constructing for themselves portable cases ofbits of grass and sticks or leaves, in which they reside, and undergotheir transformations fig. 106. lo. larva in its case ; li. pupa of thefemale ; 12. male imago ; 13. female imago ; 14. antenna J ). In thisrespect these insects represent the Phryganeidte ; indeed, Mr.Newman does not hesitate to assert, that they ought to be removedfrom the present order. The transformations of these insects areespecially interesting, and the females are entirely apterous, being inThe Rev. L. Guilding's admirable account of this genus is contained in thefifteenth volume of the Linnaean Transactions. Judging from his figures, I apprehendthe genus comprises two very distinct groups, P. Maclean appearing nearlyallied to Psyche. The female never quits her case, but receives the caresses of themale whilst still confined therein.Lepidoptera.— ARCTlIDiE. 389fact, the most imperfect of all Lepidopterous insects ; and even lessfavoured than their larvae, which they considerably resemble. Ipossess some very singular cases, formed by exotic species of thesegenera. The male larva of Psyche, previously to assuming the pupastate, fastens its case by the mouth to the surface of leaves andstems of plants ; the larva then turns, so that its head is pointedtowards the opposite aperture, out of which the pupa half pushesitself before becoming an imago : the females, on the other hand, neverleave their cases ; and from some observations made by Ochsenhei-mer and Ingpen (Stephh. Illustrtr. Haust. 2. p. 81.), it would appearthat these females produce fertile eggs without fecundation.The relation of these insects with the Mgeriie. seems confirmed bythe Sphinx ephemeraeformis, an insect which Mr. Stephens has formedinto the genus Thyridopteryx, next to Psyche. (Trans. Entomol.Soc. vol. i. p. 76.) M. Rambur has described another genus, underthe name of Heterogynis, which seems intermediate between Psycheand Penthophera, agreeing with the former in the general appearanceof the male, and the apterous inert female ; but having a nakedlarva, which makes a cocoon somewhat like that of Anthrocera.(Ann. Soc. Ent. France, 1836, pi. 17., and Fauna Tantalus. vol. ii.pi. 14.)Closely allied to these insects, and apparently also to the Orgyiae(judging from Mr. Curtis's dissections), is the genus Penthophera,the larvos of which are described by him as tuberculated, each tubercleproducing a bundle of hairs. The female of P. Moro, however,ernst. Pap. (Tear. t. iv. pi. 134. f. 179. a-d), differs only fromthe male in its more robust abdomen, simple antennae, and smallwings. The females of P. detritus and rubra have the wings, however,as large in proportion to the size of the insects as those of the males.I have seen in the collection of M. Robins, at Brussels, a most remarkableJavanese insect, apparently belonging to this family, inwhich the hind wings are extremely elongated and linear, giving theinsect the appearance of a Nemopteryx. M. Wesmael has describedit under the name of Himantopterus fuscinervis bull. Acad. Roy.Bruxelles, 1836.).The transformations of many species of this family are illustratedin the works of Reaumur, De Geer, Rose, &c. .CO 3390 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.The eighth family, Lithositd^ Stephens, is of small extent, anddifficult location, having the body slender fig. 107. 10. Lithosiaquatre), the antenna generally slender and setaceous, and occasionallypectinated or ciliated in the males ; the mouth is considerablymore developed than in many of the preceding moths (fig. 107. ii-headof Deiopeia pulchella after Savigny), the maxillse being long (withthe maxillary palpi exceedingly minute and inarticulate in Deiopeiapulchella, according to Savigny) and spiral, and the labial palpi of moderatesize and 3-jointed fig. 107. 12. labial palpi and base of themaxillary of D. pulchella), the third joint being small, and in somecases apparently soldered with the preceding ; the thorax is notcrested ; the wings comparatively of delicate structure, elongated, andwhen at rest carried horizontally, the inner margin of one of the forewings lapping over the same margin of the other. The larvae (fig.107. 9. larva of Lith. quatre) are cylindrical, often somewhat hairy,with six pectoral, eight ventral, and two anal feet ; they are solitary intheir habits, never residing either in a case or in a general tent-likeweb. In their habits the perfect insects are weak and inactive ; theyfly rarely by day, although the brilliant colours of some of the specieswould seem to indicate a contrary habit. Their flight is short andfeeble.This family is closely related to such of the aberrant Arctiidae ashave an elongated spiral tongue, such as the scarlet tiger moth,Hyperaemia Dominus ; indeed Latreille places them as genera inone and the same group without ans' sectional division ; they, however,make a very near approach to the Yponomeutidse, as is evidentfrom such insects as Eugenia cerebrum and Yponomeuta Evonymella(Latreille, Consist. General, p. 81.): hence, in some of his works,Latreille places his Tineites after this family, and preceding theNoctuidaj. Mr. Stephens considers them so closely allied to the last-namedfamily, that he unites them together to form his section Nocturnal; but this relation appears to me to be too slight to warrantsuch a step. Many very splendid exotic species appear to me toconstitute a passage between these insects and the aberrant AnthraxThe larva of the beautiful Deiopeia pulchella offers a remarkableagreement with the imago in its colours being whitish with red andblack spots ; that of Callimorpha Jacobseag, which feeds in considerablenumbers upon the ragwort, is quite different from its imago, inbeing dark golden coloured with black rings.LEPIDOPTERA NOCTUID^.Mr. Curtis introduces into this family the genus Nudaria, placedby Stephens near Psyche ; in its ample wings, however, it differs fromthe habit of this family, although its hirsute larva, and its transparentcocoon, in which the hairs of the larvae are worked, agree therewith.Reaumur (vol. i. pi. 36.) and Schiiffer {Abhatidl. vol. iii.pi. 2.) have published the history of this genus with figures, overlookedby Mr. Curtis, who has also given figures of the transformations.See also Der Nattirforscher, st. 28.The ninth family, Noctuid^ * Stephh., is one of very great extent,and tolerably well defined in its characters, having the body robust,Fig. 108.the antennae almost constantly simple fig. 108. 7. antenna of Plusia),being but very rarely pectinated or ciliated in the males ; the thoraxstout, and often crested; and the wings of moderate size, with strongnerves fig. 108. i. Plusia Gamma), and generally with peculiar eai*-BiBLIOGR. Refer. TO THE NoCTUID^.Beckwith. Hist, and Descr. of four N. Sp. Falcons, Linn. Trans, vol. ii.Paykidl, in Trans. Swed. Acad. 1786. noctua telifera.)Eversmann, in Bulletin Soc. Nat. Moscow, 1837.Ramhur, in Annales Soc. Ent. de France, torn. iii. {CucnUia.) — Ditto, torn, iii,(new Noctua.)Boisduval, in Silbermann's Rev. Entomol. vol. ii. (new Notice.)Guenee. Classification of the Noctuidce, in Annales Soc. Ent. de France, 1837.Boisduval, Duponchel, Pierre, Guenee, Donzel, Rainbow, Memoirs on various detachedspecies in ditto. •And the general works of Ochsenheimer and Treitschke, Huber, Haivorth, Esper, Fabricius,Stephens, Curtis, Sc, ^c.C C 4392 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.shaped spots on the disk of the fore wings ; the mouth is also welldeveloped, the spiral tongue or maxillae being greatly elongated (^fig-108. 2. front of head of Noctua (Striking) Pope Sav. Egypt ; 3.labrum ; 4 4. mandibles ; 5. maxilla ; 6. labium and its palpi, onedenuded). The wings in repose are ordinarily deflexed at the sidesof the body ; the labial palpi are of moderate length, terminatedsuddenly by a small or very slender joint, the preceding being verylong and compressed. The body is clothed with scales, rather thanwith a coating of a woolly nature. The abdomen is of an elongateconical form, rarely so robust as in the Bombycidae.The larvae exhibit several modifications, but in the majority theyare naked, with sixteen feet ; in some the first, and in others the firstand second, pairs of the ventral feet are wanting ; the anal feet arenever wanting. These larvae ordinarily undergo their transformationsunder ground in cocoons, often formed of particles of earthmixed in with the silk. * Mr. Stephens observes, that the typicalgroups of this family, as their name imports, fly only by night, andrepose during the day in the crevices of the bark of trees, old walls,palings, &c. ; though others not only fly by night, but also duringthe afternoon and at twilight. The position of the wings duringrepose varies much ; in some groups (as Triphaena, &c.) they areplaced horizontally, and closely applied to the body, giving the insectasomewhat cylindrical form ; in others (Catocala, &c.), they are alsoplaced horizontally, but somewhat expanded, and forming a triangle;in others (as Plusia), they are considerably deflexed, and the thoraxis greatly crested. There is also considerable diversity in the formof the wings, though in general the anterior ones are elongate-triangular,and the posterior somewhat triangular-orbiculate : some fewhave the posterior margins denticulated, and the anterior wings aremostly adorned with two stigmata, one more or less circular, theother reniform, a character rarely observed in any other family inthis order. The larvae are usually solitary, not residing in a web,neither are they subcutaneous ; but those of the genus Ceropachatwist up leaves similarly to those of the Tortricidae. (illustrationsHamtell. 2. p. 102.)The colours of these insects are ordinarily very sombre, agreeingwith their nocturnal habits ; but in some which are accustomed to flyCalophasia Linaria? (De G. t. pi. ^8. f. 1 — 6.) and the CucuUias have thetongue case of the pupae greatly elongated.LEPIDOPTERA. — NOCTUIDtE. 393more by day, we find the wings, and occasionally the hind wings,more gaily ornamented. This is the case with the Catocalse, orscarlet underwing moths ; whilst the Elusive are adorned with patchesof silver or gold. Some of the latter may occasionally be observedduring the day darting about and hovering over long-tube flowersinto which they insert their long spiral tongue.M. Dumeril (A?i?i. Sci. Nat. Sept. 1830) has published an accountof two larvae belonging to species of this family, which had beenvoided by a person in ill health ; and in the Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscow,No. 5., is a notice, by M. Gomerthall, of one of these larvae, which hadbeen observed to be luminous. In the 3Iag. Nat. Hist. 1st ser. No. 15.,is a notice, by the present Bishop of Norwich, of the occurrence of anunusual number of individuals of Noctua typicoides (Heliopolispopular St). I regret that want of space will prevent me from doingmore than referring to an interesting memoir on the habits of NonagriaTyphse, in the Entomol. Mag. vol. i. p. ^^55. (by Mr. E. Doubleday *),and in the Ann, Soc. Ent. France, torn. ii. p. sis. 451. ; to notices ofthe habits of Agrotis Begets, in ditto, ISS^, App. p. 19. ; Bryophila,ditto, 1836, App. p. 3., and 1837, p. 123. ; to Loschge's memoir onAchates piniperda, in Der Naturforscher , st. 20. ; and to Mr. Wales'smemoir on Charles grains, in Entomol. Mag. No. 18. p. 232.This family corresponds with the Linneean section Phalaena Noctua,and comprises nearly 800 European, and 400 British species, mostlyof a large or moderate size, divided by Mr. Stephens into about 80genera, often resting upon minute structural differences. In thework of Ochsenheimer, the family comprises 42 genera, most ofwhich correspond with the sections in the family proposed in theWeiner Verzeichniss (vide ante, p. 326.). The classification of thefamily is certainly a matter of great difficulty, owing to the " extremesimilarity in general appearance" of the species, and which isgreatly increased by the exotic species having been almost entirelyneglected, although it is evident, from the figures of many speciesgiven by Drury, Cramer, Abbott and Smith, &c., that the extra-europeanspecies exhibit even greater diversity of form than those ofEurope. Dr. Horsfield, we have seen tante, p. 328.), proposes todivide the family into five stirpes (one of which agrees with theThis gentleman has also published an extensive list of the species of this familycaptured by him, and which had been attracted by the sweets of an empty sugarhogshead.394 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Lithosiidse) ; but these stirpes, being established upon the larvae, areevidently more numerous than proposed by Dr. Horsfield. Latreille,after separating the exotic genus Erebus (in which the wings arealways extended and horizontal, and the last joint of the palpi longand naked, and which comprises some of the most gigantic insects inthe order), proposes to divide the remainder into two extensive andparallel series. In the first, the larvae are geometrical in their modeof progression, some of which have 16 feet, but with the 2 or 4anterior ventral feet shorter than the others, and the others have only12 feet fig' 108. 9. larva; 10. pupa of Plusia Gamma). The secondseries comprises the genera Calyptra, Xylina, CucuUia, &c., all ofwhich have 16 feet, the anterior ventral ones being of the ordinarysize, and their progression is centigrade. Chrysoptera concha(Fischer, Ent. Russ. Lepid. i. iv.) in the former series, and Erastriain the latter, appear equally to lead to the Pyralides. Catocala,Ophiusa, and Brepha, on the other hand, appear most nearly allied toErebus.One of the chief difficulties connected with the arrangement of theorder already alluded to in p. 361., is especially evident in the presentfamily. In the Springtide and Geometrical, for instance, we find thelarva state affording the best characteristics of the families ; but herethe case is quite different. Plusia is in effect as truly a good type ofthe family as Polia, Miselia, Acronycta, or Agrotis, and yet the larvaeof all these genera are strikingly distinct, some being Geometricians,others Arctiideous, and others Noctuideous, if we consider the latterto be characterised by a naked fleshy larva, without inequalities onthe surface of the body, and 16 feet. Of these, many are radicivor-vous, but they are easily distinguished from the Hepialideous larvae,although the resemblance between the latter and those of Fortuna isvery close. Some of these naked larvae are external feeders, andhave the body more coloured, and others have the eleventh segmentof the body more or less angulated above (Miselia, Phlogophora,Trachea, &c. ; fig. 108. il. larva of Maestro Persicariae ; 12. frontof the head ; 13. cellar region ; 14. mandible ; 15. labium and maxillae,with a thread issuing from the spinneret ; 16. antenna). Acrossvaries in its larvae, being strongly hairy in A. Menyanthidis,and having an elevated horn near the extremity of the body in someof the other species. That of Diphtheria Orion nearly resembles thatof an Arctia. Ophiusa has a naked larva, greatly attenuated at eachLEPIDOPTERA. Geometrical. 395end ; and Thyatira also a naked one, but furnished with a numberof conical tubercles throughout the whole length of the body. Thoseof Catocala are strongly fimbriated at the sides of the body ; inCosmetic there are only six ventral feet (fig. 108. 18. larva of A.muscular) ; whilst in Plusia (fig. 108. 9.) and Euclidiaia, which havesemi-geometrical larvae, there are only two pairs of ventral feet ; thoseof the last-named genus are quite vermiform in their appearance, andhaving the habit of twisting themselves about in all directions (fig. 108.17. larva of Euclidiaia Mi). That of Erastria has only ten feet {Hubn.Curt).M. Guenee, in his memoirs upon this family, in the sixth vol. of theAnnul. Soc. Entomol. de France, 1837, arranges the species into theeighteen following tribes : — 1. Bombycoidi ; 2. Pseudo-Bombycoidi ;3. Bryophagidi ; 4. Nonagridi ; 5. Leucanidi ; 6. Noctuelidi ; 7.Amphipyridi ; 8. Miselidi; 9. Hadenidi; 10. Orthosidi ; 11. Xylinidi;12. Heliothidi; 13. Ctenoceridi ; 14. Plusidi ; 15. Catocalidi ; 16.Ophiusidi ; 17. Noctuoidi ; 18. Noctuo-Phalaenidi ; in addition towhich he has described another tribe, Noctuo-Bombycoidi, consistingof the genera Ceropacha, Cymatophora, Tethea, and Cosmic*, thelarvae of all of which live amongst the leaves of trees, which theyfasten together with silken threads.The tenth family, GEOMEXRiDiE f Stephh., is one of nearly equalextent with the Noctuidse, from which it is distinguished by itsgeneral weakness of structure, slenderness of body, but more particularlyby the remarkable peculiarities and mode of progression ofthe caterpillars, which has supplied the name of the family fig. 109.Fig. 108. 8. represents the under side of the abdomen of a specimen of Cosmictrapetzina, in order to show the two large pencils of hairs which are at times exsertedand erected, and at other times lie close upon the body, to which allusion hasalready been made in preceding pages. (See also Knoch, Beitrage, vol. iii. pi. 5. f. 6. ;Annales Soc. Ent. France, tom. i. part. 2. ; Kirhy and Spence, vol. iv. p. 59. ; andCurtis, 635 f. A*. )-f- BiBLioGR. Refer, to the Geometric,Audouin. Obs. sur une Chenille du g. Dosithea, in Ann. Soc. Ent. France, 1834.Eversmann, in Bulletin Soc. Nat. Moscow, 1837.Ramhur, in Ann. Soc. Ent. de France, tom. i. part 3., and tom. ii. ; and the generalworks on Lepidoptera above referred to.MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Fig. 109.3. Abraxas grossulariata). The head is of moderate size; the maxillaeshort and weak, being nearly membranous ; the labial palpi small andcylindrical ; the antennae variable, being strongly bipectinated insome males fig. 109. 6. antenna of Chimera pennaria ^ ; 4. head ofOurapteryx sambucaria ^ ; 5. part of its antenna ; 7. joint of antennaof Hybernia defoliaria $ ). The wings are of large size, andvarious outlines, and are often extended horizontally (in a few speciesthey are occasionally carried vertically). The thorax is never crested.The legs are slender, the anterior tibiae being armed internally with aspur (fig. 109. 8.), and the posterior with two pairs of those appendages.The caterpillars are called loopers, or geometricians, from thepeculiar mode of their progression. They have only three pairs ofpectoral, and one (the hindmost) pair of ventral prolegs, with a pairof anal feet ; and hence, in walking, they first fix themselves firmly,by means of their anal and ventral feet ; they then extend the bodyto its greatest length, when they put down their fore feet, drawingthe hind part of the body as close after them as possible, so as tofoi'm an arch, like a pair of compasses, fixing their hind feet, andproceeding again as before. Their muscular power is very great,and hence their positions during repose are very striking. Fixingthemselves by their anal feet alone, they extend their bodies in astraight line, holding it in that position for a great length of time.This, together with their obscure colours, and the warts whichtheir body exhibits, renders it often quite difficult to distinguish themfrom twigs of the trees on which they feed (fig. 109. li. young larvaof Ourapteryx sambucaria in its stationary attitude; lO. ditto justhatched, showing them in various positions ; l. geometrical positionLEPIDOPTERA Geometric. 397of the larva of Abraxas grossulariata ; 2. pupa of ditto ; 12. the larvaof the Lilac Beauty, Pericallia sjringaria, distinguished from all theother caterpillars in the family by the recurved horns upon theeighth segment of the body). Mr. Stephens describes the larvae ofsome of the genera as possessing 12, and others 14 feet.*If we except Camps Margarita (the larva of Which has lateralappendages at the sides of the middle segments of the body, givingit the appearance of a greater number of prolegs than it really possesses),and the Crura-like larvae of Platypteryx fig. 109. 13.), thefigures given above represent the most marked variations in theappearance of the larvae of this family, except such as have 12 or14 feet, as already mentioned.These caterpillars feed upon the leaves of various trees and plants,and have the instinct, when alarmed, of dropping down from the leaves,and suspending themselves by a thread, which enables them to remountwhen the danger is past. The chrysalides are either nakedand suspended by the tail, or enclosed in a very slender cocoon, whichis rarely subterranean, and oft-times placed amongst dry leaves, &c.In the perfect state, these insects offer very little variation in theirhabits, flying sluggishly in the twilight, or when disturbed during theday, and quickly settling again amongst the foliage of woods andhedges. In their colours, they are much more beautifully ornamentedthan the Noctuidae ; and many species have a broad wavy band acrossthe fore wings, whence they have obtained the name of carpet moths :they rarely exceed a moderate size. In some species, the femalesare almost, or entirely, destitute of wings fig. 109. 9. Hiberniadefoliaria 5 ). Some of these, as the Cheimatobia brumata, areexceedingly injurious to fruit trees, devouring the tender shoots andleaves in the spring (see Kollar's work on Noxious Insects) ; WhilstPalus piniarius is occasionally exceedingly destructive in the pineforests of Germany. (Silbermann, i?e?;. £wto»jo/. No. 9.)The males of one small group (genus Lobophora Curtis) are singularlydistinguished by their hind wings being furnished with a smallmembranous lobe, giving them the appearance of possessing an extrapair of wings.M. Duponchel has described a singular Gynandromorphous individualof Angelina prunaria (in Ann. Soc. Entice France, 1835, pi.In the species figured by De Geer {{Mem., torn. i. pi. 25. f. 1 — 7.), the larva hagthree pairs of ventral feet, the first and second of which are very minute.Ses MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.1 . f. 5.). In addition to the numerous memoirs upon various speciesof this family contained in the general works of Reaumur, Sepp,Admiral, Harris, De Geer, Lyonnet, &c., reference must also bemade to M. Audouin's Memoir on Dosithea scutularia above referredto, and to a memoir by Ver Hell, on the anomalous structure of thehind pair of legs in this species, contained in the Tijdschrift poorNatuurlijke Geschiedenis, Use feel. Sde stuck.Of the relations of these insects but little can be said. The largerspecies, with feathered male antennae, as Latreille long ago remarked,exhibit so strong a relation to some of the Bombycidae, that it wouldbe rash, looking at the imagines alone, to assert that the i-elation wasnot one of affinity. On the other hand, we have seen them nearlyrelated to the Noctuidge. Mr. Curtis proposes to divide these insectsinto two families, characterised by the structure of the male antennae ;but such a step would unnaturally break many strong relations, aspointed out by Mr. Stephens. (^Illustr. iii. p. 143.) Platypteryx* {Jig-109. 14. PI. falcataria) constitutes a most anomalous group, which,in the imago state, seems to be one of the types of form of thisfamily ; but its larvae {Jig- 109. 13. larva of PI. lacerta) are altogetherdistinct, and more nearly resemble those of Cerura ; but this relationis so slight, that Latreille has evidently confounded a relation ofanalogy with one of affinity in uniting them into one tribe, Apostropheeleventh family, Pyramids, is one of moderate extent, andthe species are of a small size, having the body slender and elongated; the antennae simple, or but slightly ciliated in the males ; thelabrum and mandibles small fig. Woe 6. these parts in Crassus(Lydia) Cannarum Sav. Egypt) ; the labial palpi fig. 11 0.8. labiumof the same) often greatly elongated and porrected, but occasionallyrecurved, with the maxillary ones occasionally developed fig. 110. 3.m. p. ; Jig. 110. 4 ; — 5. and 7. head and maxillas of Cr. Cannarum) ; themaxillae themselves are generally of moderate length (^^.110.7.),although in Hydrocampa very small, and in Aglossa nearly obsolete ;the head fig. 110. 3. head of Botys (Ismene) persia Sav. Egypt.sideways ; 4. maxilla, labium, and labial palpi of the same) is occa-See I.aspeyres, Versclil. zu g. Platypteryx, 4to. Berlin, 1803; and in DcrGesellsch. Nature, Freund zu Berlin, n. Schrift, 4 vol. ; and Lyonnet's Posthh.Recherch .Lepidoptera. Pyramids.Fig. 110.signally furnished with a pair of ocelli ; the thorax is of moderatesize, never crested ; the wings are also of moderate size, and generallyplaced in a triangle during repose (whence Latreille's name ofDeltoides given to the section composed of the typical groupJig. 110.1. Hyaena proboscidalis) ; the anterior wings are generallyslightly angulated at the tip; the legs are ordinarily very long, especiallythe fore pair, of which the coxa? are nearly as long as the tibiae (as inHydrocampa Potamogata, Jig. 110. 9.), thus indicating the greatactivity of movement which these insects so frequently exhibit. Insome species the fore legs of the males are singularly ornamentedwith fascicles of hairs capable of expansion, whence the species havereceived the name of fan-footed moths * ; the anterior tarsi of the malesof some of the species of Pyralis are obsolete. There is a considerablediversity, however not only in the perfect insects, of which thisfamily is composed, but also in the preparatory states ; in general,the caterpillars are long and slightly hairy fig. 110. 2. ; larva of Hyaenaproboscidalis). They vary in the number of legs, having mostlyonly three, but sometimes four pairs of ventral feet (^^.110. ii.larva of Hydrocampa lemnalis). They are never geometrical in theirmotion, nor radicivorous in their habits, nor are their bodies denselyclothed with hairs ; in all which respects they vary from the precedingand following groups ; but it is to be admitted, that the limits ofthe family are not clearly defined ; for instance, Latreille confines itto his genus Herminia, composed of the strongly rostrated species(Crassus barbarous, rostratus, &c.), whilst Stephens considerablyincreases its extent, and adds to it the genera Nola, Simaethis, andsome other anomalous genera, forming Latreille's first section ofAs also in the Indian typical Hyblajae Fair. See Esper, Monogr. on this g.in Der Naturforscher, st. 29. .400 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Tineites in the Regne Animal. The family is here made to compriseLinneeus's 12 or 14 last species of Geometry, and the whole of hisPyralides, which he characterised ** alis conventions in figuradeltoideam forcipatam." (Si/st. Nat. vol. ii. p. 809.)Of these species those which compose the genus Hyaena and itsallies are the largest in the family, and have the labial palpi greatlyelongated ; the species are found in hedges, and amongst low herbage,and the larvae are well distinguished by having only three pairs of ventralfeet ; the chrysalis is enclosed in a slight cocoon in a leaf rolled upby the larva. (Lyonnet has figured the transformations of several of thespecies P. pinguinalis Linn., &c.) The species of Aglossa, on theother hand, are domestic insects, being found in houses, their larvaefeeding upon butter, grease, and other similar substances * ; whilstthat of Pyralis farinalis Linn, feeds upon meal, flour, &c. The speciesof Pyrausta Schr., Pyr. purpuralis Linn., &c., are gaily colouredinsects, which frequent hedges, and revel in the sunshine, hoveringover grassy spots, but immediately settling as soon as the sun is overclouded; whilst those of Hydrocampa and its allies frequent aquaticplants, upon which the larvae feed, inhabiting moveable cases, formedof portions of the plants ; the sides of the body of the larvae in somespecies which reside beneath the surface of the water being furnishedwith elongated filaments (as in some of the Phryganeidee), employed inextracting the oxygen from the water. (See De Geer, tom. i. pi. 37.;and the Physiological Researches of Dutrochet read before the Academicdes Sciences upon the subject of these aquatic larvae.) Reaumur(tom. ii. pi. 32.) and Lyonnet have described the transformations ofother species, the larvae of which appear to be destitute of these appendages.I possess some very singular exotic species belonging to thisfamily from North America, one of which has the antennae of themales elbowed and thickened in the middle (Desmia macula;West., in Guer. Mag. Zool. pi. 2.). Another species, apparentlyallied to Hydrocampa, with the labial palpi of the males as long asthe body, the basal joint porrected, and the two others thrown overthe back, has been figured by Poey ( Cent. Lepid. Ctiha, pi. 8.) underthe name of Mastigophorus Parma ; the same author has also figuredthe transformations of Pyralis hyalinata Linn., a species remarkableLiniiffius adds, " In ventricle humano larva persia expelled infuse lichenscumatilis." (Faun. Stiec. p. 351.) Other instances of larvae inhabiting, accidentally,the human intestines, have been already noticed in this work.LEPIDOPTERA. TORTUICID.^i:, 401for its tasselled tail, in the same work (pi. 19.) ; the larva has 16 feet,and the pupa is enclosed in a very loose cocoon. This species isthe type of Guilding's manuscript genus Phakellura. The genusNola appears nearly allied to the Tortricidae, not only in the elevatedpatches of scales in the wings i^fig- 110. il. N. cucullatella), but alsoin the habit of its cocoon fig. 110. 13.) ; its larva fig. 110. 12, 13.)is naked and depressed, pilose, and furnished with 14 feet. Odontiadental has a smooth larva, slightly tapering at both extremities,with 6 pectoral, 8 abdominal, and 2 anal feet, and which forms aclose cocoon amongst leaves, obtuse at one end, and pointed at theother chub ner ; Curtis, 563.). Simaethis is another genus, which inits form seems also allied to the Tortricidae, but its transformationsare not known ; they fly during the day, even at noon, and settle onleaves exposed to the sun, their motions being very curious ; several,which I have watched, moving sideways, and in a circular direction ;and when they had completed the circle, they returned in the oppositedirection, so as to complete the circle the contrary way. Kirby andSpence notice a similar motion in their Introduction, vol. ii. p. 369.The twelfth family, ToRTRicrD^*, or the section Tortures ofLatreille, Platyomides of Duponchel, or Pyralides of other Frenchwriters, is a group of considerable extent, composed of minute, generallydull-coloured moths, distinguished by their broad entire fore wings,which form a triangle with the body when at rest, slightly deflexed atthe sides, and dilated towards the shoulders fig. 111. 8. wing ofCarpocapsa Pomonella). The maxillary palpi are never prominent,although possessed by many species, but being in them very minute ;the labial palpi, on the other hand, are broad and very compressed,BiBLiOGR. Refer, to the Tortricid^.Froehlich. Enumer. Tortricum Wurtembergia. 8vo. Tubing. 1828.Fischer Eider von Ruslerstam. Abbild., &c., der Mikrolepidopterologie. 4to.Leipzig, 1833 ; in parts.Duponchel. Dives. de la Tribii des Platyomides, in Annal. Soc. Ent. de France,1834.And the general works of Linnceus, Fubricius, Stephens, Hmvorth, Wood, Curtis,Donovan, Treitsch/te, Huhner, Sc.VOL. ir. D DMODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Fis. 111.especially the middle joint, which is curved above, the last jointbeing short, and often more distinct and exposed: they are neverrecurved, but generally form a short beak in front of the head fig.111. 16. head of Cochylis rupicola Curtis ; 17. labial palpus of thesame) ; the spiral tongue is short in the majority. The body isslender ; the thorax rarely crested ; the antennae simple, or slightlyciliated in a few species fig. 111. 5. part of antenna of Hylophilaquercana ; 18. ditto of Cochylis rupicola). The fore legs, in the majority,have a central tibial spur fig. 111. 13.), the intermediatetibiae one pair of terminal spurs fig. 111. 14.), and the hind tibiae apair at the middle, and another at the tip fig. 111. 15.). The wingsin some species (Prone, Sarrothripus, &c.) are ornamented withsmall tufts of scales ; and those of the genus Peas of Treitschke aredeeply notched in the fore margin. The larvae are naked fleshygrubs, with 6 pectoral, 8 ventral, and 2 anal feet, which, for themost part, take up their abode in a leaf, curled up by the insect itself,and fastened with silken threads, forming a cylindrical tube, open ateach end, which thus serves them for abode and food (De Geer, Mem.tom. i. pi. 27. ; and Reaumur) ; others frequent the young buds andshoots of various plants, fastening several of the leaves together sofirmly as to impede its growth. Others, again, reside within thepulpy substance of various fruits, especially the apple and plum, towhich they are occasionally very detrimental.This family offers a striking instance, proving that the largest andmost conspicuous insects in a group are not to be considered asnecessarily constituting its pre-eminent types. Here we find theTortrix prasinana Zmw. (^^. 111. i. — Hylophila pr. Zfi.) to be thelargest species ; but, if we examine its characters (in any of itsLEPIDOPTERA. TORTRICIDiE. 403States), we find it remarkably aberrant from the great majority ofthe family. The head (yfig. 111.6.) is seen to be furnished with anelongated spiral tongue; the labial palpi are slender (^^7. 111.7.);the caterpillars are naked, and more slender at the tail, — hence namedby Reaumur "chenilles en forme de poisson " (^^.111.2.); thecocoon (fig. 111. 3.) is in the shape of a boat turned upside down,-attached to a leaf; and the chrysalis is not furnished with abdominalrows of spines. Several allied species correspond in these habits.My figure 111. 9 — 15. represents the history and details of a prettyspecies (Argyrotoza Bergmanniana), which commits great havoc inour gardens, by eating the young buds and leaves of the roses ; thecaterpillar i^fig- 111. 10.) feeding within the bud, from which, whendisturbed, it lets itself down by a thread : others tie several of theyoung leaves together, consuming the inner layers, and changing topupae without forming any cocoon ; the chrysalis, when ready toassume the perfect state, pushing itself half out of the end of theperfect leaf (as ^t Jig. 111. 11.), by the assistance of the transverseseries of short recurved spines, two rows of which are placed uponeach segment of the abdomen (7?^. 1 11. 12. pupa magnified; 9, theimago ; and 13, 14, 15. its tibiae above described. Westwood, in Gard.Mag. No. 90. Sept. 1837.)Another insect of the same family, Carpocapsa Pomonella, thecodling moth, is one of the most destructive enemies to the applecrops in this country, laying its eggs in the eyes of the newly-formedfruit, within which the larva feeds, its presence being only indicatedby the premature falling of the fruit. I have detailed the history ofthis insect in my series of articles on the insects most injurious tocultivators in Loudon's Gard. Mag. May, 1838, No. 98. In the samework (No. 94. January, 1838), I also published the history of Ditulaangustiorana, the larva of which does great damage to our apricottrees in the early spring, by tying the young shoots together withthreads so firmly, that their growth is stopped, and by devouring theyoung blossom-buds.Another species, Tortrix viridana, feeds upon the oak, which, incertainyears, it totally strips of its foliage, its numbers being sogreat, that when the branches of that tree are sharply beaten, acomplete shower of these moths is dislodged Other species, asCarpocapsa Woeberana, live upon the wood, or beneath the bark ofplum trees ; whilst some, as Orthotaenia Turionella, and Resinella,DD 2404< MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.feed on the young shoots of the Scotch fir, which they perforate.(De Geer, JSIem. torn. i. pi. 33.) One of the most destructive insectsin the family is the Tortrix vitana Boscc (Pillerana Fab), a specieswhich, in the larva state, attacks the leaves of the vines in France,rolling them up and fastening them together with threads. Its historyhas lately attracted considerable attention, having been investigated,with a view to its destruction, by Messrs. Audouin (Annal. Scienc.Nat, 1838, two memoirs), Guerin (in Diction. Pittoresq. d' Hist. Nat.art. Pyralis), Walckenaer (in Annal. Soc. Ent. de France, mem. Ins.nuisibles a la vigne and others.M. Duponchel has published a distribution of these insects (abovereferred to), in which he divides them into nine groups, according tothe habits of the larvae, and the mode in which they attack plants.As, however, out of 300 European species, not more than one-sixthhave been observed in the larva states, it is most probable that thisarrangement will require modification when the others have beenequally investigated.The thirteenth family, Yponomeutid;e *, comprises an extensivecollection of minute moths, distinguished from the Tortricidse byBiBLioGR. Refer, to the Yponomeutid^ and Tineid^.Reaumm: Hist, des Reigns, ou des insectes qui consent les haines, in Mem. Acad.Paris, 1728.Goeze, in Der Naturforscher, st. 4, 5. and 14. (on Mining Caterpillars).Sicken Sommer. Die Linneischen Tineen in Getting. in Germar's Mag. d. Ent.vol. ii. pt. 3. and 4. (on Chilo and Galleria.) — Ditto (with Charpentier), DieZiinsler, Tickler, Shaken, und Geitschen des Wien. Verzeichn. 8vo. Brunswick,1821.Hummelljin Essais Entomol. No. 3. on Tinea bisselliella (La Teigne des Meubles).Sadoffsky. Lepid. Micrometer. Sp, Nov. in Bull. Soc. Mosc, 1829.Esper, in Der Naturforscher, st. 25. (Ein. kl. prachtigste Schmett. )Boscc, in Trans. Linn. Soc. vol. i. on two Tineaee.Laspeyres. On Tinea socially and colonel, &c., in Berlin Mag. 2., 1808.Dahlbom, in Swedish Trans., 1835. Ypsolophus Falleniellus and YponomeutaPatella.Bernatoiuitz. Memoire sur la Chenille qui fait des ouates, Bibl. Univ. Geneve.Feb. 1825.Penning. Ueber Tinea Use. Constans, 1811, 1 pi. 8vo.Boyer de Fonscolomhe. On Tinea oleella and olivella, in Ann. Soc. France, torn. vi.LEPIDOPTERA. YPONOMEUTID^.Fig. 112.having the labial palpi long and slender ; and from the Tineidae, inhaving the maxillary palpi Rarely, and then but slightly, developed *(./%• 112. 1. Yponomeuta patella). The body is ordinarily slenderand elongated, but rather depressed, in a few groups most nearlyallied to the Tortricidae ; the head (fig. 112. 2. head of Yponomeuta;8. head of CEcophora ; 9. head of Metallosetia spissicornis) is small,and occasionally clothed with long scales in front ; the antennae long,slender, and generally simple in both sexes ; the thorax is rarelycrested ; the wings are entire (fig. 113. 9. fore wing of Necessaria),and often long, narrow, and more or less convoluted, the posteriorhaving very long ciliae ; the legs are of moderate length, andspurred as in the majority of moths ; the anterior tibiae having one(fig. 112.3.), the intermediate two (Jig. ll. 4.), and the posteriorfour spurs ( /?5'. 112. 5.) ; the palpi are generall' long and slender,and mostly recurved, but drooping in a few species, with the terminaljoint distinct from the preceding, and not so thickly clothed withDuponchel. On Tinea decuriella, in Ann. Soc. Ent. de France, No. 3. — Ditto, inditto, 1838. General revision of the Tineidje.Discarding. On Plutella Xylostella, in ditto, vol. vi.Fauna del Regno Napoli ( Monograph on QScophora).Curtis. On Cecidoses, in Trans. Zool. Soc. vol. i. pi. 40.Bohemann, in Swed. Transact., 1837 (Tinea Linneella).Fischer von Roslerstam. Abbild. zur Bright. der Mikrolepidopterologie.And the general works above referred to." Les Yponomeiites, une ou deux excepted, les fficopliores et Ics Adeles, sontpresque les seules Tineites, dont les pales supcrieures ou maxillary ne soient pasbien apparents." (Latreille, Regne An. torn. v. p. 417.)DD 3406 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.scales. Mr. Stephens, to whom we are indebted for the establishmentof this family, observes, that there is considerable diversityof habit amongst these insects, some of them residing in the larvastate on flowers, upon which they subsist : others are found withinthe surfaces of leaves, devouring only the parenchyma ; some formextensive webs, and live in society ; others are solitary. Amongst thesubcutaneous species are some of the most brilliant of the Lepidoptera,their wings being ornamented with highly polished metallicscales, and some of them being extremely varied in the number oftheir tints; others, again, are very plain; the former set havegenerally drooping palpi ; the latter ascending recurved ones. (Illust.HmistelL vol. iv. p. 196.)The typical insects of this family forming Latreille's genus Ypo-momenta, are amongst the largest in the family, having the fore wingslong, and convoluted when at rest, and the posterior large, and withmoderate ciliae. They are generally of white or slate colours withblack spots, whence their names of small ermine moths ; the larvaei^fig' 112. 6.) reside in large societies under a common web on variousfruit trees, and especially on whitethorn hedges, which are sometimesentirely desolated by them. I have also seen the apple trees,along the sides of the roads in France, equally deprived of their leavesby these insects, and festoons of their webs suspended from the tree,and clothing the surface of the ground beneath the trees. Theselarvae are of a slate colour with black dots, and let themselves downto the ground when alarmed. They have six pectoral, eight ventral,and two anal feet. They form their cocoons in company together,in the midst of their webs (Westwood, in Gard. Mag. Oct. 1837 ; andDahlbom, in Swed. Trans. 1835). Mr. Lewis (trans. Ent. Soc. vol, i.p. 22.) has published an account of the habits of this insect, in order toaccount for the sudden appearance of the " blight," as the young broodof larvae are termed. M. Habenstreit of Munich, by compelling thesecaterpillars to spin their webs on paper, has been enabled to obtain asufficient quantity of silk to manufacture into various articles. literaryGazette, Nov. 1826.) M. Lenormand also presented a memoir on thissubject to the "^ Academic," which was reported on by Latreille andBoscc, on 27th Nov. 1826. Other species, referred to this genus bymost authors, are solitary in the larva state.The species of the genus Necessaria Haw. are distinguished, asthe name implies, by their flat broad body and horizontally carriedLEPIDOPTERA. YPONOMEUTIDiE. 407wings, but their palpi are recurved ; they feed in the larva state onumbelliferous, and pass the pupa state in the stalks of these plants.De Geer's figures (torn. i. pi. 29. f. 1 — 8.) represent the transformationsof one of these insects. The figures 9 — 18., on the sameplate, apparently represent the transformations of a singular species,Lophonotus fasciculellus Stej)/i., which has the inner margin of thefore wings adorned with several bundles of prominent scales. Thisinsect has very narrow, deeply-fringed wings, as has also the speciesof the genus Anabasis, one of which, separated by Curtis, underthe generic name of Tavern (Ph. Tinea sarcitella Linn), is extremelyinjurious in houses, the caterpillar feeding upon woollenarticles and clothing, of which it forms for itself a moveable case,and within which it changes to a chrysalis.The elegant species of CTlcophora fig. 112. 7. CEc. sulphuret (^)fly during the day, frequenting gardens and hedges : I have rearedthe species figured from larvae found under the bark of felled fruittrees. Adela also comprises day-flying species, known under thename of Japan moths, or long-horns ; the former name alluding totheir polished metallic wings, and the latter to the great lengthof the antennae. They frequent woods, and fly in troops, like gnats,over the bushes in the sunshine fig. 112. lo. Adela De Guerilla ^).The transformations of this interesting genus have been observedby Lyonnet recherches, pi. 19.) ; the larva of A. De Guerillafig. 112.12.) inhabiting a flattened case, formed of bits of leaves{Jig- 112.11.); and its pupa being very remarkable, in having thegreatly elongated antennae coiled up in a roll at the extremity of theabdomen fig. 112. 13.).The larvae of several other of the genera inhabit cases formed ofvarious materials, which they bear about with them. One of the mostsingular of these cases is that figured by Reaumur {{Mem. 3. pi. 26. f. 6.;and ray Jig. 1 12. 21.), which has been referred to Tinea palliotella. Ihave succeeded in rearing the perfect insect, which has the fore wingsentirely white (Porrectaria ■ ?). Another curious case has beencommunicated to me by the Senator Van Heyden fig. 112. 22.), whoreared Tinea Vibicipenella Tr. from them, as well as numerous specimensof my parasitic genus Erasmus. (See also Kuhn, in Der NaturJor~cher, st. 7. tab. 3. ; st. 9.; and Scheven, in ditt;p, st. 11.) Some ofthese case-making species, as the Cochleophasia tessellea, have apterous,or nearly apterous females, which is also the case in Dasystoma,D D 4408 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Chimophila, and Diurnal. The caterpillars of the last-named genusare described by Dart as flat, furnished with two rows of verrucosadots, each terminated by a little hair, armed with a corneous shieldon the back, with the third pair of pectoral feet in form of a battle-door,living and metamorphosing between the leaves ; in walkingthey spread their pallet-shaped feet very much, and, when disturbed,make a noise with them, which faintly resembles the rollingof a drum, according to Treitschke, as quoted by Curtis.But the most beautiful species in the family are those minutemoths with metallic spotted wings, the majority of which, in the larvastate, are leaf-miners ; such are the genera Micrometer, Glyphy-pteryx, Pancake, and Argyromyges. My Jigs. 112. 16. representsa portion of a rose leaf mined by Micrometer ruficapitella*, the larvaof which is extremely interesting, offering, as far as I can perceive,no rudiments of legs, except fleshy angular projections of the skinof very small size ; and the head is capable of being almost entirelywithdrawn into the prothorax. De Geer has given the history ofthis insect (Mem. pi. 31. f. 13—21. and SO. fig. 20.), and has representedthe fleshy leg-like tubercles (as in Jiff. 112. 17.) of a muchlarger size than I saw them, and eighteen in number, placed onconsecutive segments. My figure 112. 18. and 19. represents theupper and under side of the larva, and 20. the pupa of ArgyromygesCinderella, which I have reared from mined oak leaves : here the larvahas three pairs of membranous ventral feet. De Geer has figured thehistory of this and another allied species in his Memoires, tom. i. pi. 30.and 31. (See also Swammerdam, Book of Nature, pl.44'. f. 18 — 21.) Mr.Curtis has figured the history of Arg. autumnal, the larva of whichappears to have been naked, and the cocoon ingeniously suspended bythreads from each end like a hammock (Brit. Ent. pi. 284.). Thereis an interesting memoir upon a species with similar habits in theTrans. Soc. Geneva, 1837. The history of a minute, but highly interestingspecies, with white wings, varied with brown spots, is givenby De Geer, tom. i. p. 468. pi. 32. f. 1 — , the cocoon of which is long,removal, and ribbed; the construction of which, by crossing the threadsin a remarkable manner, has formed the last subject of De Geer's fourteenthMemoire, as well as of one byLyonnet (Recherches, pl.l9.).'|- DeLewis (in Entomol. Mag. vol. i. p. 423.) has published a memoir on thisspecies.f Lyonnet has also published the details of the history of some other species withsomewhat similar cocoons. (Recherches, pi. S3.)LEPIDOPTERA.TINEID^.Haati gives this as Tinea sequel, but a specimen of the cocoon,which I found near Berlin, was named for me by the Senator VanHeyden, Tinea rhamnifoliella.The fourteenth family, TiNEiDiE, comprises an extensive series ofminute Lepidopterous insects, distinguished from the Tortricidae bytheir narrower wings, as well as by the slenderness of their palpi ;Whilst the great development of the maxillary palpi, and the rareoccurrence of recurved labial palpi, separates them (but by no meanssatisfactorily) from the Yponomeutidse. The body is generally longand slender ( y%. 113. 5. Tinea tapetzella) ; the head often denselyFig. 113.clothed with scales in front (fig. 113. 6. head of Tinea arabella ; 3.head of Galleria cereana) ; the antennae of moderate length, slender,and generally simple in both sexes, or pubescent beneath in the males ;the spiral tongue, cr maxillse, is short fig. 113. 4. maxillsee and labiumof Galleria cereana Savigny) ; but the maxillary palpi are well developed,although occasionally short, yet forming a pair of scaly projections,distinct from the labial palpi ; in some, however, they are extraordinarilyelongated, as shown in the dissections of various genera,published by Mr. Curtis fig. 113. 7. maxilla of Tinea arabella), andcomposed of five or six joints ; in the majority, however, they areshorter, thickened at the tips, and 3-jointed ; the thorax is rarelycrested ; the legs spurred in the ordinary manner ; the wings are entire,often very narrow, and mostly convoluted in repose ; the posteriorare of moderate size, and are much folded when at rest.In their preparatory states, these insects are variable in their4:10 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.habits* ; but their larvae are generally naked or slightly hairy ; manyresiding in portable cases formed of various materials, in which theyundergo their transformations, whilst others feed upon vegetable substances; some residing within the stalks of plants, and others upontheir leaves ; a few being subcutaneous.In their perfect state, they are mostly of a larger size than the minutegilt species, belonging to the preceding family ; and in their colouringthey rarely exhibit any of that brilliancy of gold and silverwith which so many of the latter are ornamented ; their usual tintsbeing, as Mr. Stephens observes, of a rather sombre hue, in whichochre, white, or buff colour, with longitudinal marks or streaks, invaried irregular characters, are conspicuous ; the posterior wingsbeing generally plainer. We know nothing of the exotic species ofthis and the preceding families, nor of their transformations. Ourarrangements must therefore as yet be considered as unsettled.The typical species of this family compose the genus Tinea, whosehistory is so well sketched by Pliny in these words : " Est item Tineaquaedam pendulum, vel tunica, tunica sum seisin attrahens, utcochleae testa ; qua spoliata statim expired : si vero nimium excrementtunica, in chrysalis habit, ex qua Phalaena quaedam exigua(Jiff. 113. 5. Tinea tapetzella) stato tempore trumpet" (^Motiffet,p. 274-.) ; and which have afforded the beautiful image of a " mothfretting a garment," so often alluded to in holy writ. It is, of course,in the larva state that these insects are so destructive to woollen materialsof every description, feathers, furs, skins, and objects of naturalhistory, upon which they feed ; using the material also for the constructionof their moveable cases ; in which, when full grown, theychange to chrysalides, which protrude themselves out of the upperextremity of the case, head foremost ; the larva having had the instinctto turn in its case previous to duration. These larvae have six pectoral,eight ventral, and two anal feet. There are fifteen Britishspecies of this genus, including some (T. arabella, or the wolf, Philos.Transact. 1694', and Trans. Philadelph. Soc. vol. i. 1789) which commitgreat havoc in granaries and in malt-houses, feeding upon thegrains and fastening it together with silken threads.The species included in the genus Galleria Far. inhabit the nests]\I. Duponchel lias divided these insects into sixteen classes, according to thevariations in the habits of their preparatory states. I regret that I can only refer tohis interesting memoir (Annul. Soc. Ent. de France, 1838, y}. 127.).LEPIDOPTERA TINEID^. 41 1of bees, the larva feeding upon honey, and forming galleries inthe honeycomb. Two species, G. algeria Fahr. and G. cereana(Jiff. 113. 1. S) Linn. (meWoneWsi Linn), reside in the commonhive, and occasionally in such vast numbers as completely to destroyit, enveloping the comb and many of the bees in the webs spun bythe larvae (^Jig.WS. 2., larva of Galleria cereana). The species ofScythia also feed upon the honey collected by Bombs, and occasionallyin numerous colonies, whence the specific names Socially and colonel,applied by Linnaeus to the sexes of the typical species ; Ihave described a singular nest, or rather mass of the cocoons of thisinsect, communicated to me by Mr. Loudon, in the Mag. Nat. Hist.vol. ix. p. 528.The species of Crassus (Jig. 112. 14. Crassus pinetorum) areextremely numerous, and are distinguished by their porrected palpi(Jig. 112. 15. head of Cr. marg ari tellus) ; their wings are much convolutedwhen at rest, whence their name of " Close-wings," andthey generally abound in grassy places, settling upon the stalks headdownwards. Chilo is allied to these insects, but the palpi are muchlonger, and the larvae live in the stems of reeds (being naked, withthe head and prothorax horny and polished, with six pectoral, eightventral, and two anal feet) ; the moths being found in boggy andmarshy places.The Rev. L. Guilding described an insect belonging to this familyunder the name of Diatraea Saccharine (in a memoir published inthe Trans. Soc. Arts, vol. xlvi. p. 143., for which he received thegold Ceres medal), being by far the most destructive enemy of thecane, which is never exempt from this dreaded pest, which occasionally,in some of the West-indian Islands, destroys whole acres, thelarva burrowing into the centre of the stems. This insect is, however,evidently identical with the Phalaena bacchanals Fahr. (sent. Syst.vol. iii. part 2. p. 238.), which is described thus : — " habitat in AmericasMeridional saccharo, cujus causes perforate, distrust, exsiccat,plantation pestis''Harpipteryx, as the name implies, comprises species having hook-tippedwings ; the larva of H. estella feeds upon the honeysuckle,and is described as fusiform, smooth green, with a purple dorsal line,and the chrysalis is enclosed in a fusiform cocoons open at each end.The cocoon of another species, observed by myself at Hammersmith,is composed of beautiful open lacework, permitting the pupa enclosed412 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.to be seen. De Geer figures the history of this or a closely alliedspecies (Memoires, torn. i. pi. 26.).The species of Euplocamus are the largest in the family, theirlarvae agreeing in structure with those of Chilo ; but the antennaeof the males are more or less strongly fasciculated, especially in thereputed British species Eupl. Anthracinellus; the typical species ofIncurvated Haw. (I. masculella) has also the antennae of the malesstrongly pectinated. The species of Gracillaria Hmo. are distinguishedby the length of the antennae, narrowness of the wings, andgreat breadth of the ciliae of the hind wings. The moths sit in avery peculiar manner, with the head greatly elevated, the hind pairof legs concealed, and the two anterior pairs extended nearly atright angles from the body, the fore leg on each side being hiddenby the middle leg, which is densely clothed with scales ; the larva(fig. 113. 8.) of G. anastomosis Hav. (syringella i^air. ?) feeds uponthe leaves of the common lilac, which it at first mines, and whengrown sufficiently strong, it rolls up the ends of the leaves into a coil,in which it resides. It is very common, and has afforded me themeans of studying its history as well as that of its Ichneumonideousparasites. The late E. W. Lewis also investigated the history of thisspecies, and observed, that Pimpla stercorator punctures the roll ofthe leaf in order to dislodge the caterpillars on which it feeds. (mag.Nat. Hist. vol. vi. p. 414.)It is in this family that I would, provisionally, place the generaLampronia and Eriocephala, distinguished by their metallic colouring,the latter of which, in the great length of its maxillary, and theminuteness of its labial palpi, noticed by Mr. Haliday, as well as inthe nervures of its wings fig. 113. lo), offers so great an exceptionto the remainder of the order, and approximates so closelyto some of the Trichoptera. (See ante, p. 324. note.) It is to beregretted, that the transformations of this and other equally anomalousgroups have not been observed with sufficient precision. Delta{Ent.Mag. vol. i. p. 389.), however, describes the larva of Lamproniacastella as somewhat resembling that of Cossus ligniperda^ and asburrowing into the young shoots of the currant.It is in this order, without hesitation, and provisionally also in thisfamily, that I include the genus Acentropus, which Mr. Curtisregards as Trichopterous, and which Mr. Stephens at first placedamongst the Neuroptera, and subsequently amongst the Trichoptera.LEPIDOPTERA. ALUCITID^. 413I have already (p. 324.) stated the grounds for my opinion as to itslocation amongst the Lepidoptera. My Jig. 1 13. il represents Acen-tropes Garnonsii; 12. the head and prothorax seen sideways, showingthe tippet ; 13. the palpi, having a minute lateral pair of appendages,which I regard as the other pair of palpi ; 14. the front of the head,distinctly exhibiting a pair of maxillae ; 15. the base of the hind wing,showing the spring or bridle ; 16. scales of the apex of the wing ;and 17. scales of the disk of the wing.Mr. Curtis has described a Lepidopterous insect, supposed by himto belong to this family, under the name of Cecidoses Remittrans. Zool. Soc. vol. i. pi. 40.), the pupa of which inhabits a gallfound on a Brazilian shrub. Reaumur has also described a similar galland insect from Cyprus {{Mem. tom. iii. pi. 39. f. 1 — 4.), but Mr, MacLay assures me that the supposed galls are in fact the cocoonsformed by these insects.The fifteenth and last family, ALUCixiDiE, or the Fissipennes ofLatreille, is nearly allied to the preceding family, both in respect tothe elongated form of the body and narrowness of the wings ; but thelatter, except in one genus, are singularly cleft into narrow featheredrays fig. 113. 18. Pterophorus pentadactylus) ; the fore wings havingtwo, three, four, or six, and the posterior wings three or six of suchrays, which are beautifully feathered on each edge ; they are carriedhorizontally in repose ; the antennae are long, slender, and setaceous ;the labial palpi vary considerably in length, being somewhat recurvedin Alicia, and still less so, as well as much shorter, in Pterophorus.The spiral maxillae are long, and the maxillary palpi are not evident ;in which respects these insects approach the Yponomeutidae {fig- 113.19. head of Pterophorus). The legs are long and slender ; the foretibiae with one, the intermediate with two apical, and the posteriorwith two apical and two sub central spurs.These insects are of small size ; they vary in the time of theirflight; the Pterophori, being crepuscular, flying over low plants;whilst Alicia frequents our gardens, and enters outhouses, sitting withits beautiful fan-like wings. The larvae somewhat resemble those ofthe Arctiidae, being clothed, although sparingly, with rather longhairs, with sixteen feet ; they are very inactive fig. 113. 20. larva ofPteroph. pentadactylus) ; the pupae are variable, being either naked,414) MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.and enclosed in a transparent silken cocoon, or elongate-ovate, conical,hairy, and suspended perpendicularly by a thread, or affixed by hooksat the posterior extremity of the body to a layer of silk on leaves.The rays of the wings are composed of the nerves, without, any of theintervening membrane, which seems to be transformed into the fringe.In repose, the Pterophori have the habit of folding their wings so asto appear to consist of only a single broad ray. Reaumur has representedthe details and transformations of several of the species in hisMemoires, tom. i. pi. 19, 20., as has also De Geer Mem, torn. ii. pi. 4.f. 1 — 11. Admiral and Harris have also figured the transformationsof Pteroph. pentadactylus.The genus Agdistes Hiibner differs from the rest in having thewines entire.Order Hemiptera* MacLeay.(Omoptera Leach ; Hemiptera p. Lifin. ; Rhyngota p. i^air/c.)Char. Wings four, entirely membranous and deflexed ; the anteriorlarger than the posterior, and not lapping over each other in repose.Body convex.Antennae generally very short and setigerous.Tarsi not more than 3-jointed.Mouth arising from the under and hinder surface of the head,promuscidate, the mandibles and maxilla being setaceous and enclosedin the labium, which forms an articulated canal. (See Vol. I.p. 9.)Pupa active, semi complete (metamorphosis semi complete JFabr.).BxBLioGR. Refer, to the Homoptera.Fahricius. Systema Rhyngotorum.Fallen. Monographiaia Cicadariarum Suevi*. 8vo. Holm. 1805-6. (In Act.Holm. 1805-6.) — Ditto, Specimen nov. Hemipt. disponed. Method, exhibits.4to. Lund. 1814. — Dit4to, Hemiptera Sueci®. Pars 2. Laid. 1836. 8vo.Stoll. Naturlyke en naar't leaven, &c. ( Representation des Circles et des Praises,&c.) Amsterdam, 4to. 1780. (29 pi. Cicada.)Germar, in his Mag. d. Entomol. vol. iii. and iv. — Ditto, in Thon's Entomol. Archiv.band ii. 1830. — Ditto, in Silbermann Rev. Ent. tom. i. 1833, tom.ii. 1834. — Ditto, in his Zeitschr. f. d. Entomol. no. 1, 2.Hemiptera. 415The insects composing this order comprise some of the most anomalousforms to be met with in this class of animals. The musicalCicadass, the strangely formed lanthorn flies, the cuckoo-spit insects, thedestructive aphides, and the extraordinary scale-insects, are all typesof well-marked groups in the order, agreeing together in the moreor less membranous nature of their four wings, their promuscidatemouth, and their transformations. The body is generally thick andconvex, rather than depressed ; the wings consequently assume a deflexedposition in repose ; the promuscis arises much nearer to thebreast than in the Neuroptera, having sometimes the appearance ofbeing pectoral ; the antennae often arise from the under surface ofthe head, being mostly short, the basal joint very thick, and theterminal ones very slender and setigerous ; the segments of the thoraxform a solid thick ovate mass, the anterior being generally shorterthan the following ; the tarsi are always very short, and never havemore than three joints. All the insects of this group subsist uponvegetable juices, which they obtain by the assistance of their promuscis.Sometimes, as in the case of the Aphides, Cocci, and sugarcanefly (Delphax saccharivora), the injuries which they thus commitupon plants is very considerable. In some species, the promuscis isalmost as long as the body, the labium itself being of that length, asin the Fulgorae ; but in others it is extremely short, the four internalsetae not much exceeding the labium in length ; in the Coccidae, however,these setae are exceedingly long, but retractile, the sheath itselfbeing very minute. The females are often furnished with a scalyovipositor, composed of several toothed saws, lodged, when at rest,in a bivalve sheath at the extremity of the under side of the abdomen ;being enabled, with this apparatus, to make an incision in the leavesor stems of plants, into which they afterwards introduce their eggs.Say, in Journal of Acad. Nat. Scienc. Philadelph. vol. vi. p. 2,Serville and St. Fargeau, in Encyclop. Method, torn. x.Dufour. Recherches Anatoniiques et Physiol, sur les Hemispheres. Paris, 1833.4to. (Extr. from Mem. des Sav. Strangers, 4tom. iv. )Burmeister. Handbuch der Entomol. zweit. band, 1835. — Ditto, Genera Indecorumicon illust. No. 1 — 4. Berlin, 1838,Guerin, in Voyage de la Coquille. — Ditto, in Voyage Duperrey et Belonged.And the general works of Litmus, De Geer, Alison Beauvais, C'oquebert, Perty(Del. An; Art. Brazils, Zetterstedt, Curtis, §-c.416 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.A remarkable peculiarity, exhibited by great numbers of these insects,is the secretion of a fine farnese matter, often in very greatquantities ; and which occurs, not only in the typical tribes, but alsoamong the Aphides, where a genus is even named, from this circumstance,Eriosoma ; and the Coccidae, where, at least in some species,the secretion forms large scales, as in the female Diathesis, or greatlyelongated anal filamentous fascicles, as in the males of that samegenus.The characters of the wings, mouth, and transformations, uponwhich, as we have already seen (Volet, p. 18.), the three principalmodes of distribution of the class have been built, separate this orderfrom all the other suctorial insects ; the differences, however, existingbetween them and the Neuroptera are confined chiefly to the first ofthese characters, and hence the propriety of the separation of thesetwo groups has been denied by many subsequent writers. De Geer,indeed, first separated these as an order, named Siphonata by Retzius.Latreille, however, in most of his works, and Fabricius considered themas forming together but one ; the former dividing it, under the nameof Hemiptera, into two borders or sections, Neuroptera and Homo-pera.It cannot be denied that the characters they have in commonare so numerous and strong, that disagreement in the texture of thewings is not alone sufficient to warrant their separation. If, however,we adopt the separation of the Phrj'ganeae from the Neuroptera, andthe Formulae from the Orthoptera, we are, as it seems to me, equallywarranted in considering these two groups as quite as much entitledto the rank of separate orders. Another consideration has also muchweight with me in retaining the order as distinct, namely, the analogicalrelations which exist between the mandibulated and suctorialtribes. Mr. MacLeay, we have seen (Vol. I. p. 27.), regards theHomoptera (Neuroptera) as opposed to the Orthoptera, and the Homopteraas analogous to the Neuroptera; but neither of these relationsappears to me well founded. The Neuroptera, on the one hand,I consider as offering a far stronger series of analogies with theCleopatra (such as the general shape of the depressed body, size ofthe scutellum and antennae, and, more definitely, the Buprestis-likeform of some of the equally splendid Scutellerte ; the Coleopterousform of others, as Odontoscelis scarabseoides, Thyreocoris melosBurm., Th. sulphide Fah.^ or Cephalocteus historiesDvf. ; or the Dyticus-like form of the equally aquatic Naucoris andHemiptera. 417Belostomae) ; whilst, on the ether hand, the Homoptera seem to meto present as equally strong a series of relations of analogy with theOrthoptera, such as the uniform texture of the fore wings, their laterallydeflexed position, and especially the saltatorial and musicalpowers possessed by many of both groups, and the complicated structureof the female ovipositor. In this respect, therefore, there is sostrong a distinction between the two groups that I am tempted toretain them as distinct, although I might not have regarded theirstructural differences alone as sufRcienl.The situation in which these insects are here arranged (between theLepidoptera and Neuroptera), is equally liable to discussion. Thatthey must be placed in immediate contact with the Neuroptera, isevident from what has been already said, and from the gradual approximationto them made by the Hydrocoris^e amongst the Neuropterain the minuteness of their antennae, the shortness of theirconical promuscis, &c. ; but their relation, on the other hand, to theLepidoptera is much less clearly to be perceived. If, indeed, we lookinthe most general manner at the suctorial series of insects, we findthe Homoptera agreeing better with the Lepidoptera than any of theother orders in their tetrapterous condition ; the Neuroptera, andstill less the Diptera, offering a slighter relation in this respect. This,however, it must be remembered, rests but upon a solitary bond ofrelation. Mr. MacLeay, indeed, brings forward the genus Flataa Fahr.,the species of which, according to Latreille, " assembled a de petitesPaleness ou mieux encore a des Parties" (Tortrices), and especiallythe Flataa limbata, as exhibiting a singular example of the commencementof a relation of affinity ; the elongated antennae, farnese wings,and shape of the head, especially receding from the Homopterous, andapproaching the Lepidopterous type. The genus Aleyrodes Latr.(Tinea proletella Linn) is also regarded as exemplifying the immediatetransition or osculant order between the Homoptera and Lepidoptera,undergoing an obtected metamorphosis, being inactive inthe pupa state, and in its adult state being covered with farinaceouspowder. It is impossible not to be struck, however, at once with theslight nature of these proposed relations, leading to the conviction ofthe great hiatus which exists between the two orders in question.Another interesting circumstance connected with this order in itsrestricted state is the great modification which even its most characteristicmarks undergo in some of the more obscure tribes. TheVOL. II. E E4-18 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Thripidge, ordinarily regarded as portions of this order, we have seenpossess a mandibulated palpigerous mouth, and hence they have beenremoved to the neighbourhood of the Orthoptera. In like manner,amongst the Aphides we find some species destitute of wings ; andeven amongst the Cicadae of Linnaeus, some of the species have thefore wings as leathery as in many of the Coieoptera : but it is in theCoccidae that we find the greatest aberrations, for here, at least inthe typical species, the alary and metamorphosis characters are lost,the only tie being that of the suctorial mouth, and even its parts arewidely different from those of the true types of the order ; whilst thedipterous alternated condition of the males destitute of a mouth, and atthe same time undergoing an inactive metamorphosis, bespeaks as completea want of conformity' with the order as can be produced — sufficient,indeed, in the opinions of some authors to raise them into a distinctorder ; De Geer and his commentator Retzius having separated themunder the name of Proboscis, and Laporte under that of Phaulop-teres, the last-named author having also separated the Aphides asanother distinct order, under the name Gynaptferes. (deludes Entomol.p. 7.) I think it however more advisable, in the present state of thescience, to retain these two groups as portions of the order.In this extent we accordingly find the order divided by Latreilleinto four families, in his Genera ; namely, Cicatrix;, Psyllidae,Aphidii (including Thrips), and Gallinsecta (Coccus). In his laterworks, however (Refute Animal, 2d ed. torn. v. p. 224.), we find thePsyllidae reduced to a division of the Aphidii, whilst Burmeister, whoadopts the views of Nitzsch as to the relations existing between thePediculi and the Fabrician Rhyngota, or haustellated Hemiptera ofLinnaeus, and likewise introduces the Neuroptera into the order, forwhich he retains the name of Rhyngota (rejecting that of Linnaeus ;the mouth and not the wings being his primary character), divides itinto six stirpes : Ridiculing, Cocaine, Phytophthires (including two subdivisions,Aphidina and Psyllodes), Cicada, Hydrocele, and GeogOf these, the second, third, and fourth stirpes constitute thepresent order.Mr. Stephens, on the other hand, divides the order into seven primaryfamilies: Cicadiidae, Fluoride, Cercopidae, Psyllidae, Thripidfe,Aphid[e,and Coccidee. Of these, the first three are of much less relative valuethan the rest ; the fourth is too closely allied to the Aphidae to be consideredas a distinct primary group, and the fifth must be removedfrom the order.Hemiptera. 419Retaining therefore, as usual, the family terminations for the secondarysections, and adopting Latreille's and Burmeister's views asto the division of the order into three primary sections, I propose toname these, in conformity with the gradation in the number of theirtarsal joints : —1. Trimera. Tarsi 3-jointed ; antennae minute, setigerous; wingsareolate. (Cicada LimKsus.)2. Diner. Tarsi 2-jointed ; antennae moderate, filiform, 5 — jointed; wings subareolate. (Aphis Linn, and Psylla Gcoffr.)3. Monomera, Tarsi 1-jointed; antennae 6 — 25-jointed ; wings notareolate. (Coccus Linn.)The first section, Trimera, corresponds with the Linnaean genreCicada, or the family Cicatrices of Latreille, and comprises the mostnumerous portion of the order, consisting of the largest and mostbeautiful of the species, and which have ordinarily three joints inthe tarsi, and very small antennae, composed of three or six jointsterminated by a slender seta ; the ocelli are generally present, beingeither two or three in number ; the wings are varied in their consistencein different species, but the upper pair never exhibit twodifferent textures, so remarkable in the Neuroptera. The species aregenerally saltatorial ; the hind legs, however, are never disproportionatelyincrassated, as we have seen to be the case in other saltatorialspecies. The thorax undergoes several modifications of structure ; inthe typical species the prothorax is distinct and transverse, and theraesothorax, as seen above, occupies nearly the remainder of thethorax, being narrowed behind into a kind of scutellum, leaving themetathorax only visible at the sides ; on the under side the three segmentsof the thorax are nearly of equal size. In Embraces, Cercopis,&c., the prothorax is greatly enlarged in size, and often singularlydeveloped, and the mesothorax is reduced to an ordinary sized scutellum; in all, the metathorax above is reduced to a very small size.The abdomen of the females is furnished with a complex instrumentfor boring into the stems of plants, in which they deposit theireggs.This section of the order has been especially investigated by Dr.Germar, who has described a very great number of species in hisEE 2042 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.various memoirs ; Dr. Burmeister has also added the descriptions ofmany genera and species in his Handbuch der Entomologie. Linnaeusunited them into two genera — Fulgora, characterised chiefly byits porrected head ; and Cicada, dividing the last-named genus into,1. FoliacecE for the g. Membracis Fabr,); 2. Crucial (Controls andLeda) ; 3. Jfannifercs, " non saltantes," or the true Cicadae ; 4. Hatia-tree, " saltatoriae " (C. sanguinolenta, spumaria, &c.) ; and 5. DeJiexcB(comprising an heterogeneous assemblage of species). Latreille, withgreater precision in the characters of the sections, divided them asfollows {Regne Animal, torn. v. p. 212.) : —A. Chanteuses. Antennas 6-jointed ; ocelli 3. (Cicada 0//v. or TestisFar.)B. Muettes. Antennas only distinctly 3-jointed ; ocelli 2.1. Fulgorelles. Antennae inserted beneath the eyes; foreheadoften rostrated.2. Cicadelles. Antennae inserted between the eyes.Dr. Burmeister has added a fourth group, by separating Membracis,Sec. from the Cicadelles; his groups being, 1. Cicadellina ; 2. embracing; 3. Fulgorina ; and 4. Stridulantia. I have, however, preferredfollowing the arrangement of Latreille, not considering theMembranes as sufficiently distinct from the other Linnaean Ranatra;; dividing the section, therefore, into three families, — Cicadidae(Cicadiidai Leach), Fluoride Leach, and Cercopidae Leach.The first family', Cicadidae*, corresponds with the Cicadass f man-literaeLinn,, the Chanteuses of Latreille, and the Stridulantia of .Refer. to THE ClCADlD^E.Clever. De Cicada Indices, in Ephem. Misc. Acadia Cur. 1687. Obs. 49.Germar,\\\ Silbermann, Rev. Ent. vol. ii. (Monogr. Cicada. )Olivier. Encycl. Methh. art. Cigale.L. Dufour. Rech. Anat. sur 1. Cigars, Ann. Si. Nat. torn. v.Meckel. Anat Cic. Plebeian in his Beitr. zur Verge. Anat. b. I. 1 808.And the general works of Stall, Germar, Encycl. Methh., Fair. (Syst. Rh. ), Burmeister,Guerin, Brullc, Donovan, §-c.\ The Latin name Cicada is derived by Beckman from the word ciciim orHemiptera. CIC ADIDjE.Fig. 114.meister, vehicle last names they have received on account of the musicalpowers possessed by the males {Jjg. 114. l. Cicada Anglice). Theseare the largest insects in the order, one species measuring betweensix and seven inches in the expanse of its wings. The head is short,broad, and transverse, with large prominent eyes fig. 114. 2. front ofhead of Cicada atrata) ; the ocelli, three in number, are placed on theback of the head in a triangle ; the face has a large nearly circularswollen and transversely striated piece, close to which, at the upperangles, and between the eyes, the antennae are inserted: these areasit appears to me, composed of seven joints, although describedas only 6 jointed by Latreille and others, — the basal joint being thick,and the others slender and gradually attenuated to the tip fig.114. 4.). The rostrum, promuscis, or, more strictly speaking, the labium,is greatly elongated and 3-jointed; the basal joint being veryshort (when seen from above, and in some species not perceivable),the terminal joint very long and slender {Jjg. 114. 2. ; 3. base of promuscissideways) ; the mandibles and maxillae are represented byfour fine setae passing through the promuscis, and the palpi areentirely wanting. The prothorax is short and transverse, the mesothoraxvery large, the metathorax scarcely visible above, exceptai the sides; beneath these segments are nearly equal {Jig.WAf. i.eiccum, a thin sir, and aJsiv, signifying a sound produced by the motion of a littleskin. Others derive it from the Latin words "citocadat," implying that the Cicadaesoon vanish, or are short-lived. The Greeks named them Tettix, and the smaller muteones Tettigonia ; the last of which names has been given by Fabriciiis to the trueCicada, whilst Latreille applied it to the smaller species. Furmcisfer conjecturesthat Cercopis sanguinolenta was the true TestimonialE 34)22 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.under side of the body of the female). The abdomen is short, andsomewhat triangular (^^. 114. 6. under side of abdomen of male);the legs are short, the anterior femora thickened and toothed beneath(j^^. 114. 5.) ; the posterior tibia? slightly spined, without terminalspur's. The tarsi, except in a few species of Cicadass *, are 3-jointed ;the fore wings are large and rather narrow, deflexed at the sides ofthe body, and of an uniform consistence, with comparatively few andvery distinct nervures, except in Humidity fronds Burm., andPolynesia ducats West. (a beautiful insect brought from India byGeneral Hardwicke), in which they are thickly reticulated. In afew species, C. stridula Linn. &c., the base of theforewings exhibits adecided space, somewhat more coriaceous than the rest of the wings ;but, in the majority, they are completely membranous and delicatelytransparent.The structure of the legs does not permit these insects to leap ;but the more peculiar characteristic of the group consists in thestructure of the apparatus, whereby the males are enabled to executethe long-continued and monotonous music, for which they have beenso long famed ; these organs are internal, and are placed at the baseof the abdomen beneath, and covered by two large flat plates attachedbehind the place of insertion of the hind legs, varying informin the different species f, being, in fact, the dilated sides of themonasterium (Jig. 114. 6. bey . 7. b ? ). The peculiar construction ofthe internal double apparatus has been carefully investigated byReaumur (Memoires, tom.v.), and more recently by Goureau and Sober(Annates Soc. Ent. de France, 1837, and also in the Crochard edition ofthe Regne Animal; Ins. pi. 95.), and which consists of a pair of stretchedmembranes, acted upon by powerful muscles. The sound issues out ofthe two holes beneath the above-mentioned plates, in a manner somewhatanalogous to the action of a violin. (See also Latreille's dissertationon musical insects, in the Memoires du Museum, tom. viii.)The sonar of the Cicada has been a favourite theme in the versesThe species with 2-jointed tarsi form Latreille's genus Tibicen, C. plebeian,tympanum, mannifera, &c.j- The chirping varies considerably in different species, probably according to the sizeof the drums. Captain Hancock states that some sing so loud as to be heard to thedistance of a mile. The song of a Surinam species so much resembles the sound of a lyrethat the species is thence called the harper (Herman). — Merian, Sitrin. p. 49. TheChinese, as well as the Greeks, kept these insects in cages for the sake of their song.Hemiptera CICADID^E. 423of every Grecian bard from Homer to Anacreon. The hieroglyphicsof Egypt also represent these insects as objects of attention, and inwhich they were emblematically represented as ministers of religion.That their music was not held by all in equal estimation, isevident from the line of Virgil —Et canto queries repent augusta Cicada ;"whilst the same poet also alludes to their singing in the hottest sunshine,—Sole sub ardent resonant augusta Cicadae :"and the Rhodian bard Xenarchus notices the peculiarity of the malesalone being possessed of the power of singing, in his coupletHappy the Cicada lives,Since they all have voiceless wives."It is impossible to allude to the numerous fables related of theseinsects by the poets of antiquity (amongst which the story of Tithonusturned into a Cicada by Aurora is pre-eminent) ; I must thereforecontent myself by referring to Kirby and Spence's Introduction, or tomy article Cicada, in the British Cyclopcedia of Natural History. Burmeisterhas also collected much classical lore respecting these insects,in his Handbuch, vol. ii. p. 175., nor must old Buffet be forgotten.The curious apparatus with which the females are provided, forenabling them to make slits in the branches of trees for the purposeof depositing their eggs therein, consists of several pieces, admirablyfitted together. On examining the under side of the body of the female7?V/.114.7.),the eighth dorsal segment is seen to be deflexed at the sides,forming a groove beneath, enclosing two valves articulated in the middle,as represented in vay fig. l]^. 8. b, b 2., b 3., and by Percheron,Gen. d. Ins. Hemipt. pi. 2., Reaumur, tom. v. pi. 18. f. 3. *, whichunitedly form a kind of scabbard to a cylindrical horny borer, muchcurved at the base fig. 114. 8. d) and dilated into lanceolate pointat the extremity ; on viewing which from beneath fig. 114. 9.), it appearsserrated on each side, and furnished with two more coriaceousnarrow plates fig. 114. 9. J), which, however, are but the incurvededges of the two files of the borer, which have an alternate andBurmeister only represents one articulation in the middle; sv?e his (iL 'J4, f. !.A, B, and f. 2. B, C.E E 445^4' MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.separate motion and are supported by a single piece at the back i^jig-114. 10. 0, X and x being the two lateral files, one partially pushedforwards; 114.11. represents these three pieces in another position,showing more clearly that \ is but the produced edge of x ). Thisinstrument has been carefully described by Reaumur (tom. v. pi. 18.),who represents in his various figures the alternate protrusion of thelateral files, as well as the central groove down the back of the supportingdorsal piece. On inspecting this last piece, it appears probablethat it consists of two pieces firmly soldered together. I do not,however, believe that these two pieces have the slightest motion independentof each other, or open at the tip, as represented by Burmeister,Hand. Transll. pi. 24. f. 3, 4. This author has further described andfigured the two lateral files as united together, and forming a " superiordistended sheath, with teeth on the margin *," and the dorsalsupporting piece as " the lower setae," evidently considering thispart as consisting of two setaj, enclosed in the distended sheath ; andas the point of this supporting piece is represented as bifid and protrudedconsiderably beyond the extremity of the serrated lateral organ,it is evident that Burmeister considers the middle piece as the piercingpart, and the serrated part as the supporting sheath : so also M. Doyere,in the Crochard edition of the Regne Animal (pi. 95. fig. 2. i and2. k), considers the serrated lateral pieces as performing, in the act ofperforation, " les fonctions de grains," and the central piece asInstrument settlement perforate ;" but the peculiar structure ofthese lateral files, so admirably fitted for making incisions in vegetablefibre, and the curious form of the middle dorsal piece (Jig 114. 12.0.)grooved along the sides, — the groove being internally dilated, and receivingthe dilated edge of the serrated piece, and thus retaining it in itsplace, (as represented in my Jig. 114. 12. being a transverse section ofthese instruments f,) — are, I think, sufficient proofs that the serratedlateral pieces are the real organs of perforation, and that the dorsalpiece is but an organ of support. I have dissected so many specimensBurmeister has certainly erred in regarding these two lateral serrated pieces asforming one organ ; see his pi. 24. fig. 3. a a, 5. and 7. a a ; whilst M. Doyere'stwo figures, 2. i and 2. k, give an incorrect idea, by omitting one of the lateral piecesin each figure.i" Tic figures of the transverse sections of these organs given by Burmeister andDoyere, are incorrect, the middle supporting piece being placed downwards insteadof being represented as the dorsal part.HOMOPTEUA. CICADID^. 425of Cicadae, that I entertain no doubt as to the correctness of the descriptionwhich I have given of these parts, "sly Jig. 114. 13. representsan organ connected with the ovipositor, and placed within thetip of the terminal dorsal segment of the abdomen, which has beenoverlooked by all authors, but which appears to me to be the anus'the two terminal conical parts of which it is composed, opening witha slit in the middle.The female Cicada deposits from five to seven hundred eggs ;making choice of dead dried branches for their reception, being apparentlyaware that moisture would injure her progeny : the situationsin which the parent insect has bored into the branches, andintroduced her eggs, may be recognised by being covered withlittle oblong elevations, caused by small splinters of wood detachedat one end, but left fixed at the other ; these elevations are mostlyin a line, but sometimes in two lines, at equal distances apart, andform the covering of so many burrows, about one third of an inchlong, each containing from four to ten eggs. M. Pontedera assertsthat the parent closes the mouth of these burrows with a layer of gumimpervious to the air *, but Reaumur considers this not correct. Theyoung grubs, when hatched, are stated by Reaumur to resemble the fleain form. He also observed that the eggs were attacked by the larvae ofan ichneumon, which he also found in the bin-rows. The young larvaehave six feet, and make their escape out of the opening of the cell leftby the parent for that purpose, descending immediately into the earthywhere they increase in size, in the form of hexapod grubs, furnishedwith a cylindrical proboscis and thick fore legs (Jjg. 114. 14.), andwhere they are transformed into active pupae, differing only from thelarvae in having the rudimental wings visible at the sides of the bodyfig. 114. 15.). In this state they were known to the ancients, Aristotlecalling them Tettigometra, or mother of the Cicada. The twofore segments of the thorax (x 1. and t 2.) are well developed, andthe metathorax (t 3 ) is transverse, and although short, is seen fromabove ; the abdomen is composed of eight segments ; the mess-sternumis produced into a large tubercle fig. 114. 15. x ), which is also foundin the imago ; the antennae are thicker than in the imago, and 9-jointedThis statement probably had its origin in the supposed production of mannaupon trees, resulting from the puncture of the proboscis of rise imago of Cicada omni ;whence Linnaeus named these insects Manifest. M. L. Dufour, however, doubtswhether this statement is well founded.426 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.fig. 114.16.); the forelegs are very robust, and fitted for digging,with very large coxae, strongly toothed femora, raptorial tibiae, 2-jointedtarsi, the basal joint being very small fig. 114<. 17.); the pupa (describedby the editor of the Crochard ed. of the Regne An. Ins. pi.95. f. 2. a, and other French authors, as the larva) does not exhibit anyrudiments of the sexual peculiarities of the imago. During the winterthese immature insects burrow to the depth of two or three feet intothe earth, and from all the recorded observations it appears that it isfrom the roots of plants that they derive their subsistence. In thepupa state they were eaten by the ancients, Aristotle stating, " quotempore gusts suavissimae sunt, antequam cortex rumpatur," In theperfect state they were also eaten, the same author adding, " et antecoltum mares suaviores sunt, a coitu seminal quippe quae ova Candidagusts habet grata."Of 150 species of these insects contained in the Royal Museum ofBerlin, 70 are from America, 50 from Africa, 25 Asia, including Java,10 South Europe, and 6 or 8 New Holland : thus it is chiefly in thetropical parts of the world that the largest and greatest number ofspecies are found, those found in the centre of Europe being butsmall ; one species only, of comparatively small size, is found in thiscountry, which has been supposed to be the C. haematodes Linn.,but which Mr. Curtis has figured under the name of Cicada Anglice,fig. 114. 1.). It is found in the New Forest. Mr. Curtis thinks thisspecies does not sing, because a specimen kept in confinement by Mr.Dale for two or three days was mute. Kirby and Spence, however,were informed that it is very noisy, and analogy would lead to thebelief that it does sing, the drums of C. Omni not being comparativelylarger than in this species. Weaver found the pupa case of this insectattached by the legs to the stem of a fern, upon the roots ofwhich he, as well as Curtis, supposes that the larva feeds. mag. Nat.Hist. No. 29. and Ent. Mag. vol. ii. p. 436.)Cicada septendecim Fab., an American species (so named because,according to Kali, Lived. Trans. 1756, and Travels, 2. 6., it appearsonly once in seventeen years, and then in inconceivable numbers),does great damage both to fruit and forest trees in the United States.This species is still eaten by the native Indians. Collins, in Phil.Trans. 1764, 54. 10. QB. See also Hildreth, on the Cicada; of Ohio,mV>xesiv?,\,Q,x ?, Edinh. Jonrn, of Science, vcA. yC\. 1828. The sentencesappearance of this insect has recently been confirmed by Dr.Hemiptera.Fluoride.Harlan. (See Trans. Ent. Soc. vol. i. App. p. 30., and Annales Soc.Ent. France, 18S7, p. 31., and App. pp. 17. 39.)The family FuLGORiDiE * ZmcA {fig- 115. l. Fulgora apical,West.) is at once distinguished from the preceding by having onlythree distinct joints in the antennae {fig- 115. 2. 9. ll), and two ocelliFig. 115.placed beneath the eyes fig. 115. 5. 7,8.). The legs are in generalfitted for leaping, with large spurs fig. 115. 14. hind leg ofDelphax) ; and the males are destitute of those organs which are .Refer, to the Fulgorid^.Burmeister. Genera Indecorum. — Ditto, Hand. d. Entomol.Guerin, in Voyage de Belonged (Revision of fam. ). — Ditto, Iconogr. R. An. —Ditto, Bull. Soc. Cuvierrr. 1839, p. 183. and Mag. de Zool.Westwood, in Trans. Linn. Soc. London, vol. xviii., Monogr. Fulgora.Linnaeus, on Chinese Fulgorae, in Swed. Tr. 1746, and Amen. Acad. torn. iv.Wittenberg, in Der Naturforscher, st. 13. (Surinam Fulgorae.)Olivier. Observ. sur le g. Fulsome, in Journ. d'Hist. Nat. torn. ii.Hoffmansegg. Ueber cas Leuchten der Fulgora, in Gesellsch. Nature. fr. BerlinMag. vol. i.Kirby, in Trans. Linn. Soc. vol. xiii. ( Anotia and Otiocerus). — Ditto, in hisCentury, and Brown's N, Hold. Ins. in ditto, vol. xii.Laporte, in Ann. Soc. Ent. France, 1832 (n. g.). — Ditto, 1833 (Caliscelis),Zetterstedt, Fauna japonica.Percheron, in Guer. Mag. Zool., Derby and Cephalelus.Waterhouse, in Trans. Ent. Soc. vol. ii. (Cephalelus and Alleloplasis).Bohemann, in Swed. Trans. 1838, (Derby).Descourtilz. Mem. n. g. (Agenia), in Ann. Soc. Linn. Paris, 1824.Spinola, in Guerin's Bull. Soc. Cuvierrr. 1839, p. 199.And the general works above referred to.4-28 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.played in the Cicadass for the production of sounds *; the antennae areinserted immediately beneath the eyes, and the forehead is often singularlydilated in the form of a muzzle, varying in shape in the differentspecies, and in some nearly equalling the rest of the body inlength.This is a much more numerous family than the preceding, and thespecies exhibit considerably greater modifications of form, comprisingin fact some of the most singular of the insect tribes. In the typicalgenus Fulgora the head is dilated in front into the most remarkableporrected protuberances, varying in each species (^5'. 115. 5. headof F. laternaria sideways, 6. ditto of F. diadems), and which is thepart of the body asserted by various writers to emit a strong lightby night, analogous to that of the fire-flies; in others, again, this partof the head is recurved in the shape of a horn (^fig- 115. 7. head ofAphana nigro-maculata sideways, 8 into in front) ; others, again, haveit simple, but broad, with the? rent edge raised and acute ; in many ofthe smaller species the face is longitudinally carinated {fig- 115. ii.head of Asiraca clavicornis in front) ; the antennae are generally verysmall 1 (fig. 115. 2. 9.), but in some they are considerably elongated ;the ocelli appear to be wanting in Otiocerus {fg> 115. lo), PcecilopteraIssus, and Asiraca (fig. 115.11.). The first of these genera (or CoaxGermar) is remarkable for possessing two small palpiform appendagesbeneath the eyes, and attached to the base of the antennae fig. 115.10.), of which the uses are unknown, and which have been found inno other insects. The proboscis varies considerably in length, beingin some nearly equal to the whole body, and in others very short ; thewings also differ very much in form, those of some species of Flataaand some of the allied genera having them very broad and rounded'or triangular, and sometimes with the hind margin emarginate : theyalso differ in their position in repose, in some being very much deflexedand in others carried horizontally, the latter having much the appearanceof moths (^^.115.10. Titania — ?) ; there is also considerabledifference in the veining of the fore wings fig. 115. l. and 13.), but ingeneral they are very thickly reticulated : the spurs of the hind feet'* Kirby and Spence, on the authority of Stcdman's Surinam, assert that Fulgoralaternaria makes a loud noise in the evening, like that made by a razor-grinder, andthat the Dutch in Guiana call it scare-sleep. Dr. Hancock, however, states thatthe razor-grinder, or the Aria Aria of the natives, is a species of Cicada, (Proceed.Zool. Soc. June 24. 1834.)Hemiptera. FULGORIDiE. 42ere large ; in some of the smaller species which perform great leaps,they are very large and toothed {^fig. 115. 14.) ; the tarsi are 3-jointedfig' ] 15. 3 and 4.). In some species, also, the fore legs are curiouslydilated, as in some Asiracae, and especially in Laporte's minute heterodox.The species of this family emit the white waxy secretion * abovealluded to, and in some species to a remarkable extent : such isthe case with Plena variegata, Lystra agricola Kl. (Burm. Gen.Ins. 1.1.), L. lanata, &c. ; many Flataa, &c. This production iscollected by the Chinese, and employed in the manufacture ofthe fine white wax so much esteemed in the East Indies. The insectsby which this is produced are the immature states of a speciesof Flataa (probably of F. nigricornis, as supposed by Donovan ; myfig. 115. 15.). Du Hale, in his Histoire de la Chine, speaks of thisproduction : " De la cire blanche faite par des insectes et nonceChang pe la f , c'est a dire, cire blanche dissected. jfiudit, ce sent depetits insectes qui la forment : ces insectes success le sue de I'especed'arbres nomme Tong thin, et a la longue ils le changent en une sortede graisse blanche, qu'ils attachent aux branches de I'arbre. II y ena qui disent que c'est la fiente de ces insectes qui s'attachant a I'arbreforme cette cire, mais ils se trompent. On la tire en raclant lesbranches dans la saison de I'automne ; on la fait fondre sur le feu, etAyant passee, on la verse dans I'eau froide ou elle se fige et se formeen pains. On la mere avec de I'liuile, et on en fait des chandelles.Elle est beaucoup superieure ii celle que font les abeilles."Chi thin dit, les insectes sont fort petits ; quand le soleil parcourtles quinze derniers degree des Gemeaux, ils se dependent engrimpant sur les branches de I'arbre ; ils en tirent le sue et jettent parlabouche une certaine have , qui s'attachant aux branches encore ten-thissecretion, which is either cottony, or arranged in lamellae is evidently analogousto the wax secretion of bees; it has not, however, yet been analysed. Itappears to be generally secreted frown all the parts of the outer covering of the body,but in some species, particular orifices are destined for this purpose. Thus, inChermes (Psylla) abietis the cottony filaments are emitted from minute oval cavitieson the dorsal part of the abdomen, each segment having four arranged transversely,and which under a high power exhibit minute tubercles pierced at the summit witha minute orifice.j- Some writers have slated that this Pe la is produced b}? a species of Coccus ; andthe account given by Chi thin evidently alludes to a species of that family, CoccidiE(probably Ceroplastus) ; Sir G. Staunton's account clearly refers to a differentcreature : probably several species are thus used.430 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS,does, se changent en vine grasse blanche, laquelle se durcit et prendla forme de cire."Chi hen dit c'est une drogue absolument necessary aux chirurgiens: elle a des efFets admirables." (JDu Hale, torn. iv. p. 495., largefol. 1735.)Sir George Staunton, in his work on China, has also described andfigured the wax insect which he found at Turn Bay, in Cochin China.Gordon also, in his description of China, notices this production ascaused by vast numbers of little worms. (Donovan, Ins. China, p. 42.)Much uncertainty exists as to the real existence of any luminouspower possessed by the typical species of this family. This accountoriginated with Madame Merian (insects Surinam, p. 49.), who assertedit to be possessed by Fulgora laternaria in an eminent degree,and her statement long received general assent, and appears to be theonly authority for its existence. Olivier appears to be the firstauthor who doubted the luminosity of the Fulgorse (Jena. Methh.art. Fulsome *), from information given to him by M. Richard, whohad reared the F. laternaria in Cayenne and had not found it tobe luminous. HoflPmansegg mag. Nat. Berl. vol. i. p. 153.), thePrince Von Nieuwied (Reise nach Bras. tom. ii. p. 111.), andstill more recently M. Lacordaire (the two last-named authors havingbeen long resident in South America), also concur in this opinion,none of the individuals they had ever seen alive exhibiting the leasttrace of luminosity. The majority of the natives also who had beenquestioned on the subject denied the luminous power, although a fewaffirmed it; hence Lacordaire suggests whether one sex may be luminousand the other not. {{Introdd. a I'Entoinol. tom. li. p. 143.) RosalindDonovan imagined that the white farinaceous dots upon the snoutsand bodies of these insects were phosphorescent, but they are clearlynothing else than particles of the waxen secretion above noticed. Dr.Hancock also read a memoir on the luminosity of the Full. laternariabefore the Zoological Society, on 24th June, 1834, in which its luminosityis considered as entirely fabulous. M. Wesmael has recentlyreasserted the luminous property of the South American species onthe authority of a friend who had witnessed it alive. (ann. Soc. JEnt'de France, App. 1837.) And W. Baird, Esq., has informed me of theOlivier, however, states that he had " souvent trouve au midi de la France degrandes species de Circles retirement phosphoriques acres leur mort."IIOMOPTERA. — CERCOPIDiE. 43.1existence of a Chinese edict against young ladies keeping lanthorn-flies.One species of this family, having habits similar to the Aphides, isextremely injurious in the West Indian Islands from its attacks uponthe sugar-cane, which it often entirely kills, from the vast numbers ofindividuals with which the plants are infested. 1 have described andfigured this insect under the name of Delphax saccharivora (mag.Nat. Hist. vol. vi. p. 407. ; and see Trans. Ent. Soc. vol. i. App. p. 28.and 70. for further details of its destructive ravages). A very remarkablespecies has been described by Mr. Waterhouse, from NewSouth Wales, of minute size, having only two wings, which greatlyexceed the body in length, and are linear and rather spatulate at thetip (AUeloplasis Darwin, Trans. Ent. Soc. ii. p. 191-. pi. 17. f. 4.).Other instances in which the wings undergo a deficiency of developmentoccur in the genus Delphax, the majority of which, in ourEnglish species, have the upper wings not covering more than halfthe abdomen, the terminal membrane being deficient as well as thehind wings. In certain seasons, however, especially hot ones, thewings are fully-developed. My Jig. 115. 12. represents an imperfectlydeveloped imago of Delphax anceps Germar ; and ^g. 115.13. thewings of a fully developed individual. Mr. Curtis has formed the undevelopedspecimens into a different genus, Criomorphus.The third family, Cercopid^ *, differs from the two preceding inhaving the antennae 3-jointed (Jjg. 116. 10. antenna of Centrotus) ;BiBLioGR. Refer, to the Cercopid^.Germar, in Silberm. Rev. Ent. No. 17, 18. (Monogr. Memorandum) ; and hisMagazin d. Entomol. No. 3, 4.; and Zeitsclir. f. Entomol.Laporte, in Ann. Soc. Ent. France, 1832 (Monogr. Herodotus). — Ditto (De-script,n. genera)Lewis, in Trans. Ent. Soc. vol. i. (n. Brit, genera).Curtis, in Entomol. Mag. vol. i.Burmeister-. Genera Insectonim. — Ditto, in Silberm. Rev. Ent. (Monogr.Darnis, &c.) — Ditto, Hand. d. Entomol.Gistll, in Faunus, No. 2. 1837.Waltll. Reise nach Spanien.Eversmann. List of Russian Species, in Bull. Mosc. 1837.Kirhy. N. Sp. Centrotus, in Mag. Nat. Hist. No. 6.Lesson, in Centurie Zoology. (sp. of Centrotus).Modern CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Fig. 116.the last forming an elongated seta, occasionally apparently articulatedat the base (Jig. 116. 3. ant. of Leda), and inserted between, notbeneath the eyes.The ocelli also, two in number, are situated either on the foreheador the face {fig- 116. 16. head of Selenocephalus beneath, with theocelli on the extreme edge of the forehead ; 1 16. 8. face of Centrotus) ;the head is rarely produced in front into a proboscis ; the legs are fittedfor leaping, and the species are destitute of sonorous organs.This family is very extensive, consisting of species of small size,and in one tribe comprising many most singular creatures ; themajority of the latter are, however, tropical. The head is of smallor moderate size, often very low, with the face broad fig. 116. 2. 16.),the eyes lateral, the antennas inserted in the middle or lower part ofthe face ; the promuscis short fig. 116. IG.), or but of moderate lengthfig. 116. 8., and 116. 2., head of Leda beneath) and 3-jointed ; theprothorax very variable in form and size, and in the sub-family Cerebeing the portion of the body which assumes the remarkableforms above alluded to ; instances of this are represented w^fig. 116.?. Centrotus biclavatus West.; fig. 116. n. Herodotus nigricansLap., andfig. 116. 13. Membracis — ? ; but this part exhibits an almostendless variety and grotesqueness of form and anomalous development.In the Testimonies the prothorax is of the ordinary form and size,leaving the scutellum exposed (as in ^^. 1 16. i. Leda aurita); theH. Sch'dffer. Nomenclator Entomologicus, and Continuation of Panzer.And the general works of Linnceus, Fahricins, Panzer, Palisot Beauvois, Perty,Guerin, Griffith (An. King's), Curtis, §-c. (Encircle. Mtth. torn. x.).Hemiptera. CERCOPID^. 4;33fore wings differ in their consistence, but the majority have themstrongly veined, forming cells closed before reaching the extremityof the wing (Jiff. 116.9. fore-wing of Centrotus). This type ofneuration occurs in both subfamilies, as does also the mode of neurationof the hind wings. The hind tibiae vary in structure, being insome nearly simple (Jiff- 116. 17. post, tibia of Centrotus); in others,furnished with a few strong spurs (Jig. 116. 18. post, tibia of Cere; and in many being triangular or quadrangular, each angleemitting strong spines (^^. 116. 19. part of post, tibia of Ccelidia).The tarsi are 3-jointed (Jiff. 116. 12.). The abdomen of the femalesis furnished with a multivalve ovipositor, variable in its form in thedifferent species (Jiff. 116. 5. apex of abdomen beneath of Ledaaurita ?, 116.4. ditto ^).The species are often beautifully varied in their colours ; they areconstantly found amongst plants, and on trees, upon the juices ofwhich they subsist, in all their states, by introducing their rostruminto the stems or leaves ; the larvae being entirely destitute of anyappearance of wings, and the pupa having them rudimental.One of the best-known insects in this family is the Aphrophoraspumaria Germ., a species of small size, which frequents gardenplants, the larva and pupa (Jiff. 116. 14.) investing themselves witha frothy excrementitious secretion (^^.116.15.), which has givenrise to various fancies : " Cuculorum nascuntur spumo," was thenotion entertained by the ancients ; whilst the modern names " froghopper"and " cachet de grenville," indicate their supposed originfrom another tribe of animals. The history of this species has beentraced by Swammerdam, De Geer (in Swed. Trans. 1741 ; and inhis Mem. tom. iii), and Rose.A species of Aphrophora (A. Goudotii Bennett) is also found in greatquantities upon trees in Madagascar, the larva of which has the powerof emitting a considerable quantity of clear water, especially in themiddle of the day, when the heat is greatest. (See Proceedings of theNat. Hist. Soc. Mauritius, Sept. 12. 1832; and Proc. Zool. Soc. London,Jan. 22. 1833.)The history of an allied species, Cercopis sanguinolenta, the mostbeautiful insect of the order found in this country, has also been investigatedby Goeze in Der Natiirf or seller, st. 6. .and by Schrank inSchrift d. Berlin Gesch. Natur.-freiind. b. 2.I have already alluded (ante, p. 2"4.) to the statement of M. Tunc,VOL. u. F F4'34' MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.and the drawings of General Hardwicke, as to these insects being usedby the ants instead of Aphides, for obtaining a supply of saccharinefluid ; the same fact is also recorded by Six and Martins select.Anim. art. Brasil. Introdd. p. 24-.), as well as by Beske, as publishedby Burmeister (Silberm. Rev. Ent. No. 5.; see also Rev. L. Guildingin Mag. Nat. Hist. No. 43.). Mr. Swainsonon also, unacquaintedwith these authorities, has stated the same fact as one unknown, inhis just published Treatise on the Instincts of Animals. Burmeister, inhis monograph on Combophora, quotes the following statement ofBeske as to the habits of C. Besckii (Membracis cucullata Perty, Del.pi. 35. f. 9.), one of the most remarkable species in the family: —Insects declarator hasten sultans timide fugit, et pronotumin fuga perdit sed nunquam recuperat. Semper formam id comitatusobservant, siiccum e suture capitis et thoracic exsudantemhaurientem ; nympha insects declarator similis sed pronotum brevissi-mum abdominal basin vix tenens, globules parum alice trispinosumemitted ; elytra et alae breves incomplete." The pupa is figured byBurmeister, hoc. cit., together with the imago.My Jiff. 116. 1. represents the imago, and Jiff. 116.6. the full-grownlarva (as I consider it to be) of Leda aurita, from specimens in mycollection ; the latter exhibiting only the rudiments of the prothoracicelevations, and the wing-cases not being so much developed as theyare in the more mature state of pupae, nor extending beyond the metathorax.I also possess a very young larva of the same insect, inwhich these peculiarities are still less evident. I also possess the pupaof Centrotus GenistEe, in which the pro thoracic elevation is but slightlydeveloped, but the abdomen is considerably elongated and attenuatedat the tip. The curious insect figured by Stoll, pi. 16. f. 85., havinga long furcate horn arising from the prothorax, and several pairs ofelevated spines from the abdominal segments, and which Laporte hasraised into a genus under the name of Acanthus ami. Soc. Ent.France, tom, i. pi. 6. f. 7.), appears to me (from a specimen in mj'collection) to be a pupa of some species of Centrotus, the four wing-casesbeing well developed. Such also is the opinion of Germar inSilberm. Rev. Ent. N, 4.The section Diner of the order comprises much smaller insectsthan the preceding, from which they are distinguished by having onlyHemiptera.PSYLLID^two joints in the tarsi, with antennae longer than the head, and composedof from six to ten filiform joints ; whilst they differ from theMonomera by the winged individuals possessing four wings, the anteriorbeing ordinarily of the same membranous texture as the posterior.The section consists of the families Psyllidae, Aphidffi, andAleyrodidae ; the genus Aleyrodes disagreeing so much from theAphidae, in which it is placed by Latreille, and from the Coccidae, inwhich Burmeister arranges it, that I have thought it most naturalto consider it as forming a distinct familyFiff. 117.The family Psyllid^ has long or moderately long filiform antennaecomposed of ten joints, the basal one being thick, and terminated bytwo short setae (Jigs 117. i. Psylla — ?, the largest British species) ; inLivia they are much shorter, with the second joint very greatly dilated; they are inserted in front of the eyes, at the sides of the head,which part of the body is deeply cleft in front ; the eyes are lateraland prominent, the ocelli, three in number, placed in a triangle, theposterior ones close to the eyes (Jiff- 117. 2. head above); the promuscisis short, inarticulate, arising almost between the fore legs(Jiff' 117. 3. head beneath), enclosing several very slender elongatedsetae, capable of being thrust out to a great length, as in jeff. 117. G. ;the thorax is of a very large size, the pro thoracic collar is very short,the mesothorax and metathorax fully developed, the former composedof several parts ( ^ff. 1 17. i.), terminated by a small scutellum. Beneath,the epimera of the metathorax are singularly produced behindthe place of insertion of the hind legs (which are pushed forwards),and terminated by two strong spurs (Jiff. 117.5. body sideways); thetarsi are composed of two joints (Jiff. 117. 4. hind leg) ; the wings,which occur in both sexes, are deflexed at the sides of the body, the foreF p 2436 MOr/ERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.wings being of a firmer consistence than the hind wings, and furnishedwith three strong furcate nerves ; the nerves of the hind wings arevery delicate ; the abdomen is small, and terminated in the femalesby a univalve conical ovipositor (fig. 117. i.), and in the males byseveral erect appendages (fig. 117. 5.). The general habit of theseinsects is very similar to that of some of the Cicadae, with which theyalso agree in their saltatorial powers and deflexed wings : hence, aswell as from other circumstances, M. Dufour considers them intermediatebetween the Cicadcllina and Aphides. They were named byReaumur Faux Pucerons, from their relation to the Aphides ; and byLinnaeus, Chermes. Geoffroy, however, considering that the lattername had been improperly employed by Linnaeus, gave to these insectsthe name of Psylla, from the Greek, in allusion to their salta-trialpowers; whilst he employed the name of Chermes, in its morelegitimate sense, to designate some of the Linnaean species of Coccuswhich had been employed as dyes, the names Chermes, Kermes, orAldermen having been given by the Arabians and Persians to the Coccusllicis Linn., or famed Tyrian dye : Geoffrey's name has consequentlyreceived general adoption.They subsist in all their states upon plants, and have receivedspecific names from the various trees and vegetables which theyfrequent. The species, however, require an attentive investigation,the majority being known only by their habitat, and not by anydetailed specific description. Their larvae i^Jig' 117. 8. larva P.Betulae denuded) have the body very flat, the head broad, and theabdomen rounded behind; the tarsi are terminated by a small membranousvesicle with two ungues ; the antennae are stated by Dufourto consist of only one joint ; the pupae fig. \ 17. 9. pupa P. Betulae)are distinguished by having four large and broad scales on the back,which are the rudimental wings. Many species in the preparatorystages are covered with a white cottony secretion fig. 117. 7. larvaP. Betulae), and their excrement forms threads or masses of a gummysucreous nature. Some species also, by puncturing vegetables, in orderto suck the sap, occasion the production of gall-like monstrosities,especially upon the leaves and buds. Psylla Buxi, whose history istraced by Reaumur {{Mem. torn. iii. pi. 29. f. 1. 16.), causes theterminal shoots and young leaves of the box tree to assume the appearanceof buds. The same author has also represented the detailsof the history of the species which lives on the fig (tab. id. f. 17—24.p. Ficus Latr., L. Dufour, Geqffr. pi. 10. f. 2.) ; whilst De Geer has inHemiptera. — APHIDiE. 437like manner illustrated Ps. Pyri, Article, and Betulae, the last of whichin the larva state is densely enveloped in a cottony secretion. Twospecies, Psylla Pyri and Chermes Mali Schmidberger, are very injuriousin orchards, the former to the young shoots and leaves of thepear, and the latter to the apple. The history of these two speciesis given in Kollar's Treatise on Insects injurious to Gardens, Sec.translation, p. 275 — 284'. ; and some particulars relative to the pearPsylla were published by Mr. Knight in Sort. Trans. 2d series, vol. ii.p. 107.; and Gard. Mag. (Loudon) No. 92., Nov. 1837. Latreille hasgiven us the history of a curious species, Livia Juncorum, which inhabitsthe common Junius articulates, depositing its eggs in theflowers, or at least in their shoots : the action of the sap produced amonstrosity in the diseased part, resembling a bundle of grass, withinwhich the insects reside in their different states, supporting themselveson the juice of the plant, and emitting a white farinaceous excrementitioussecretion, in the midst of which they delight to reside.bull. Soc. Philomat. torn, i., and Hist. Nat. Fourmis, p. 325.) Mr.Curtis has figured this insect brit. Ent. pi. 492.), and has stated thathe detected three joints in the tarsi ; the basal joint being, however,scarcely visible, except in the hind legs.The family AphtdjE* comprises the very numerous and obnoxiousspecies of plant lice fig. 117. lo. Aphis Persian), a tribe of insectsBiBLioGR. Refer, to the Aphid.I)e la Hire. Obs. sur 1. Pucerons, in Mem. Acad. Sc. Paris, 1703.Bonnet. On Aphides, in his Oeuvres, torn. i.Richardson. Obs. on the Aphides of Linnaeus, in Phil. Trans. 1771.Bjerkander, in Swed. Trans. 1784.Hausmann. Beitr, d. g. d. Blattlause, in Illiger. Magaz. zu Insect. b. 2. 1802.Kyher. On ditto, in Germar's Magazin d. Ent. 1812.Dutrochet. Anat. Aphides, in Annales des Sci. Nat., Oct. 1833.Duvau. Nouv. Rech. sur I'Hist. n. de Pucerons, in Mem. Mas. d'Hist. Nat.torn. xiii. 1825, and Ann. Se. Nat. torn. v.Kitten, in Ann. Soc. Linn, de Paris, torn. v.Boyer de Fonscolomhe, in Ann, Soc. Ent. de France, torn. iii. (Phylloxera.)Holiday, in Annals of Natural History, Nov. 1838. ,Ferussac. Puceron de Therewith, A. Pistacise, in Nouv. Bull, de Sci. toni. iii. ;and in Bull. Soe. Phil., 1812, 1813.Macquart. Puceron du Able, in Ann. Sci. Nat., April 1831.F F 34-38 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.analogous, in regard to the vegetable world, to the animal parasites ofthe order Anoplura, gr lice; and which, from their constant occurrencein great numbers upon almost every species of plant, must haveattracted the attention of every observer : from the Psyllida^ they areat once distinguished by their antennae being only 7-jointed ; from theAleyrodidse by the more numerous veining of their wings. The rostrumis more or less perpendicular or inflexed, varying in length, beingin some species nearly half as long as the body, and consists of fourjoints (Jiff. 117. 12 head of Cinaja Pini ? Curt). Latreille describes thelabium as 3-jointed, and Curtis as 5-jointed; the terminal joint describedby the latter appears to me to be the exserted tips of theenclosed seas ; the labrum is long and pointed at tip ; the antennaeare of moderate or great length, and consist of seven joints, the lastbeing sometimes obsolete, and the third the longest. The ocelli,three in number, form a large triangle ; the eyes are entire, prominentand semiglobose. The thorax is oval, with the prothorax forming atransverse collar ; the abdomen is short and convex, ovate or elongate-ovate,soft, and generally furnished with a more or less elongatedtubercle on each side near the extremity. The wings are very muchdeflexed at the sides of the body, being almost perpendicular in repose(Jiff' 117. 11.); the fore wings much larger than the posterior, withstrong nerves, the subcostal nerve terminating in an elongatedstigma, close to which runs another longitudinal nerve, obliquelyemitting two or three straight nerves, which run to the hind margin ofthe wing, the last of which emits one or two branches ; the posteriorwings have two similar oblique nerves. The legs are long, or very longand slender, formed only for crawling ; the tarsi short and 2-jointed,the basal joint being shortest (Jiff- 117. 13,).The pupa state is active, and resembles the imago, except in possessingrudiments of wings upon the back (^ff. 117. 15. Pupa AphisBlot. (Myzoxyle) in Mem. Soc. Linn. Calvados.Bonnfous. Aphis Seas, Ann. Soc. Ent. France, 1835.Walker, in Entomol. Mag. No. 14.Schrank, in Fama Boica.Van Heyden, in Museum Seckenbergianum, b. 2. 1837.Morrem, in Annales Sc. Nat., August 183G. Anat. Aph. Persist.And the general works of Reaumur, De Geer, Linnceus, Frisch, Curtis, LatreilleHarris (Exposition of Eiig. Ins).Hemiptera. — APHIDiE 439Prune), at least in those individuals which ultimately acquire wings ;but the family is very anomalous in this respect, many specimens(indeed the majority) never acquiring wings (in which case the pupais not to be distinguished from the mature larva or imago states),although at certain seasons of the year other individuals of the samespecies, and of both sexes, obtain fully developed wings.* It is alsoto be observed, that it is chiefly the females which are produced inthis imperfect condition fig. 117. 14. Aphis Rose y); and whenwe consider that these individuals are placed in the midst of an amplesupply of food both for themselves and their numerous progeny, wecannot be surprised at the non-production of organs which would becomparatively useless ; whilst, at the same time, it is not unworthy ofremark, that the loss of these organs is accompanied by an extraordinarydevelopment of the ovaries : moreover, the suddenness 0*1 thematurity of these apterous specimens, dependent upon the object oftheir production, namely, the checking of vegetation, at such time inthe most luxuriant state, seems sufficient to account for the non-productionof wings, which would require a greater period of time fortheir development. The species reside in great societies upon almostevery species of plant, of which they suck the juices of the youngshoots, leaves, stems, and even roots f, by the assistance of theirproboscis, producing in many instances disease in the plant either bygreatly weakening it, or by distorting young shoots and leaves ; somespecies raising vesicles, or other gall-like excrescences, in which wholegenerations of Aphides are residents. The anal tubercles above-mentioned(which are wanting in some species), secrete a saccharinefluid of which ants are very fond ; and it is this fluid dropped uponthe adjacent leaves, or the extravasated sap flowing from the woundsWe have already seen in the Orthoptera and Fluoride, that analogous instancesoccur, in which, however, rudiments of wings (quite unlike those of the truepupa) are acquired by some specimens, whilst others of the same species have themof full size ; with the example of the Aphides in view, we can but be surprised thatthere should be entomologists who doubt the specific and even the generic identityof such individuals. See further observations hereon under Hydrometrida.•j- A writer in the Entomol. Magazine, No. 14. p. 337., states that he found wholetroops of Aphides in the pips of large sound codling apples ! The same writer haspublished ample details of the injuries committed by Aphis Humuli upon the cropsof hops in the same work (No. 3. p. 217.), in which {tio. 3. p. 315.) anotherobserver has stated that he has observed the hop-fly produce young actually providedwith wings !F F 444-0 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.caused by the punctures of the insects, which is known under the nameof honey-dew.Each family of plant lice in spring and summer consists of individualsalways wingless and of pupae ; all these, however, are females,which produce living young without a previous union with the othersex ; and Bonnet, whose researches have removed all doubts upon thesubject, has clearly shown that this power is exercised at least throughnine generations, which are produced within the space of three months.Whilst Duvau thus obtained eleven generations in seven months, andKyber even observed that a colony of Aphis Dianthi, brought into aconstantly heated room, continued to propagate for four years, with asingle impregnation of a female by a male, the young being constantlyproduced of the female sex. The males, of which some are winged,and others apterous in the same society, are not born until the end ofthe summer or autumn. They fecundate the last generation, producedby the previously born specimens, consisting of wingless females,which then deposit fecundated eggs, which remain through the winter,and produce young in the spring capable of reproduction withoutfresh impregnation. It is impossible in this work to enter into thenumerous details relative to these insects, which have attracted somuch of the attention of naturalists ; I must therefore refer more particularlyto the memoirs of Bonnet, Reaumur (Mem. torn. iii. mem. 9and 11., and torn. vi. mem. 13.), De Geer (Mem. tom. iii. chap. 2 and 3.)Curtis (Observ. on Aphides, in Trans. Linn. Soc. vol. vi. Phil. Trans.1771.), Sauvages (on Honey-dew, in Journ. de Physique tom. i., andin his memoirs), as well as the elaborate anatomical researches ofDuvau, Dutrochet, and Morrem, above referred to.Many of the species have the body densely clothed with a whitecottony secretion, either in threads or flakes ; amongst these mayparticularly be mentioned the Aphis langer, or American blight *as it is termed, which infests the stems of apple trees, sometimestotally destroying them. This species belongs to the genus LachnusIllig. Myzoxyle Blot., Eriosoma Leach, differing from Aphis in theneuration of the wings, as well as in the want of tubercles at the extremityof the body for the secretion of honey-dew. The antennae alsoThe details of the history of this species are given by Knight and Sir J. Banksin the Horticult. Trans.; by Knapp in the Journal of a Naturalist ; Annales Sci. Nat.,March 1831 ; D'Arcilly in Bill. de VAcad. Ebboicienne dxi Department de Vere,J 834; Audouin in Ann. Soc. Ent. France, tom. v. p. 9. App.Hemiptera. APHID.^. 441are shorter than in the true Aphides. Other species agreeing withLachnus hangers in the neuration of the wings, have the body naked andthe wings in repose carried flat upon the body. I possess three small Britishspecies of this group. The very large species which Mr. Halidayhas conjectured is identical with Phylloxera, found by Reaumur in thecrevices of the oak, and figured by him (3Iem. tom. iii. pi. 28. f. 5 — 14.)"(Lachnus Quercus Burmeister^ agrees with these in the wings beingcarried flat upon the body, and the body destitute of tubercles ; butthe apterous individuals are naked, and have the promuscis nearlythree times as long as the body beneath which it is extended in repose,reaching far beyond its extremity like a tail: from the greatlymagnified figures of this instrument given by Reaumur, this instrumentappears evidently 4-jointed, the penultimate joint being thickenedand the preceding joint being capable of great contraction. The genusVhyWoxeva. Fons. differs from the preceding in having still fewer nervesin the wings (only three simple ones upon the disc of the wing), althoughthese organs are carried flat upon the back. M. Fonscolombehas sent me a specimen of the species found by him on the Elaea (Attn. Soc. Ent. France, 18S4, p. 224-.), M'ith the expressionthat it certainly belongs to his genus Phylloxera; and M. V. Audouinhas supplied me with both sexes of the species found on the oak. Thevery minute species Vacuna coccinea of Van Heyden (to whom I amindebted for specimens) has the wings similarly veined. The generaParaclete and Fords V. H. (which I also possess from theirtalented describer), as well as his g. Drama, are founded upon minutespecies which reside in ants' nests.* (Reaumur also mentions findingAphides in the nests of these insects.) These insects are all apterousas well as the genera Rhizobius Burm., and Thersites Haliday. Thelast-named author has published some interesting observations on thehabits of the species of Eriosoma in the Annals of Nat. Hist., Nov.1838 f, the majority of the species of which are produced withinI have above (p. 229. and 234.), alluded to the fondness of ants for the saccharinematter secreted by the Aphides, the place of which seems supplied in tropicalclimates by the more numerous species of Centrotus and allied genera.-f- In Risso's Hist. Nat, de V Europe Merit., tom. v. 1826, two new genera are indicatedby Leach, ninety, Morals (sp. Pini Leach, Dauci F., Ulmii Le., and Ru-minisie.) and Palais (sp. Crash Le., Absinthii Le., Salicis Le., Viris Le., PopuliLe., and Tanaeeti ie. ), without any characters; and a new species of Eriosoma isdescribed under the name of E. Olea. I do not know the genus Apelles Fallow.4'4'2 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.gall-like protuberances on the leaves oF trees. The group, as proposedby Leach, corresponds with Latreille's 3d section of Aphis, andcomprises the Aphides Gallarum Ulmii, Tremble, Xylosthei, and Gal-harumAbietis, all figured by De Geer. The last-named species recedesmuch from the rest of the family, and approaches nearer to theCoccidee, especially in the nearly globular form of the swollen females,which have very short legs, antennae, and proboscis, but the setaj of thelatter organ are capable of being greatly exserted.The species of this family are greatly subject to the attacks of otherinsects ; the larvas of the Hemerobiidge, the Coccinellae in the larvaand imago states, and the larvae of various species of Syrphidae feedupon them, and destroy vast timbers, whilst they are parasitically attackedby numerous minute Hymenoptera, belonging to the familiesChalcididae, Proctotrupidae, Cynipidae, and Ichneumonidae ; indeed, oneof the genera of the Adscitous Ichneumonss is named Aphidius.When an Aphis has received an egg of one of these parasites, it quitsits companions, and fastens itself by its ungues to the under side oi' aleaf, where it swells nearly into a globular form, its skin stretchedout and dried up, and in a short time the perfect parasite escapes bya circular hole, the mouth of which sometimes remains like a trapdoor.Some of the fossorial Hymenoptera also provision their nestswith Aphides (see ante, p. 195.).The species require a careful monograph, although descriptions ofdetached species have been given by Curtis, Walker, Haliday, Blanchard,L. Dufour, Van Heyden, Morrem, Burmeister, and other recentauthors.The family Aleyrodidte consists of the minute species of the genusAleyrodes (Jig 118. l. A. Chelidonii, man. ; 2. ditto in repose, threetimes nat. size), distinguished from the Aphidte by the broad, farnese,and nearly equal-sized wings, and still more by the transformations; and from the Coccidae by both sexes being furnished withfour wings in the perfect state. The head is small (Jiff. 118. 3.), withthe eyes bipartite (^^.118, 4.), and not emarginate, as stated byLatreille (R. An. tom. v. p. 228.) ; the antennae are short and 6-jointed ;the promuscis is short, and apparently only jointed, the basal jointlongest, and the last short and conical, as is also the labrum, from theextremity of which I extracted two curved serai in one specimen(Jiff. 118. 4.) ; the collar is short and transverse ; the abdomen neitherHemiptera. — ALEYRODID^.tubercled, circulate, nor furnished with long threads at the tip ; thefour wings are broadly oval, nearly of equal size, covered with awhite powder, the anterior having only one strong central nerve* ; inrepose they are carried nearly horizontally (^^7. 118. 2.); the legs areshort and simple; the tarsi 2-jointed, with two ungues i^Jig. 118. 5.).The transformations of this genus are extremely interesting, agreeingwith those of the male Coccus in the scale-like form of the larva, totallyunlike the imago (fig. 118. 6. after Burmeister), and in the quiescentstate of the pupa covered by the skin of the larva. We are indebted toReaumur for a minute account of the habits of this insect (memoires,tom.ii. mem. 7. pi. 25.), which feeds, in the larva state, on the leavesof Chelidonium manus, the cabbage, oak, &c., and of which the larvaeand pupae are devoured by a minute Coleopterous larva, apparentlyfrom Reaumur's rough figure of the imago belonging to the Coccinel-hideous genus Somnus. The type of the genus, A. Chelidonii, wasregarded by Linnaeus as a Tinea (Ph. T. proletella, Syst. Nat. vol. ii.p. 889.). Reaumur has given a calculation of the number of individualsproduced from a single female, showing that in twelve generationsthe number is at least 200,000 in one year ; hence, Linnaeusobserves, " Part quotannis 200,000 soboles, dum 12 progenies ponant12 ova singulae."-}- These eggs, varying in number from eight tothirty-six, are arranged around a circular space, covered with whitepowder, on the underside of the leaves.Gen. 1437. Pinicola and Aleyrodes gigantic and nubia of Stephens'sCatalogue are species of the Neuropterous genus Coniopteryx.Burmeister has incorrectly represented them with nerves similar to those ofCoccus, (Handbuch d. Ent. vol. ii. t. 2. f. 7.)f Kirby and Spence, overlooking this calculation, give 200,000 as the number ofeggs produced by a single individual. ( In trod, to Ent. vol. iii. p. 89.)444 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.The section Monomera, comprising those'species which possess butone joint in the tarsi, terminated by a single unguis (^fig- 118.12. leg ofC. aceris), is composed of the single family CocciDiE*, or scale insects(fig. 118. 19. Lecanium Hesperides j ), one of the most anomaloustribes of insects with which we are acquainted ; and which clearlyproves that annulose animals may exist, which become more andmore imperfect as they approach the imago state, and which in thatstate lose all trace of articulations in the body, as well as of articulatedlimbs (as in the female Cocci and Aspidioti) ; becoming, in fact,inert and fixed masses of animal matter, motionless and apparentlysenseless, and which resemble nothing more nearly than the vegetableBiBLioGR. Refer, to the Coccid^e.Anderson. Letters to Sir J. Banks on Cochineal Insects found at Madras, 1773,1795. — Ditto, in Asiatic Researches.Roxburgh. On Chermes Lucca, in Phil. Trans, vol. Lxxxi.Vires. Rech. sur I'lnsecte de la Gomme-laque, in Journal de Pharmacie, 1810.Kerr. On Gum-lac Insects, in Phil. Trans. 1781, vol. Ixx.Breynius. Hist. Nat. Cocci radical tinctorii, and Corrigenda, &c. to ditto, in Act.Erudite. 1731, 1733, and in Phil. Trans, vol. xxxvii.Burchard. Exist. de Coco Polonico, in Act. Soc. Upsal, 1742.Wolff. On the Polish Cochineal, in Phil. Trans, vol. liv. and Vi.Haioorth. In Trans. Ent. Soc. 1812.Touched. Traite Complet du Kermes, 8vo, p. 101. Paris, 1811.Dufour. Descr. d'une n. Esp. de Coccus, in Ann. Sc. Nat. torn. ii.Rcaunmr. Memoires, torn. iv.Latreille. Descr. K. S de I'Orme, in Magas. Encycl. torn. ii. 1796. — Ditto, inHist. d. Fourmis. — Ditto, on Aleyrodes, in Magas. Encycl. 1795.De Geer. Memoires, torn. vi. mem. 8.Linnaeus. Suensk Cochineal., in Sw. Trans. 1759.Modeer. Monographiaia Generis Coccus, in Gothaborg. Vetensk Handll. 1778.Dolman. On Swed. Cocci, in Sw. Trans. 1825.Brandt and Camel. In Mem. Acad. Petersburg, vol. iii. n. series.FonscoJomhe, in Ann. Soc. Ent. de France, 1834.Boscc. Descr. du Dorthcsia Caracas, Journ. de Physique, torn. xxiv.Dorthes. Observ. on ditto, in ditto, torn. xxvi.De Bernard, in Ann. Soc. Linn. Paris, live. iv. 1824. (Dorthesia Delavauxii.)Bouche, in his Nature. d. Insecten, band 1.Ratzehurg. On Coccus, in Der Medizinischen Zoologie, Berlin, 1833.L. Guilding. On Margaret's, in Linn. Tr. tom. xvi.Costa, in Atti Sci. Nat. Napoli (Bull. Ferries., Sept. 1830), and Fauna del Regnodi Napoli.And the general works of Laus, Geoffroy, Fabrlcius, Burmeister, Curtis, Bouche,Guerin, and Percheron (Genera d. Ins), &c.Hemiptera. — COCCID^. 44.5excrescences called galls * : such, at least, is the case with many ofthe females in the typical groups. The males {^fig. 118. 7. PseudoccusW., Cacti Z.), on the other hand, become winged ; but, like certain ofthe Ephemeral, to which they are most analogous, they possess butapair of wings (carried horizontally in repose, one covering the other,as in ^<7. 1 18. 8.), and are furnished with two very long anal setae.The mouth, also, of the males in the perfect state is completely obsolete.The female is, however, furnished with a very short 3-jointedpromuscis, arising, as it were, from the breast, emitting several setae(four, according to my examination, three, according to M. Percheron,jig. 118. 11.), capable of being greatly porrected, and inserted intothe bark or stems of trees ; the antennae in this sex are short, subcutaneous,inserted before the eyes, generally composed of from eightto eleven joints ; and the body is apterous, ovate, globose, or shield-shaped(fig. 118. 17. Coccus Cypraeola ? Dalm., 18. C. gibbs $ Softendensely clothed with a white, downy, or waxen secretion, variouslyarranged fig. 118. 20. Dorthesia cataracts ? ). The males,on the other hand, have the body elongate and depressed fig. 118.7.), the three parts quite distinct ; the head small and rounded; theeyes composed of about ten small grains, placed irregularly, or composite,the ocelli wanting ; the antennas more or less elongated ; thethorax wide, with a large scutellum ; the abdomen often furnished withan elongated style, as well as the two setae ; others have the abdomenterminated by a long brush of very delicate white filamentous setae.The wings are large, having a strong subcostal nerve, with a slenderdiscoidal longitudinal nerve, emitting an elongated branch near itsbase; behind this pair of wings is attached a pair of minute halteres,terminated by a short seta, which represent the hind wings. Thetarsi consist of a single joints, terminated by a single claw.These insects, which are ordinarily of very small size, are amongstthe most injurious to the interests of the horticulturist and agriculturist: their powers of propagation are excessive ; and when theyonce gain possession of a plant or young tree, its death is almost certain; the minute size of the larva rendering it impossible to extermi-In these respects it will at once be perceived that these insects offer a strikinganalogy with the class Cirrhipeda.f Dahnan fancied he perceived three joints in the tarsi of C. cryptogamia; andI made a similar observation in one of the tarsi of C. aceris ; probably the tarsusconsists of the three normal joints soldered together.446 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.nate them. Some of the species infest the vine, pine-apple*, and orangetrees in hot-houses, where they do great damage ; the continued heatand, as Mr. Curtis well suggests, the absence of those parasites which,in the native countries of those plants, keep them in check, renderingtheir propagation continuous and not annual, as in the out-of-doorspecies. Sometimes they are so numerous, that I have seen instancesin which the entire surface of a branch of an apple tree has been completelycovered with them. They are well known to gardeners andothers under the name of scale insects and mealy bugs ; the former,especially, affixing themselves to the twigs ; and the females, by degrees,assuming the appearance of galls, whence they are termedby the French gall insects. The males, in their earliest states, resemblethe females ; but a period arrives when the individuals ofthis sex undergo a singular change. At this time, they affix themselvesto the plant for a certain period, sufficient to allow them toundergo their transformations ; the pupa being inactive, and coveredby the skin of the larva, or by an additional pellicle (7?^. 118. 21.cocoon of C. cryptogamia us Dalm. $ ).The following account of the habits of Coccus aceris, communicatedby me to Mr. Curtis, from my observations continued through severalyears, will sufficiently show the habits of the family : —The males make their appearance in the winged state in May, whenthe impregnation of the female takes place, in the singular manner describedby Reaumur (mem. tom.iv.). The males, on escaping from theirsingular cocoons, escape backwards, the wings being extended flatlyover the head. By the end of June the females have attained theirfull gravid size ; and, on lifting up their bodies, their whole interior,or the entire space between the under surface of the body and thebark of the tree, is occupied by white flowery-like matter, in whichthe minute young are to be observed, of the size of the smallest dot ;the dead body of the parent forming a covering to the young. In thisstate they are hexapod, antenniferous, active, and furnished with twolong anal setae. By the end of July the young quit the body of theirparent, and ascend to the extremity of the young branches; therethey affix themselves by their rostrum, gradually increase in size, andlose their anal setae, as well as their former activity. In this statethey remain through the winter, without any diversity of appearanceSee my Observations on two species v.'hich infest pine-apples, in Trans. Ent.Soc. vol. i. p. 206.Hemiptera. — COCCIDiE. 44'7indicative of the sexes ; and it is not until the following April thatthis is first perceived, by the further increased growth of the females,and by the males assuming the pupa state, which is quiescent, withthe limbs arranged upon the breast, the fore-legs being directed forwards,a peculiarity not occurring in any other insects. They aremuch infested by Chalcidideous parasites, several species of whichbelong to a distinct genus, intermediate between the Encyrti (whichare also parasites on this family) and the Eulophi, and which I havedescribed under the name of Oesophagus.The type of this family (and for which, of course, the generic nameCoccus must unquestionably be retained, instead of llliger's name Le-cranium*)is the Coccus Ilicis Linn. (Lee. llicis Burm. vol. ii. p. 71.) ;a species which lives upon the Quercus or Ilex coccifera (a low bushyshrub, a native of the South of Europe or the Levant), and whichwas the insect which supplied the famous dye kokkoq of the Greeks,coccum or coccus bahia of the Romans (whence the origin of theterra coccus and coccinum given to cloth dyed with this production ;whilst persons wearing this kind of cloth were said by the Romansto be Coccinati smart. lib. i. epic. 97. lin. 6.) ; the Chermes orKermes of the Arabs Crimes or Cocchi of the Italians, and Aldermenof the Persians. The females of this interesting species (for specimensBurmeister unites into one genus this species and many others having thebody of the female greatly swollen without any trace of limbs or articulations ; andthose which have the body flat, slender, and shield-like (L. Hesperides, &c.), withthe limbs, antennae, and anal appendages distinct ; the latter may retain the nameof Lecanium, C. Ilicis that of Coccus, and C. Cacti that of Pseudo Coccus. SignorCosta, in his memoir published in the third volume of the Atti del Real (Vlncorr.alle Science natural di Napoli, and in his subsequent monograph of this family, hasmade still greater confusion in the nomenclature of these insects, uniting C. Cactiand Polynices into one genus, first named Diaprostocetus, and then changed toDactylopius. The genus Chermes Geq^r. , including C. Hesperides, Quercus, Coryli,Rusci, &c., he first named Climate, and subsequently Captious ; and somesmaller species analogous to C. cryptogamia Dawn,, and C. linearis Latr., Rtaum.torn. iv. pi. 5. f. 5 — 7., he has named Diaspis. He has changed many specificnames, and regarded many distinct species living upon different plants as varietiesof the same species, their differences of colour, form, and texture being "secondo ilnutriment e I'indole degli mori che dalle piante ritrae" — "o per excessive ridon-dana di mori che la planta gli somministra, o per la quality degli stessi ! " and heasserts, contrary to Reaumur, De Goer, and all other authors, and as the result ofinfinite observation sopra migliaja di casa, e sopra moltissime specie, che il machinasia simile alia semina, trance la sola figura un poco iii stretta," &c., consideringthe male figured by Reaumur in the act of impregnation as a parasitic Ichneumon !448 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.of which, as well as other species of this family, I am indebted toM. Boyer de Fonscolombe of Aix) are of the size of peas, nearlyglobular, black, shining, and quite smooth, without the slightest tracesof articulation.* Its history was first traced by Vallisnieri, Garden(Enc. Aix, p. 250. t. 53.), and Reaumur (3Iem. torn. iv. mem. 1.pi. 5.). See also Loudon's Arboretum Britannicum, p. 1910., whereI have given an account of the mode of its culture and collection,and Kirby and Spence, vol. i. p. 320.Another species, the Coccus Polynices Linn. (G. PorphyrophoraBra), was likewise greatly employed in Poland as a dye, whence itsname of the scarlet grain of Poland. This species, which is foundon the roots of Cleanthes pendennis, differs generically from the formerin the fleshy texture of the unwieldy female, furnished with short antennae,and six very short feet, whilst the male has a thick bushy tailand a very broad costa to the fore wings. My friend Burmeister hasgiven me specimens of this and other interesting species in thepresent family.A large species, allied to this, found in Armenia, upon the roots ofPoa pungent, has been described by Brandt under the name of P.Amelia (P. Armenian Burma). Other European species have beenemployed in dyeing, as mentioned by Kirby and Spence, vol. i. p. 322.But the discovery of the cochineal insect of Mexico, CoccusCacti Linn., has almost superseded the employment of these dyes,and has proved one of the most productive sources of the riches ofthat country. It is found upon the Cactus cochinellifer, and is collectedin such quantities that, according to Humboldt, 800,000 lbs. ofcochineal are annually brought to Europe, each pound containingabout 70,000 insects ; and Dr. Bancroft estimated the annual consumptionin England at 150,000 lbs., worth 375,000A This insect,which has been imported by the French into Algiers, and by theSpaniards into Spain f, with apparent success, and which is to befound in many of our hot-houses on the Cacti, belongs to a genus distinctfrom the preceding species, and which I propose to name ,the male fig. 118. 7.) more nearly resembling that of the trueCocci, whilst the female fig. 118. 9.) is more like that of Porphyrybeing slightly active, with short antennae and feet, and envelopedReaumur states that it is covered with a white powder.f Vincent in Annal. Sci. Naf. vo]. vile. 1st series; and This in Annul. Soc.Ent. France, torn. v. p. I.Hemiptera. — COCCIDJE. 449in a dense white cottony secretion. My figure 118. 7. represents themale of this species ; 8. ditto, with the wings closed, considerably largerthan life ; 9. the under side of the female magnified ; lo. its antenna ;11. its promuscis and seta, after Percheron ; 12. the young larva ; 13.one of its feet ; 14. one of its antennae ; 15. male pupa.Another valuable material obtained from a species of this familyis the Indian product termed lac, which is extensively used in themanufacture of varnishes, sealing-wax, &c. ; it is also the basis of theFrench polish, and is used in making waterproof hats, as well as indyeing. The perfect insect has not been described with sufficient precisionfor modern scientific purposes in the memoirs and figures ofDrs. Roxburgh and Kerr, above referred to*: the female, however,attaches itself to the twigs of various trees, in which state it iscalled stick-lac ; when separated, pounded, and the greater part of thecolouring matter extracted by water, it is called seed-lac; when melteddown into cakes, lump-lac ; and when strained and formed into thinlaminae, shell-lac. The species is the Coccus lucca Kerr, C. FicusFar. Burmeister places it in the same genus with C. Cacti.A species allied to the cochineal is found upon Samaria manniferaEhr., a large tree growing on Mount Sinai, the young shoots of whichare covered with the females, which, puncturing them with their proboscis,cause them to discharge a great quantity of a gummy secretion,which quickly hardens and drops from the tree, when it is collectedby the natives, who regard it as the real manna of the Israelites. Thisspecies, C. manniparus Ehr., is figured in the Symbols Physically Tir ,Klug, to whom I am indebted for specimens.A remarkable creature, known in the West Indies under the nameof the Ground Pearl, and described by Guilding under that of margaret'sFormicarum, from its being chiefly found in ants' nests, isevidently also an insect of this family. (See Latreille in FerussacBulletin, January 1831, and Literary Gazette, June 25. 1831.) TheCoccus cerberus Far., described by Anderson in his letters from Madras(1781), and by Pearson in the Phil. Trans. 1794, is employedin the production of a white wax, the body of the females being envelopedin a thick and solid coat of wax. (Comp. aiite, p. 429.) Thegenus Ceroplastus Gray spices. Zool.) appears identical with thisinsect.Various other remarkable modifications occur amongst these insects :thus, in Auspicious, the males have no lateral anal filaments, but theVOL. ir. c; G450 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.abdomen is terminated by a long slender tube ; in Monophlebus the(J antennae are very long, multi-articulate, and verticillate, and the abdominalsegments furnished with long flattened filaments ; whilst inDorthesia {Cionops Leach) the antennae <? are very long, but simple,and the abdomen terminated by a thick pencil of very delicate whitesettee (frontispiece, Vol. I. Jig' 8.), and the female (Jiff- 118. 20. D.cataphractus Sh.) is covered with elongated flakes of a waxy secretion,which in some exotic species in my collection are nearly an inchlong. The females in this genus, as well as in Monophlebus, remainactive, with the antennae and legs distinct. Some of the exoticspecies are of very large size. I possess several males belonging tothe genera Monophlebus and Dorthesia*, the wings of which are nearlyan inch in expanse, and a gigantic female from New Holland, givento me by Mr. Hope, which has much the appearance and size of thefull-grown larva of Oestrus Bevis.Order HETEROPTERA.f(Hemiptera Maclean, Stephens; Hemiptera NeuropteraLatr. ; Hemimeroptera p. Clairvv. ; Rhyngota t^. Far. ; Rhyn-chota p. Burm. ; Arthitignathes p. Spin. Essai Hem. Het.p. 20.)Char. Wings four ; anterior pair larger than the posterior, lappingpartly over each other ; basal portion coriaceous, apical part membranous.I cannot agree with M. Dufour in considering Dorthesia as belonging to afamily distinct from Coccus. (See his Rech. Anatomy. sur les Hemipt. G. 31.) Themales even of my gigantic species are entirely destitute of a mouth ; and thenervures of the wings as well as many other characters, and especially the possessionof only a pair of wings with halteres, agree with the rest of the Coccida;.The numerous observations and drawings which I have made in illustration ofthis family (which has engaged much of my attention) will form the subjectof separate memoirs.j- BiBLioGR. Refer, to the Neuroptera.Stall. Representation des Praises, 4to. 49 col. pi. Amsterd. 1788.Modeer, in Vetensk. Acad. Handling. 1764, b. 26. (on Cimices). — Ditto, band 29.(Ditto.)HETEROPTERA. 451Body depressed.Antennae generally elongated, filiform.Mouth arising from the anterior and inferior part of the head ;promuscidate.Pupa active, semi complete (Metamorphosis semi complete Faber).Having, in the general observations upon the Homoptera, enteredinto the question of the rank of that and the present group, I shallhere merely notice the peculiarities of structure exhibited by theseWolff. Icones Circum. Erlang. 1801-4. 4to. pi. 20.Fabricated. Systema Rhyngotorum, 8vo. Bruiis. 1801. Ed. Alt. 1803.Fallen. Monogr. Circum Specie, in Vetensk. Acad. Handll. 1805-7. andCopenh. 1807. Specimen Novem Hemipt. dispon. Method, exhib. Lund.4to. 1814. — Dit4to, 1823, Supplement 4to dit4to, 8vo. Lund. 1826. — Dit4to,Hemipt. Special, Lund. 1826, 8vo. — Ditto, ditto, 1829, fasc. 1 10.L. Dufour. Recherches Anat. et Physiol, sur les Hemipt. Paris, 4to. (Extr. fromMem. Sav. Etrang. tom. iv.) 1833. — Ditto, in Annal. Soc, Ent. France,torn. ii. and tom. iii. — Ditto, in Ann. Sci. Nat. April, 1831.Laporte. Essai d'une Classification Systematt. de Ordre des Hemipt., in Guerin'sMag. Zool. 1833.Schellenherg. Die Land und Wasserwanzen. Zurich, 8vo. 1800.H. Schaffer. Nomenclator Entomologicus, 12rao. Regensburg, 1835.Hahn. Icones ad Monographiam Circum, fasc. i. 12mo. Nurimb. 1825. — Ditto,die Wanzenartigen Insecten, in Nos. 1831-9. (continued by H. Chafed).Sm. Svo.Say. Hemipt. of Rocky Mountains, in Journ. Acad. Philadelph. tom. iv.Ditto, Descript. of new Heteropt. Hemipt. of N. Amer. Svo. 1831. New-harmony.Thunherg. Dissert, de Hemipt. rostratis Capensibus, 4to. Upsal, 1822. (in 4 parts).Ditto, Ins. Hem. tria g. illus. Upsal, 1825.Schilling, in Beitrage zur Entomol. (Hemipt. Silesia).Gistll, in Faunus, 1837,No. 2. (list of species).JSurmeister. Handll. d. Ent. vol. ii. — Ditto, in Nov. Act. Phys. Nat. Curios.vol. xvi. — Ditto, in Revue Entomol. de Silbermann, tom. ii.Waltll. Reise nach Spanien.Wesiicood, in Ann. Soc. Ent. de France, tom. iii. 1834. — Ditto, in Trans. Ent.Soc. vol. ii. — Ditto, in Mag. Nat. Hist. n. s. vol. ii.Eversmann, in Bull. Mosc. 1837.Spinola. Essai sur les Hemispheres, Svo. Genes, 1837. — Ditto, in Bull. Soc.Cuvierrr. Nov. 1839 (2 n. g.).Audouin and Brulle. Hist. Nat. Ins. tom. ix.And the general works of Klug (Symbb. Physica), Griffith (An. K. ), Serville(Encycl. M^th.), Perty (Delect. An. art. Bras.) Palisot-Beauvois, Donovan,Drury, Coquehert, Curtis, Zetterstcdt, Guerin, Boisduval, §'c.GG 2452 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.insects. The head is generally advanced and broad ; the eyes generallyplaced at the sides of the head, which enter the frontal cavity ofthe prothorax ; the ocelli are occasionally present, and two in number; the antennae are ordinarily of moderate length, and composed offoin or five joints* ; they are mostly filiform, but sometimes have thelast joint either thickened or very slender. In the aquatic species(where porrected antennae would be inconvenient) we find these organsgreatly reduced in size, and received into cavities on the underside ofthe head. The mouth is of the promuscidate construction (seejfiff. 119.and 122.) ; the labium or canal being occasionally greatly elongated, extendingbeneath the body, and either 3- or 4-jointed.-]- The four internaldelicate setae represent the mandibles and maxillae ; the maxillaryand labial palpi are obsolete); ; the labrum is distinct, triangular, andmore or less elongated, closing upon the upper side of the labium atthe base, when the setae enter the labial canal. Savigny has discoveredalso a minute elongate tongue, trifid in front, between the base of themandibles and maxillae, terminated behind by the pharynx in Nepa. Inmany species which prey upon other insects, as well as in such as residebeneath the bark of trees, the promuscis is very short. The body is ordinarilyrounded, oval, or more elongate and depressed. The prothoraxgreatly developed (although it never covers the scutellum and wings),imitating in this respect, as well as in the great development of themesothoracic scutellum, the order Cleopatra : the metathorax is ofsmall extent ; on its under side it is furnished with two pores, which secretethe fluid which gives to these insects so unpleasant a scent. Thewings, when at rest, are carried horizontally upon the back, the membranousapex of one fore wing lying upon and crossing the same partof the other ; the anal area of the fore wings is narrow ; the basal partor communi of this pair of wings is often very thick, but occasionally it issufficiently transparent to permit the nerves with which it is furnishedto be perceived ; these nerves, both in the corium and apical membrane,vary considerably in number and position in the differentIn Hammatocerus, a genus of Brazilian Reduvii, the second joint is composedof a great number of minute articulations.-|- The mode of insertion of the joints of the rostrum or labium necessarily influencesthe mode of action of this organ. (See Spinola's Essai, p. 26 — .)% Savigny first discovered two minute oval .pieces attached to the third joint ofthe labium on the upper side in Nepa, and which he considers as the labial palpi,observing that if the sides of the labium were not turned up, these palpi would beatthe under side of the joint, as in the Orthoptera. (Mem. A71. Article. pi. 4. f. 3.)HETEROPTERA. 4-53genera. The fore wings rise wide apart at the base, in order to leavespace for the large scutellum, which is generally triangular, but sometimesso greatly enlarged as to cover the whole of the upper side ofthe abdomen, leaving only the lateral margins of the fore wings visible.The feet vary considerably in form ; in the majority, however, theyare simple, and formed for walking ; the anterior pair in some is transformedinto a pair of organs of prehension, whilst the hind feet inothers are greatly dilated and toothed ; these limbs are modified inthe aquatic species, to fit them for their functions. The tarsi areshort, and never composed of more than three joints.The structure of the mouth of these insects indicates at once thattheir nutriment consists solely of the juices of plants or animals,which are pumped up the labial canal by the gradual contraction ofthat organ, the substance from which such juices are derived havingbeen previously wounded by the four sharp internal set£e. By far thegreater proportion of these animals are found upon plants from whichthey derive their nutriment ; some, however, feed upon other andweaker insects, found in similar situations. Such are their habits inall their stages, as they continue active, and require food throughouttheir whole existence. The larvae are distinguished by the total wantof any appearance of the rudiments of wings ; whilst, in the pupa, theselimbs are to be observed upon the back of the resound meta-thorax.The ocelli are only developed in the imago state.The number of species of this order is very great ; the majority,however, are found in tropical countries, in which they are mostly ornamentedwith a great variety of beautiful colours and markings, oftenvying in splendour with the most splendid of the beetle tribes. Theaquatic species, on the other hand, are uniformly of an obscure blackor brown colour. They rarely exceed an inch in length, whilst many arenot above a line long : they are, for the most part, found in the wingedstate at the end of the summer. Almost every terrestrial speciesin the order emits, on being suddenly alarmed or touched, a peculiarodour, more or less disgusting, and which is so well known in thecommon bed-bug ; but which, in some few species (as in Lygaeus ),assumes a more grateful scent, probably resulting from thenature of the plant on the juices of which it subsists. Others emitthe odour of acetic ether, or exhalations similar to that of the majorityof the Carabidae. Fruit, such as raspberries, &c., is occasionally renderedvery offensive to the taste by some of the garden species havingGG 3454 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.previously passed over or sucked its juices. Some species, however,are destitute of this means of defence, and these are chiefly foundamongst the predaceous species, with a short curved rostrum. Theexhalation of this scent is not, however, continual ; for, as Dufourobserves, when one of these insects is observed without its beingdisturbed, no scent is perceived ; and if, when suddenly seized, it beplunged into a fluid, innumerable minute bubbles will be observed toissue from two pores between the hind feet, which, on bursting at thesurface, immediately emit the scent peculiar to the species. Thespecies of Reduvii, and other carnivorous species, with strong curvedbeaks, are able to produce, when alarmed, a smart pain, by plungingtheir rostrum into the flesh, and emitting a drop of fluid dischargedfrom their salivary glands. Others, at the same time, make a creakingnoise, by the friction of the fore part of the metathorax within thehollowed base of the prothorax.A peculiarity occurs in some of these insects, whereof analogousinstances have already been noticed among the Orthoptera, Homo-pera,Aphidae, and even in a species of Chalcididae, namely, the undevelopedstate of some specimens in the imago state which are neverthelessas capable of reproduction as others of the same species whichhave acquired fully developed wings. Thus the bed-bug has never beenobserved but with the minute rudimental upper wings, somewhat resemblingthe ordinary wing-cases of pupae ; others, again, as the speciesof Gerris, Hydrometra, and Velia, are mostly found perfectly apterous,whilst occasionally they are found with full-sized wings. The wingedmales of Capsus ambulance are stated by Fallen {JSIonogr. Cim. Suecc.p. 6.) to be always found coupled with apterous females. Chorosomamiriformis, Prostemma guttula, Pachymerus brevipennis, &c., aregenerally found with very short wing-covers, but occasionally withfull-sized wings.Two erroneous opinions have been entertained with respect to theseundeveloped individuals : first, that they are pupae, and, consequently,that pupae are able to reproduce ; and second, that they belong todistinct species. Against the first of these opinions, I will only observethat the structure of the real pupae of such specimens as subsequentlyattain wings is quite different from that of these imperfectperfect insects, as they may be called ; and, against the second, I willrefer to the analogy offered by the other groups above alluded to, andto the constant discovery of the winged and imperfect individuals inHETEROPTERA. 455''company, and often in copulation together". The specific identity ofthe ordinary individuals of Pyrrhoceris apterus (Curtis B. E. pi. 465.)having hem elytra destitute of apical membrane, with such as haveperfect fore and hind wings, has never been questioned* by writers whocontinue to assert the specific differences of Velia rotulorum andcurrent, and form the winged specimens of Hydrometra into a speciesdistinct from the apterous oneself I must refer, however, to mymemoir on this subject (annales Soc. Ent. de France, 1834).Notwithstanding the great diversity in structure which exists betweenthe terrestrial and aquatic species, it is impossible not toperceive that they unite to form one group, having no immediateconnection with the Cicadae or other primary types of the Homoptera.Mr. MacLeay, indeed, considers the transition to be effected by theNotonectae and other aquatic species (shore Ent. p. 376.), which coincidewith the Homoptera in the small development of their antennaeand conical rostrum ; and with the Neuroptera in having the rostrumfrontal, elytra coriaceous, and body generally depressed. Indeed, heeven considers it probable that they should be placed in the orderHomoptera, from a fancied analogy between Ranatra and Ephemera ;a suggestion not likely to be adopted.I have not followed English entomologists in applying to this orderthe Linnaean name of Hemiptera, but have preferred employing thesectional name proposed by Latreille for it. My reasons for this are,1st, the circumstance that these insects are not the types of the linnaeanorder ; 2d, the name Hemiptera was intended by Linnaeus toexpress the hemielytrate semicoriaceous texture of the fore wings ofthe Orthoptera and Homoptera ; and 3d, the name of Latreille admirablyapplies to them.Latreille divided this order into two primary sections gen. Crust.,^•c. torn. iii. p. 109.), to which, in his latter works, he applied thenames of Geocorisa, or land bugs, and Hydrocorisa, or water bugsEven Mr. Curtis figures an undeveloped specimen of this insect, whilst hisdescription is taken from one with fully developed wings and wing-covers.I Mr. Curtis has recently started the idea that the undeveloped individuals arein a state analogous to the Pseudimago of the Ephemeridce ; a supposition perfectlyinconsistent with the circumstance that the pseudimago state consists in the existenceof a delicate pellicle entirely enveloping the already fully-developed limbsof the imago, and which it is necessary to slough off before the creature can performits perfect functions. How can this be applied to the apterous but yet procreativeVeliaj, or the subalterns Chorosomae, Pyrrhoceris, &c. ?G G 4'^56 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS,and scorpions ; including amongst the former a group which he namedPloteres, which reside on the surface of the water. This binary arrangementhas been adopted by most subsequent authors, includingBurmeister. M. L. Dufour, however, considered the Ploteres as a groupof equal rank with the other two sections, and which he accordinglynamed Amphibicorises ; whilst the Marquis Spinola, in his recentlypublished essay upon these insects, proposes five tribes, — Besides,Hydrocoryzes, Calculates, Amphibicoryzes, and Geocoryzes. M. La-portede Castella, on the other hand, regarding the habits of theseinsects as of more importance than the situation in which they exist,has divided them into two groups, Hsemathelges (blood-suckers)* andAnthothelges (flower-suckers) ; each divisible into aquatic and terrestrialspecies, characterised by the length or shortness of the rostrum,and the raptorial or simple form of the feet; observing, " Lesspecies que la nature a applies a poursuivre et a chasser une proievivante sont necessairement toutes d'une intelligence plus etendue ;et, par consequent, sont plus advances dans Rochelle animate que cesmetres innocents qui doivent rencontrer leur nourriture sur leur route,sans avoir besoin de deployed leur intelligence a la poursuivre." (essaiHhnipt. p. 3.) In the present state of our knowledge, however, asM. Spinola has clearly shown essai, p. 38.), it is impossible to attempta classification of the order from the nature of the fluid food ofthe insects ; as, for instance, he notices that he had repeatedly observedboth Lygaiites and Pentatomites sucking the juices of otherinsects, and points out various other objections to such a mode of distribution.I shall therefore adopt the binary distribution of Latreille.But, as the aquatic species have been regarded as most allied to theHomoptera, they are here placed at the head of the order, which I shalldistribute into families, nearly as proposed by Burmeister (whose familiesappear far more natural than many of his genera) ; retaining,however, the family termination idle, founded upon that of the typicalgenus, namely : —Section 1. Hydrocorisa, or those which reside in water, divided intotwo families : Notonectidae and Nepidse.Section 2. Aurocorisa Westio. (Geocorisa Latr.), or those whichbreathe the free air, divided into nine families : Galgulidae, Hysoil Languishes Dumeril (^Consid. Gtn. p. 216.), but merely distinguishedby the capillary terminal joint of the antennaHETEROPTERA. HYDROCORISA. 457drometridae, Acanthiidse, Reduviidae, Cimicidse, Tingidse, Capsidae,Ljgaeidse, Coreidae, and Scutelleridae.The first section, Hydrocorisa, is entirely composed of aquaticspecies, in which the antennae are very short, and concealed in cavitiesbeneath the eyes ; their legs are more or less fitted fear action in thewater being generally ciliated in the posterior pairs, with rarelymore than 2-jointed tarsi, whilst the fore legs are short and fold, forminga pair of claws, whereby the insects seize their prey, which consistsof other insects. The eyes are often of a very large size. There isconsiderable diversity in the structure and movements of the speciesof this section ; Notonecta and its allies being admirably formed forswimming, whilst the Nepidae are very slow in their movements in thewater, their legs scarcely serving them as oars ; and yet they areequally predaceous with the rest. Living in an element not fittedfor respiration, they are compelled to resort to its surface continuallyto obtain fresh supplies of air ; this is easily effected in theNepidae and Ranatrge, by the assistance of the two appendages at theextremity of the body, which conduct the air to the two spiraclesplaced at the sides of the anus, which, from the researches ofDufour, are the only ones the insect possesses, the others, althoughplaced in the ordinary situations, being merely rudiniental.* In theNotonectidae, the extremity of the body is thrust out of the water,whereby a supply of air is introduced beneath the wings and the uppersurface of the abdomen, where it is retained by the rows of hairs withwhich the segments are dorsally furnished, at least in Notonecta.(Dufour, Anat. Hemipt. pi. 7. f. 94.) The connection of these insectswith the Aurocorisag is admirably effected by the genera Calculus,Pelogonus, and especially by means of my genus Aphelocheirus, assubsequently noticed.Nearly all the Hydrocorisas are of a dull brown or obscure blackcolour.See the observations of M. Spinola, referred to beneath, relative to the respirationof the Belostomce.The insects of this section have afforded to M. Been the discovery of the circulationof a fluid through their legs. (See Ann. Soc. Ent. de France, 1835. p. 55.App.) This discovery has been denied by M. Dufour, whilst M. Wesmael hasconfirmed it, explaining Dufour's denial of the fact by stating that he had examinedthem in cold weather, in which M. Wesmael finds that the phenomenon isnot visible. trans. Ent. Soc. vol. ii. p. 17.)MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.The species of the first family, Notonectid^*, are distinguished bytheir pre-eminently senatorial habits, their hind pair of legs being greatlyelongated and strongly ciliated, forming a pair of oars (generally withoutungues), whence these insects have obtained the name of boat-flies(fig. 119. 1. Notonecta furcata).* Their "general form is also muchFig. 119.better fitted for swimming than any of the rest, being more boat-shaped,with the head nearly as wide as any other part of the body :although they prey upon other insects, the fore legs are not raptorial,being simply incurved, the anterior tarsi being two-jointed, and terminatedby two ungues (fig. 119. 8.); the middle legs are also similarlyformed to the anterior pair, except that the femora are furnished beneathat the base, in Notonecta, with a pencil of hairs, and near theapex with a short spine, which I have not seen noticed by authors. Theelytra are generally deflexed at the sides ; the eyes are very large, andbi-emarginate behind (fig. 1 19. 2.) ; the antennae {Jig- 1 19. 7.) insertedbehind and beneath the eyes, 4-jointed, the basal joint inserted at itsside, the others diminishing in size. The rostrum fig. 119. 2. and 4.)is short, thick, and apparently only 3-jointed ; with this instrumentthey are enabled to inflict a painful wound, thrusting its extremity intothe flesh, into which they also introduce their setaceous maxilla andBiBLioGR. Refer, to the Notonectid^.Sahlherg. Observ. quae. History. Notonect. imprimis Fennicarum illustrates.Above, 4 to. 1819.Leach. On the Classif. of the Notonectidrc, Linn. Trans, vol. xii.Fallen. Hydrocorides et Naucorides SuecicT, Lund. 1814. 8vo.Spinola. Essai suv les Hemipt.And the other general works on the order.HETEROPTERA. NOTONECTIDjE. 459mandibles, the latter of which are armed at the sides with twelve finerecurved teeth : fig. 119. 5. represents one of the mandibles entire,and the base of the other, and of the two maxillae ; fig. 119. 6. showsthe extremity of the mandible more strongly magnified. These organsare introduced into the labium, through an orifice on the upper sideof the basal joint, represented in j*?^. 119. 4., which is ordinarily coveredby the upper lip (fig. 119. 3.). (These figures of the mouth of No-tectaare copied from original drawings made by R. Templeton,Esq.)The name of the typical genus, Notonecta, alludes to the singularhabit which these insects have of swimming on their backs, various peculiaritiesin their organisation being in harmony with this peculiarity,as pointed out by Dufour ; such as the inclined position of the headtowards the breast, the form of the eyes enabling the insect to seeboth above and below, &c. When stationary at the surface of water,as is much their custom in still hot weather, they very quickly obtainintelligence of the approach of danger ; when, by a single stroke oftheir long paddles, which are ordinarily kept stretched at full length,as represented fig. 119. i., they descend into the water out of sight.Their motions are very quick in their own element, but on the groundthey are scarcely able to walk. They are able to fly well, their hindwings being exceedingly delicate.The larvae and pupae differ only from the imago in their smallersize, and in wanting wings; in the purse the rudiments of these organsare enclosed in the small flat tubercles on the back: they have the samehabits as the imago. Frisch (tom. vi. tab. 13.), De Geer, and Rosehave illustrated the preparatory states of these insects : according tothe last warned author, the eggs (which are attached to the stems andleaves of aquatic plants, and are of an oval form) are hatched in fifteendays ; the young make their appearance at the beginning of thespring, and the parent survives until they have arrived at maturity.The genus Plea is remarkably distinguished by the elytra beingentirely coriaceous, and uniting together by a straight suture, notoverlapping each other in the least.The genus Corixa is distinguished by several peculiar characters ;the prothorax being advanced behind over the scutellum : the body isflattened above. The three pairs of legs are allxiifferently organised,the fore legs being imperfectly prehensile, the tibial being short, andthe tarsi composed of a single large and ciliated joint fig. 119. 9.).460 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.The middle legs are slender, and armed with remarkably long andslender claws, whilst the hind legs are long, with the two tarsal jointsvery broad, ciliated, and well adapted for swimming. The same structureexists in the larvae of this genus, except that I cannot perceiveany trace of articulation in the hind tarsi, which consist of a singlejoint. I have observed great numbers of these insects of differentspecies congregated and huddled together at the surface of the waterbeneath the ice when frozen ; many of them had hold of each other,and they appeared very inactive. The species of this family arewidely distributed, and are found in almost all parts of the world.The exotic species require a minute revision, being (as evidentlyproved by our British species) extremely variable in their markings.The second family, Nepid^*, has the body depressed (fig. 119. lo.Nepa cinerea) ; the head small, with large lateral eyes ; the fore legsstrongly raptorial, having the coxae very long; the thighs dilated, witha notch along the inner edge to receive the tibia, which is curved andunited with the tarsus (fig. 119. ii), composed of a single joint, ordinarilywithout ungues "j" ; the two other pairs of feet are alike instructure, and formed for creeping amongst the roots of aquaticplants, with 2-jointed tarsi, furnished with two ungues. The extremityof the body in the typical species is furnished with two longand slender filaments, the use of which has been noticed above. TheBiBLIOGR. Refer. to THE NePID^.The general works of Spinola, Burmeister, Laporte, Diifour, Zetterstedt, Fallen, ,and others upon the entire order.f The structure of the fore legs of Ranatra has much puzzled some authors ;thus Geoffroy mistook them for antennae, whilst Mr. Curtis considers that thefemur and tibia are united with a strong tooth on the inside at their union, andterminated by a two-jointed tarsus. Analogy with such genera as Mantis, or evenNepa, is sufficient to show the incorrectness of this description, and that the toothon the under side of the limb indicates that part of the femur which acts in concertwith the tip of the raptorial tibia. Latreille and Savigny more philosophically describedthis "crochet terminal," as " forme de la jambe et du terse conies." (mem.An. sans Vert. p. 60.)HETERQPTERA. NEPID^. 461antennae are very short and variable in structure ; they appear to beonly 3-jointed in the typical species fig. 119. 16, ant. of Ranatra, andsee Curtis), whilst in Belostoma fio' 119. 17.) and in Sphasrodema(Laporte, Hemipt. pi. 52. f. 1.) they are 4-jointed, the middle jointsbeing sometimes greatly developed on one side. The rostrum is ashort but robust instrument, the labium being composed of threejoints, and having on its front side, at the extremity of the secondjoint, a pair of oval lobes, first noticed by Savigny in Nepa (Jem.An. sans Vert. pi. 4. f. 3 o, and my Jig. 119. 13. x ). I have also observedthem in several species of Ranatra, &c. (^Jig- 119. 12. x ). Fig.119. 13. further exhibits the place of insertion of the slender mandiblesand maxillae, which are here drawn out of their sheath (thelabium), at the orifice represented dark in the basal joint (analogousto that represented \x\Jig. 119. 4.), as well as the semicorneoustongue trifid in front, and having the pharyngeal orifice at its base.The description given by L. Dufour (JRech. Hemipt. {jI. 6. f. 81.) ofthese internal organs, is quite at variance with the account of Savigny,and all other authors.These insects are very predaceous, feeding upon other insects, especiallythe larvae of Ephemerae. Their motions are, however, veryslow. The females of the typical genus deposit their eggs in thewater ; they are of an oval form, and surmounted by seven elongatedfilaments fig. 119. 14.), which serve, whilst the egg is in the oviduct,to form a kind of cup for the reception of the succeeding egg, butwhich are recurved when the egg is discharged. The eggs of thegenus Ranatra are more elongated, and are furnished above with twoslender setae. According to Rose, they are deposited at random in thewater, but Geoffrey states that they are introduced into the stems ofaquatic plants, the elongated filaments being alone exposed. M.Dufour has described the eggs deposited by two species of Naucoris,which differ considerably from those of Nepa and Ranatra. The femalesof some species of Belostomac carry their eggs upon their backs,arranging them in a single layer with great symmetry. The younginsects resemble their parents, except that those which ultimatelyobtain elongated anal filaments have the body terminated at first by ashort point {Jig.W^. 15. young larva of Nepa). Frisch, De Geer,Rose, Swammerdam, and Geoffrey have illustrated the transformationsof the three genera found in England, whilst M. Dufour haselaborately detailed the anatomy of Nepa and Ranatra ann. Gen. de462 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Scienc. Physiq. Brun. torn. vii. and Recherch. Hemipt.). The last-namedgenus is remarkably elongated, with very long and slender feet andanal filaments. Like the rest of the family, it is able, when disposed,to leave the-water and take wing. 1 have seen one descend into apond, when it had the greatest difficulty to immerge itself, owing tothe dryness of the anal filaments ; at the same time I noticed that itdid not move its four hind legs in concert. The other British genusNaucoris is especially interesting in the arrangement of the order,from its more perfect powers of swimming, the four hind legs beingwell fitted for this action ; in this respect, as well as in the breadth ofthe head, approaching the Notonectidae ; but the fore legs( fig. 119. 18.)are more perfectly raptorial than in any of the other Nepidae, thefemora being greatly dilated. In the Crochard edition of the RegneAnimal (Isis. pi. 93. f. 5. c), this leg is described and figured as wantingthe anterior tarsus, but this part clearly exists ; the rostrum is short(fig. 120. 1.). The genus Belostoma comprises some of the mostgigantic species of this order, being three inches long. These arepeculiar to the waters of the tropics : their ovate depressed form, andthe more senatorial structure of the hind feet, fits them better for swimmingthan the Nepae and Ranatrae. The fore feet of the large speciesare peculiar, having the tarsi distinctly 2-jointed, but quite incorporatedwith the extremity of the tibiae, and terminated by a long, slender,and acute unguis.* In some of the smaller species (G. DiplonychusJuap.), there are two short ungues in the anterior tarsi, which aremore distinct, and they are also furnished with a short basal (3d) jointeasily visible from beneath.The second section of the order has been named Geocorisa byLatreille, the greater number of the species being terrestrial ; some,however, are found upon the surface of water ; and hence these, althoughclosely allied in general structure to the other Geocorisa,have, on that account, been separated by L. Dufour into a distinctIn the larva the fore feet are terminated by two ungues. M. Spinola alsostates that the males of the large Brazilian species B. grandis have also two ungues.He also asserts that the male BelostomjB and both sexes of Sphaei-odema have theordinary organs of respiration ; whereas in the female Blossoms the spiracles of theabdomen (except the last pair) are obsolete ; and further, that the two anal appendagesof this genus are in no wise employed in the act of respiration. (Rev.Zool. Soc. Cuvierrr. 1839, p. 112.) It is on this account that Spinola has separatedthe Besides as a distinct primary tribe of the order from the rest of the Hydrocorizes.HETEROPTERA. GALGULID^. sessection, Amphibicorisa, an inappropriate name, because the speciesnever reside in the water. In order to retain the section in its extentso well characterised by Latreille, and, at the same time, toavoid his misnomer, I have proposed for them the name of AuROCO-Rise, or such as live in the open air. From the Hydrocorisa they areordinarily distinguished by the greater length of the antennae, whichare not minute, and concealed in cavities beneath the eyes ; and bythe legs, fitted for running or walking, and not for swimming. Atthe same time, however, as if to show the impossibility of confiningnature within the limits of our arrangements, the Galgulidge (whichhave hitherto been arranged with the Hydrocorisa, but which differtherefrom in not residing in the water), as well as the genus Pelogo-nas, have the antennae minute, and concealed in cavities beneath theeyes ; whilst Aphelocheirus still more nearly approximates to Nau-corps, in being truly aquatic, whilst the elongated structure of its rostrumproves its decided affinity to Pelogonus and Acanthia. It isalways amongst these osculant but highly interesting groups that thesystematic is baffled.The third family, Galgulid^, or the first of this section fig. 119.19. Galgulus oculatus. North America), consists of very few species, distinguishedby the censorial structure of the hind legs ; the short, broad,and depressed form of the body ; broad head, with pedunculated eyes ;short rostrum (fig. 119. 21. head sideways), and small antennae, insertedin a cavity beneath the eyes, and composed of four joints(fig. 119. 20.), the third of which is small, and has been overlookedby some authors ; the fore legs are more or less raptorial, consisting ofa broad or very broad femur, slender tibia, and a tarsus consisting, inGalgulus, of a single joint furnished with two long slender ungues, butformed, in Mononyx, into a slender curved hook without ungues ; thefore feet, in this genus, being more pre-eminently raptorial than inGalgulus ; the other tarsi are 2-jointed, with two ungues ; the two ocelliare minute, and placed on the front of the face, between the eyes.The form of the fore feet and the pedunculated eyes clearly showthat the insects of this family are predatory, feeding upon other insects; whilst the presence of ocelli, and the structure of the hindlegs, indicates them to be censorial, and not senatorial ; it is, accordingly,upon the margin of water that these insects are stated to464< MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.reside, burying themselves in the sand, especially in the larva state.Fabricius, however, states that Mononyx astoria " habitat in Americameridional aquas." (Si/st. Rh. p. 111.) M. Desjardin has, however,described the habits of a Mauritian species, which is foundunder stones and wet leaves on the coast of Mauritius.* (ann. Soc.Ent. France, 1837, p. 240.)The species, according to Burmeieter, are peculiar to America ; I,however, possess species from several parts of Africa ; and Messrs.Hope and Darwin, as well as the Jardin des Plantes, possess speciesfrom New Holland ; another, also, was found by M. Desjardin in theisland of Mauritius. In Galliard's work on Egypt another species isevidently represented in vol. ii. pi. 58. f 28. Latreille described itdoubtingly as a Pentatoma, the specimen having been lost, but thefigure leaves scarcely any doubt that it is one of this family. I alsopossess a pupa of Galgulus from the interior of South America, whichdiffers from the imago in the smaller size of the pi'Othorax, and broadermesothorax, which, as well as the metathorax, has rudimental wing-covers; the tarsi of the hind legs appear only 1-jointed, like the foretarsi, with two ungues; the eyes are very prominent, and the ocelliwanting ; the larva of Mononyx, described by Serville and St. Far-beau{Enc. Methh, torn. x. p, 271.), differs (like the imago) in the lessprominent eyes ; the anterior tibia and tarsus are united into a hook,and the second abdominal segment is armed with a central recurvedspine.The family is especially interesting with respect to the classificationof the Neuroptera ; agreeing with the typical Nepidaj in theprominent eyes, short rostrum, raptorial fore legs, and slender hindlegs ; but the evidently censorial habits of the insects on the marginof water induces me to remove this family from the Hydrocorisa tothe Aurocorisa. Burmeister adds the genus Pelogonus to this family ;but the structure of its rostrum indicates a closer relation withAcanthia. The present situation of the family, however, interruptsthe passage from Naucoris to Acanthia, so beautifully effected bymeans of the genera Aphelocheirus and Pelogonus.This species differs from all the others in having the elytra united together in astraight suture, and soldered to the scutellum without any wings. Messrs. Erulleand Serville in a supplemental notice, consider the elytra as wanting, and the insectas covered by a large scutellum. Having carefully examined Desjardin's specimensin the collection at the Jardin des Plantes, I am convinced of the correctness of hisdescription.HETEROPTERA.Acanthus.The fourth family, Acanthus, consists also of but few species,of small size, but interesting structure, distinguished by their largeeyes, oval depressed bodies, long and simple legs, and long and slenderrostrum, the second joint of which is greatly elongated and straight.This character exists in three genera, which, in several other importantrespects, differ from each other, namely, Acanthia Latr.(Sala Far.) fig. 120. lo. A. salvator), Pelogonus Latr. (fig. 120.8. Pelogonus marginatus), and Aphelocheirus Westiv. (vol. i. frontier.fig. 7.). In the first of these genera, for which I retain the name ofAcanthia (which the Germans give to the bed-bug, which oughtsurely, however, to retain the generic name of Cimex), the antennaeare nearly half the length of the body, the terminal joints not thinnerthan the preceding fig. 120. lo.) ; the legs are formed for running;the ocelli are present between the eyes ; and the rostrum is elongated{fig- 120. 11.). These are minute insects, found on the bordersof rivers and other water, as well as the sea-shore ; and possessinggreat activity, both in running and flying : they also leap tolerablywell. The tarsi are 3-jointed, the basal joint being concealed on theupper side ; the ungues are long, and without pulvilli. I possess thepupa of A. salvator, which differs from the imago in the want ofocelli, in having the rudiments of the fore wings half the length ofthe abdomen ; those of the hind wings are only slightly visible betweenthe other two.The genus Pelogonus fig. 120. 8.) is another of the links immediatelyconnecting the two sections of the order, agreeing with theGalgulidae in general characters, except in having the fore feetsimple ; whilst it agrees with Acanthia in the peculiar structure ofits rostrum fig. 120. 9.), but differs in the shortness of its antennae.VOL. II. H H466 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Burmeister has removed it, however, far from Acanthia, and placed itin the family Galgulidse. M. Leon Dufour, however, observes that,in regard to their external and internal structure and economy, Cynthia,Pelogonus, and Leptopus ought to form a distinct family, whosenatural situation is at the end of the Geocorisa, and to which Gal-gulesshould perhaps be united. P. marginatus, the type of the genus,is found in the south of France and Spain, on the banks of rivers,where it probably feeds upon smaller insects ; it runs very quick, andis able to leap well. Its larva, described by Dufour, is somewhatsmaller than the imago, and more rounded, but it has the same generalstructure (except in wanting wings) ; it is, however, unable toleap : it inhabits beneath the moist sand, but runs out when theground is shook ; the head is somewhat Prostrated. This is the onlyspecies yet described, but I am acquainted with one of the same size,brought from Australia by Mr. Darwin, and a third twice its size.The other genus, which I provisionally place in this family, on accountof the identical form of the rostrum (fig. 120. 7.), is AphelionWestiv., founded upon Naucoris festivals 7^a5. (vol. i. frontier.fig. 7.), the peculiar structure of which has been overlooked byauthors, who continue to cite it as a species of Naucoris, from whichit differs in having simple fore feet, and in the great length and slendernessof the rostrum. In respect, however, to its aquatic habitsand senatorial hind feet, it assimilates to that genus ; thus forming abeautiful link between it and Pelogonus. I have had the good fortuneto capture this interesting insect in the river Eventide, near Ensham,Oxon ; it swims very fast, using its hind legs chiefly, but crawls veryslowly, using its four fore feet ; its antennae are much longer than inthe other water species ; all the tarsi are slender and 2-jointed, withtwo slender ungues. My British specimens have but short, rudimental,oval hem elytra, like those of the bed bug; but I possess one ofBoscc's original specimens, described by Fabricius, not quite so largeas the others, in which the wings are fully developed. I do not, however,on that account, regard the former either as pupae or distinctspecies, but as undeveloped specimens in the imago state. (See raymemoir on this genus in Loudon's staff. Nat. Hist. vol. vi. p. 228.)Another remarkable and interesting genus, Leptopus Latr., consideredby Latreille, Burmeister, and others as alone forming, withAcanthia, a separate family, may here be noticed. Closely allied tothat genus, in the general form of the body, very prominent eyes, longslender feet, it is distinguished by the greater length and slendernessHETEROPTERA. — IIYDROMETRID^. 4G7of the antennae, by the long and fine spines with which the fore legsare armed, and especially by the very short and curved rostrum, alsospined, which appears to connect this genus with the Reduviidge.There are three species, found in France and Spain, described by Du-four(Annales Soc. Ent. de France, torn. ii. and iii.) ; I likewise possessa new species, discovered by M. Van Heyden on the top of a mountainnear Ems, under stones in dry places ; as well as another undescribedspecies from the banks of the Nile, given to me by Dr. Klug.(See the Crochard ed. Regne An. pi. 93. for excellent figures ofseveral of these genera.)The fifth family, HYDROMEXRiDiE*, is composed of species differingin their habits from all the other Neuroptera ; being constantly foundupon the surface of standing or running waters, on which they possessthe power of progression as completely as any of the others. f Thebody is long, narrow, and generally clothed on the under side with afine coating of plush, evidently serviceable in repelling the action of thewater (fig. 120. 6. Hydrometra Stagnorum ; 2. Gerris Pabulum) ; thehead generally as broad as the thorax ; the antennae long, slender, and4-jointed, the terminal joints not being thinner than the preceding, andBiBLioQR. Refer, to the Hvdrometridje.Schummel. Verse. der Ploteres. 8vo. Brest. 1832.Eschscholtz. Entomographien. (Halobates. )Dufour, in Annales Soc. Ent. de France, vol. ii. ; and in this Recherches. Anat.Hemipt.Westwood, in Ann. Soc. Ent. France, 1834.And the general works of Burmeistcr, Spinola, Curtis, Dufour, Hahn, Gu£rin.Fahricius, Sc,t Hence Latreille formed them into a distinct section named Ploteres (althoughtheir motion is not that of swimming), in the Genera Crustaceorum, &c., whichname L. Dufour changed to Amphibicorisa, a name surely inapplicable, the speciesliving neither on the land, or in the water. Burmeister names them Hydrodromici,altering the names of Gerris and Hydrometra, overlooking the fact that Cimex lacus-thiswas given by Fabricius as the real type of his Gerris {Ent. St/st. tom. iv. p. 187.1794), and that C. Stagnorum is Latreille's type of his genus Hydrometra (Precis,p. 86. 1796), which last Fabricius subsequently (in Syst. Rhyng.^ misapplied to thegenus he had previously named Gerris, which name he then gave tp totally differentinsects.HH 2468 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.having occasionally a minute rudimental joint at their base; the rostrumis of moderate length, the third (or the penultimate) joint being considerablylonger than the others ; the upper lip is distinct, long, and muchnarrowed in its apical part ; the legs vary considerably in their structurein the different genera ; the anterior, however, are in none rap-trial,although their peculiar position in Gerris (fig. 120. 2. GerrisPabulum) renders them evidently serviceable in retaining their prey ;the tarsi are short and 2-jointed ; occasionally, however, 3-jointed, asin the fore tarsi of Velia (yfig. 120. 5.), in which certain minute membranousretractile lobes have been observed by M. Doyere (Ann. Soc.JEnt. de France, 1837, and Crochard ed. R. An. pi. 92.). The unguesare often inserted in a notch before the tip of the tarsus.Of these insects Gerris (fig. 120. 2.) is by far the most active, thespecies skimming along the surface of the water with great velocity,and turning about with the greatest ease ; for this purpose, the formof their bodies, nearly resembling that of a London wherry, is admirablyfitted. Mr. Curtis observes, that *' these insects, by rowing withtheir posterior feet, glide over the water : " but this is inaccurate ; thehind feet act conjointly as a rudder, whilst the longer middle feet, placedat the middle of the sides of the body, are used somewhat as oars * :they are not, however, dipped into, but merely brush along the surfaceof the water. Velia has a similar, although slower action, havingmuch shorter feet; but Hydrometra (fig. 120. c.) merely creepsslowly upon the surface, the body of the insect being considerablyelevated ; hence it is mostly found amongst the low plants growingout of and at the side of water.Many of these insects are subject to a remarkable diversity in theirdevelopment in the imago state ; many of them are found in a completelyapterous state, although in all other respects they are fully developedand full-sized, and are often found coupled together in thisstate. By Geoffroy, who appears first to have noticed this fact, theywere considered as larvcB, possessing procreative powers ; whilst Kirbyand Spence regarded them as pupae (Introdd. to Ent. vol. iv. p. 570.*' Inter pupas Orthopterorum et Hemipterorum coitus interdum locumhabet, quod maturiorem organization in his analogies quam inalias insects probate). Others, again (De Geer, Dufour, Curtis, &c.),• In the singular Gerris laticauda Hard. (Linn. Trans, vol. xiv. pi. 6. fig. 1,2.;and Griffith, An. K. Ins. pi. 93. fig. 2.), the middle femora have a dense coating ofhairs, and in Velia the middle tibias are more sparingly furnished in the same manner,thus offering a broader surface for opposing action.HETEROPTERA. HYDROMETRID^. 469considering the full-grown size of these wingless individuals, adoptedthe opinion that they were species distinct from such as acquiredwings, as the winged and apterous specimens of Velia*, &c. It appearstome, however, that, from causes of which we are ignorant, numerousindividuals of many of the species of these tribes are subjected to aninferior kind of development in the imago state, which does not allowthe acquirement of wings ; which, however, in certain cases, acquiretheir full size. Hence, the same principle must be applied to thecompletely apterous individuals of Velia or Hydrometra as to thehalf-winged individuals of Pyrrhocoris apterus or Prostemma guttula,which no one regards otherwise than as specifically identical with thefull-winged specimens of the same species. Hence, I consider thatthe apterous specimens of Hydrometra stagnorum, those with veryshort elytra (as figured in the Crochard ed. R. An. pi. 92. f. 6.), andthose with full-sized wings and wing-covers (Curtis, pi. 32. fig. sup.,and my Jigs, 120. 6.f ), are all in the imago state, although some aremore perfect than others. Another circumstance confirming thisopinion is the ordinary condition of the pupa state of such individualsas acquire wings : whereas the pupa state of the ultimately winglessspecimens is necessarily destitute of rudimental wing-cases ; hencewe cannot consider these wingless insects as stopped in their development,or, in other words, as imagines, left enveloped in the skin of thepupa:}:, but must be compelled to regard them as imagines with peculiarcharacters of their own, somewhat analogous to the neuters, orundeveloped females of the bees ; but yet more perfect than thatkind of imago, being capable of reproduction. §The very young larva of Gerris || differs materially from the adultspecimens in form, being very much shorter and broader, the hindlegs appearing inserted near the extremity of the body, owing to theSee Mag. Nat. Hist. 1st series, No. 18., on V. livulorum and V. current,regarded as distinct species.f Scopoli's other species having the " abdomen lines elevates longitudinallystriatum " is probably a fiill-wingcd specimen, the longitudinal veins of the wingsbeing mistaken for abdominal ridges.I Hence the inutility of Mr. Curtis's suggestion to cover a number of thewingless Valise with a gauze covering, in order to see whether they would not ultimatelyobtain wings.§ In my memoir on these insects, in the Annales de la Soc. Entomol. de France,I have entered more fully into this question.II Gilbert White nat. Hist. Melbourne,) believed these insects to be viviparous.H H 3470 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.great development of the thorax and the fundamental state of the abdomen*(De Geer, torn. iii. 1. 16. f. 16.). In the full-grown larva ofVelia, the abdomen is greatly enlarged in size, being still broader inproportion than in the imago ; the thoracic segments are still separateand visible (Schummel, Ploteres, t. 2. f. 2. b, c, d.). In the pupa ofGerris, the prothorax is short, the mesothorax large, with a largescutellum, partially grooved down the middle, and two separate-large,and very shining black wing-cases, half covering the abdomenfig. 120. 3.); and the tarsi have only one joint. The wingless imaginesof Velia and Gerris have the prothorax large, but truncate behind,exposing the other thoracic segments; but, in the winged ones,the prothorax is produced behind into a scutellum-like process.A remarkable and minute species of this family, found in France,was first described, under the name of Velia pygmies, by Dufour, whoobserved only two or three with wings out of some hundreds of specimens.The Rev. L. Guilding discovered another species, most closelyallied to this, in St. Vincent's, which I described under the name ofMicrovelia pulchella, as it differed generically in some respects fromVelia. This species must also have been most abundant, as Mr.Hope (who possesses Mr. Guilding's specimens) has very great numbers; but almost all are winged. Subsequently Dr. Burmeister hyper-criticallychanged my generic name to Hydroessa, altered L, Dufour'sspecific name, and inconsiderately gave my West Indian species, andDufour's French one, as synonymous. Mr. Curtis, in 1838, figured L.Dufour's species (which I first discovered in England, fifteen yearsago, amongst aquatic plants on Wandsworth Common, and at theroots of grass in Battersea Fields), under the name of Hydroessa pygmies,from specimens then recently found by Mr. Haliday in Ireland.The wingless specimens of this little group have much the appearanceof minute larvae of Elias ; but the abdomen is fully developed.Hebrus pusillus Wlk.^, another minute species, found amongstaquatic plants, and which I have also illustrated in the same memoir,appears to form a connecting link between these insects andIt is on this account that I am inclined to consider the oceanic species, figuredby Eschscholtz, as forming his genus Halobates, as not arrived at the imago stateOne species of this genus is described by Templeton ( Trans. Ent. Soc. vol. i.), capturedmidway between Africa and America.■f Schummel's tab. 3. fig. 3. is incorrect in this respect.i Dr. Burmeister has misapplied this specific name, giving it to a North Americanspecies, and another name to our species which he had found near Berlin,HETEROPTERA. REDUVIID^. 471some of the more minute Lygaeidge; possessing ocelli, apical ungues,and a distinct scutellum in the winged state.The situation of this family in a natural arrangement of the Neuropterais difficult to be determined. In the Regne Animal, and byBurmeister and Dufour, they are introduced between the Hydroco-rise and the Acanthiidae ; thus unnaturally interrupting the passagefrom Acanthia and Pelogonus to Aphelocheirus andNaucoris.* Themere circumstance of their walking upon the surface of water appearsto have been considered as sufficient to prove their relationship withtruly aquatic species, with which, in structure, they present but littleagreement. By placing them in this situation, I retain all the watergroups together ; but this is done at the expense of the relation betweenAcanthia, Leptopus, Macropthalmus, and the other true .Laporte places them at the head of his Anthothelges ; buttheir food certainly consists of other insects.The sixth family REDUViiDiE f {fig- 120. 15. Reduvius personages)is of great extent, and consists of terrestrial species, well distinguishedby the short, thick, naked, and curved rostrum, the labrumexserted (fig 120. 16. head of R. pers.) ; the head narrowed behindinto a more or less elongated neck, and furnished with two largeprominent eyes and two ocelli ; the antennae are of moderate or considerablelength, with the terminal joints very slender f ; the prothoraxis often spined as well as more or less completely divided intotwo parts ; the legs are long, and fitted for running ; the tarsi3-jointed and simple, the basal joint being very short; the anteriorLatreille, in the Gen, Crust, Sc, avoided this, by placing them between theReduviidsB and CimicidjE, which are, however, closely allied together.•f- BiBLioQR. Refer, to the Reduviid^.Burmeister, in Trans. Ent. Soc. Lond. v. ii. pi. xi. ( Myocoris).Servile, in Ann. Sci. Nat. t. xxiii. (Pirates). — Ditto, in Guerui, Mag, de Zoologie,and in Encyclop. Method.Heinehen, in Zool. Journ. vol. v. (Episcopus).Grape, on Ptilocerus, in his Zool. Miscell., No. 1.And the general works of King, Hamlin, Burmeister, Laporte, Boisduval, Perty,Pulisot Beauvois, Say, Griffith saw. K.), Coquebert, Guerin (Voyages), Sc. §-c.t In some species, some of the joints have a minute rudimental joint at the base.H ir 4472 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.tibiae, in some species, are terminated on the inside by an oblique,hollow, fleshy lobe or pulvillus (^fig- 120. 17.), serving, apparently, toassist the raptorial habits of the species, which are more pre-eminentlyinsectivorous than any of the other terrestrial species ; themembranous part of the fore-wings often extends nearly to the baseof the wings, and the veins are few and large. *These insects vary greatly in size as well as in general appearance,colouring, &c. In many the sides of the abdomen are greatly dilatedand thin, not being covered by the wings : in others, the body is shortand thick ; whilst in some, Zeus, &c., it is very slender : this is muchmore especially the case in the genera Ploiaria f and Emesa, whichlast consists of species resembling the thinnest bits of stick fastenedtogether ; these two genera are further distinguished by the perfectlyraptorial structure of the very small fore-legs, with the coxae greatlyelongated, like those of the Mantidae. In their motions they resemblethe Tipulae, balancing themselves on their long legs.The species are chiefly exotic, very ^&yf being natives of ourclimate : they generally want the power of emitting a strong scent ;but the wounds they are able to make with their proboscis are veryacute : this is more especially the case with the large exotic species,one of which, " of the size of our cockchafFer," greatly annoys theinhabitants of Chili by night. It is called Benchuca. Another largespecies, Arilus (Prioratus Latr.) serratus, or the wheel bug (sonamed in the West Indies, from the singular prothorax circularlyelevated, and toothed like a cog-wheel), is stated by Kirby andSpence (Tntr, i. 110.) on the authority of Major General Davies, tobe able to communicate a sharp electric shock. Many are foundupon flowers and trees, and some inhabit our houses; amongst thelatter may especially be mentioned Reduvius personages (/igf. 120.15.), a black insect, which is asserted to feed upon the bed-bug, thelarva (Jfff- 120. 18.) and pupa of which have the instinct to envelopethemselves in a thick coating of particles of dust (De Geer^ Mem.iii. pi. 15., and Geoffrey, i. pi. 9. f. 3 h), and so completely do theyDufour, Rech. Anat. Ilemip'. g. 12. sp. 2. states, that in Red. marginatus thestructure of the Ilemelytra has been overlooked, and that the membrane is entirelywanting ; but this is not the case ; it is the corium that is nearly obsolete : this isproved by other species in the family, as Opistoplatys Australasia; (Westwood inZ Jl. ), Holoptilus Lemur Westwood, Sc.f In the 6th vol. of the Tiuin Transactions is contained a memoir on the circulationobserved in this insect.HETEROPTERA. REDUVIID^. 473(exercise this habit, that a specimen shut up by M. BruUe, and whichhad undergone one of its mounting during its imprisonment, divestedits old skin of its coat of dust, in order to re-cover itself therewith.(Hist. Nat. Ins, tom. ix. p. 307.) Mr. Bird has observed, that the imagoflies into lighted rooms at night. (Ent. Mag. ii. 41.) Like most otherrapacious species, it is enabled to undergo a long fast. The larva ofPloiaria possesses similar habits. The pupa is figured by De Geer,Mem. vol. iii. t. 17. Some exotic species allied to Ploiaria (g. episcopusHeineken, Emesodema Spinola) never acquire any rudimentsof wings ; they are domestic insects, and are almost invariably foundafter dusk, according to the former author, who has published a veryinteresting notice of the habits of C. marginatus as above referredto. Its motions are very slow, although it is so insectivorous that afemale killed and sucked a companion of her own sex, her own mate,and, after only a ^qw days' fast, her own young, and sucked her owneggs I The young differs only in being more linear and smaller.Some of the species, especially Pirates stridulus, make a loudnoise by the friction of the neck within the pro thoracic cavity. (Ann.Soc. Ent. France, 1837, p. QQ.)Two British species of this family, Prostemma guttula Far. (Duf.) and Corpus subalterns Curt., De Geer (Colliersgriseus Hahn, Oncocephalus g. Spin. ? Red. pedestris Wolff, butcertainly not Actus apterus Hahn, as quoted by Burmeister), are interestingon account of their being generally found in an undevelopedimago state ; the latter being either entirely apterous, or with the forewings rudimental, although occasionally met with, having the four wingscompletely developed. " Je pense (observes Spinola, Essai, p. 96.) quela presence des ailes, et leur development dependent du climat;"and, in speaking of Oncocephalus griseus he says, " Influence du climatseptentrional parait avoir arrete le development des organes duvol." (Ibid. p. 103.) It will be seen by referring to pages 1.58 and431. ante, that I have noticed that it is, especially in hot seasons, thatcertain species acquire full-sized wings, whilst the circumstance noticedrespecting the ordinary occurrence of winged specimens of Microveliain the West Indies (p. 470.) is confirmatory of the same opinion.Some very singular modifications of form occur amongst the exoticspecies. In some (Petalocheirus Pal. B.) thee fore tibiae are greatlydilated ; in others, Notocyrtus Hoffm, Saccoderes Spinola, Red. dorsalisGr.(An. K. pi. 91.), R. inflated and vesiculosus Perty (Del. pi. 34.),and Arilus tuberculous {Griff. An. K. pi. 91.), the prothorax is vesi-474? MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.clearly elevated and curiously tubeixled, extending considerably overthe back. In Diaspidius Scapha West. (in Driiry, 2d. edit.) the prothoraxis flatter, and extends behind in the place of a scutellum. Thecurious forms of Arilus serratus* (and several allied species) andEmesaf have been already noticed. In Hammatocerus (C. perspicuityDrury, the second joint of the antennae consists of a number ofminute articulations quite unlike any other insect in the whole order, ij:In my exotic genus, Enicocephalus, consisting of minute species, thehead appears to consist of two distinct heads, the posterior being globular,and furnished with the ocelli; and the prothorax is divided intothree distinct transverse lobes, so that the front of the body seems toconsist of pieces improperly united together; the structure of the forelegsis also remarkable. (See ray Monogr. on this g. in Trans. Ent. Soc,vol. ii. p. 23. pi. 2. f. 8.) Holoptilus Serville (Ptilocerus Gray) is remarkablefor the brushes of very long hair upon the antennae and legs.I have also presented a monograph of this anomalous genus to theEntomol. Soc. The larva of H. Lemur W. (Australia) exhibits thecurious structure of the antennae and hind legs of the imago.The seventh family, Cimicid^ §, is here restricted to the genuscomprising the bed-bug fig. 121. l.), for which the name of CimexI possess the pupa of this species, which has the back of the prothorax merelyslightly elevated without any sensation.f Mr. M'Leay has informed me that he found the large Emesa filum in Cubaunder stones.Heineken zool. Journ., No. 16. p. 426.) has given the details of an interestingexperiment he made with a species of Reduvius inhabiting Madeira relative to thereproduction of mutilated limbs. On the 8th of August he divided both antennaof a pupa through the basal joint : — " Sept. 4. Reproduced, at the same time,moulting into a perfect insect. They are of unequal lengths, thicker and shorterthan the original ones, and, as far as I can ascertain, having only three instead offour joints. — Oct. 10. Died from want of proper food, the antennae still unequal andimperfect. It had not mounted again !"\ The same character is visible in a pupa of this insect, collected by Vir. Doubledayin America.§ BiBLiOGR. Refer, to the Cimicid^.Southall. A Treatise on Bugs. 8vo. Lond. 1730.; Lamb. 1737.; Berl. 1742.n. ed. 1793.Carlton, in Vetensk Acad. Handll. 1789. (Cimex lectularius).Jenkins, in Annals of Nat. Hist., No. 17. June 1839. (3 n. sp. Cimex )HETEROPTERA.CIMICID^.ought to be retained, although the Germans, following Fabricius,give it under the generic name of Acanthia. It has been united byLatreille, Burmeister, and others, with the Tingidae, but the longerrostrum (fig. 120. 2.) and the slenderness of the apical joints of theantennae i^fig' 120. 3.) at once separate it from them ; the latter characterpointing out its relation with Reduvius, with which Dufouralso states that it agrees in internal structure. The antennae are4-jointed ; the labium 3-jointed, the basal joint being the longest .the thorax is sublimate, not transversely divided, as in the Reduviidae ;the abdomen very much depressed, and more or less orbicular ; thewings are reduced to a pair of short transverse scale-like pieces ; thelegs are moderately long and slender; the tarsi 3-jointed.* Thehabits of the typical species Cimex lectularius Linn., are too well knownto require description. Its introduction into this country has beenthe subject of discussion. It was well known to Pliny (hist. N. 29.17.), Dioscorides, Aristophanes, and Aristotle hist. An. Ed. Bek.,p. 148. 12.) ; but it has been generally asserted to have been broughtfrom America to England f, whence it passed to the continent of Europe,and that it was not known here until 1670. MoufFett, however{Ins. Theatre. p. 270.) mentions its having been seen in 1503. It has,however, been noticed as a singular fact, and as showing that this dis-spinosahas described some Interesting peculiarities in the structure of this genushitherto unnoticed. essai, p. 170.)-f- Southall states that its first appearance took place after the great fire in 1666 ;learned men," says he, " united in thinking they wee imported with the newdeal timber, as the bugs were naturally fond of turpentine woods." It is certainthat they swarm in the American timber employed in the construction of newhouses ; arid it is said that they feed upon the sap of that wood.476 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.gustingvlsltant must have been comparatively little known in the clays ofgood Queen Bess;' that, although the word bug occurs five or six differenttimes in Shakspeare's plays, it is in every instance synonymouswith bug-bear*, and does not designate this insect." (Patterson'sShakspeare Letters, p. 59.) From an observation made by Dufour french.Anat. Hemipt. g. 1 1. p. 59.) it does not appear that these insects are ableto subsist a very long time without food, and that, in such case, they donot destroy one another (although De Geer states the contrary to bethecase), that author having kept some full-sized specimens in a sealedbottle for more than a year without food. Various plans have beensuggested for the destruction of these Insects. (See Curtis, 569. andBuchoz, Hist. Ins. niiisihles, 2 vols., Paris, an vii.) I have known ahouse which had long stood empty, and yet swarmed with them, thoroughlycleansed by fumigation with brimstone.The eggs of these insects are white, and of an oval form, slightlynarrowed at one end, and terminated by a cap which breaks off whenthe young escape. The latter are very small, white, and transparent,so that the blood can easily be seen through the body in this state(fig. 121. 4.) ; they are of a different form from that of the matureinsect, having a much broader head, and shorter and thicker antennae.(De Geer, Mem. torn. iii. pi. 17. f. 9 — 25.) They are eleven weeksin attaining their full size. For further details of the history of thisinsect, I must refer to the article Bug (brit. Cycl. Nat. Hist, vol, i.p. 64-0.), in which I have given an account of the remarks of Southall,Hermann, and Carlton, and to Griffith's Animal Kingdom.Scopoli {^Ent. Carniola. p. 354-.), cited by Linnaeus (Syst. iV. vol. ii.p. 715.), who, however, questions the statement, mentions the occurrenceof this insect with perfect wings. Fallen also (Hemipt. Such.vol. i. p. 141.), and Latreille hist. Nat. tom. xii. p. 255.), noticethe report of its being found winged, but without being able to confirmit. It has also been stated to occur winged in the East Indies ; butBurmeister (Hand. vol. ii. p. 253.) seems to question this. Schil-Hence, in INIattbews's Bible, the passage in the Pains 'xci. 5.), " Thou shaltnot be afraid for the term-or by night," is rendered, " Thou shalt not need be afraidof any bugs by night." Mouft'ett, whose work was published in 1634, gives " warehouse" as the common English name of the insect, not even mentioning its modernname of bug, which evidently accounts for Shakspeare's not noticing it under thatname ; although, had it been common, he surely would have done so under thename by which it was then known.HETEROPTERA TINGID^E. 477ling has indeed described a winged house bug, under the name of Cimexdomestics (Isis, 1834, p. 738.) ; but Burmeister has proved thisWeigh. Arch. No. iv. p. 71.) to belong to the genus Xylocoris Dufour.Hahn has evidently figured this insect under the name of Lyctocorisdomestics ( Want. Ins. vol. iii. t. 79. f. 243.) ; but it belongs to aseparate family. Fabricius, however, has described a species fromSouth America, under the name of Acanthia hemiptera (syst. Rh.p. 113.).It has been long known that pigeons, swallows, &c., were infestedwith these insects. Latreille considered that the latter belonged to adistinct species ; and the Rev. L. Jenyns has published the descriptionsof it and two additional species, under the names of C. Colum-darius,found in pigeons' nests, from my collection ; C. Hirundinis,found in swallows' nests ; and C. Pipistrelli, found on a bat.The eighth family, Tinged*, consists small species (jf^. 120.12.Tingis (Monanthia) carinata), at once distinguished by the depressedand broad form of the body ; the antennae, with the terminal jointsnot thinner than the preceding ; the rostrum very short, 3-jointed,and received into a gutter on the under side of the head (Jiff. 120. 13.head of Phymata manicata) ; the tarsi are often only 2-jointed (Jiff.120. 14. tarsus of Aradus), although, in Dictyonota, they are figuredas 3-jointed by Curtis (B. E. pi. 154.). There is considerable diversityin the structure of the i'ew groups of which this family, evenin its restricted state, is composed. Tingis, and the genera separatedtherefrom, have the thorax generally furnished with a membranousdilatation on each side, and posteriorly produced in the place of a scutellum,and being, as well as the large hem elytra, which entirely coverthe abdomen, covered with gesticulations of greater or less size. Inthe Aradi the scutellum is distinct, the thorax not dilated, and thewings, when closed, do not cover the abdomen, but leave its marginsexposed. Macrocephalus and Syrtis have the fore legs strongly rap-trial,resembling those of Naucoris in structure ; these have also theBiBLioGR. Refer, to the Tinged.Seceders, in Yetensk. Acad. Handll. 1787. (Macrocephalus.)And the general works of Fallen, Burmeister, Laporte, Wolff, Hahn, GnMn, Curtis,Herrich-Sch'dffer (Nominal. Ent.), Fabricius, Spinola, Encycl. MM.478 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.abdomen much dilated at the sides, and not covered by the wings.In Macrocephalus the scutellum entirely covers the vikings.* Thesevariations of structure are dependent upon the various habits of thedifferent groups ; thus, the Aradi are found under the bark of trees,for which their very flattened form well fits them ; the Insides arefound upon various plants and herbs, upon which they subsist, whilstthe Macrocephali and Phymatae are also found on plants and trees ■]-,but they are described as feeding upon other insects, as the raptorialstructure of their fore legs well indicates. Tingis clavicornis is describedby Reaumur (Mem. 3. pi. 34: f. 1 — 6.) as attacking the flowersof Teucrium Chambers, of which it prevents the blossoming, causingthem to swell out to a disproportionate size. T. Teucrii of Host, inlike manner, injures the flowers of Teucrium supine (Tarquin, Collect,tom. ii. Y>-^55.) T. Pyri attacks the leaves of the pear, and isknown by the French gardeners under the name of " le tigre."All the species are very slow in their motions ; although Phymatacrassipes is stated by L. Dufour to fly with agility, and to emit noscent.In the memoir above referred to, Reaumur has figured the pupa ofT. clavicornis, which has rudimental wings, extending half the lengthof the abdomen. De Geer has also figured the pupa and imago of anallied species ( Mem. tom. iii. 1. 16. f. 1 — 6.). In t. 15. f 16 — 19., hehas also figured the larva and imago of Aradus Betulas. In the formerthe three thoracic segments are fully developed. L. Dufourhas figured the larva and imago of a species, under the name of Aradusgenius, which is certainly identical with the Aneurism Isevis Cart.This species is remarkable for having the wing covers almost destituteof veins ; the larva has the abdomen marked with six longitudinalseries of ocelli-like black spots, the two middle rows being the largest(jRech. Anat. Hemipt. pi. 4. f. 36 — 41.) Mr. Ingpen has given mealarva, exactly agreeing with this figure, which he found in companywith Aneurism levis. I also possess the pupae of several species ofTingis, one of which has the sides of the head, thorax, henielytra,and abdomen beset with short spines : the others are unarmed.I have given a monograph of this and some new allied subgenera to the EntomologicalSociety. The g. Discovers Lap. is founded upon the structure offemale antennae of Phymata.+ Ph. eros is found commonly in the streets of New York, having fallen fromthe trees growing therein, as I am informed by Mr. Lewis. ,^y HETEROPTERA. — CAPSID^. 479The ninth family, Capsid^*, is of considerable extent, and consistsof small prettily-coloured species, with the body convex, and of a softconsistence (fig. 120. 5. Capsus dances), distinguished by the elongatedantennae having the second joint often thickened at the tip, andthe terminal joints very slender ; the rostrum long and 4-jointed(^fiQ' 121. 6.) ; the labrum long ; the ocelli wanting ; the legs long andslender ; the tarsi 3-jointed fig. 121. 7. tarsus of Maris), and sometimesfurnished with pulvilli ; the coriaceous part of the hemelytraterminated by a large triangular piece, like a stigma, the apical membranehaving only one or two strong veins, curved, and parallel withthe apex of the wing, forming a basal semicircular cell. The femalesare further distinguished by having the ovipositor nearly half thelength of the body, somewhat sabre-shaped, and received into a sliton the under side of the abdomen. These insects are very active,running and flying with agility, and frequenting plants and trees,upon the juices of which they appear exclusively to subsist. Someof the species are especially fond of ripe fruit, such as raspberries,which they suck with their rostrum, imparting a very nauseous tasteto the fruit.The family seems allied to the Reduviidae and Cilicia; in the strictureof the antennae, but it is questionable whether the relation beone of absolute affinity ; and M. Brulle, considering the Coreidae asnearest allied to the Tingidse, has removed these insects to the endof the order. I prefer, however, retaining them, for the present,nearer to the Reduviidae, which they certainly seem to approach,by means of the genus Nabis.The pupa of Capsus dances is clothed with short and somewhatclavate hairs.Bryocoris Fallen (Orthonotus Weslw., Chlamydatus Curt, Lap., Asthma Latr., Halticus Hahn), has the hind legsgreatly elongated, with the femora thickened ; the insects, whichare of small size, leaping with agility ; and the hem elytra are oftendestitute of the apical membrane. The species are generally foundin sandy places, on the ground. The antennae of the genus Hete-rooms are remarkable for the thickness of the second joint ; whichjoint, in the males of Harpocera (Azinecera St. Cat.) BurmeisteriBiBLioGR. Refer, to the Capsid^.The general works of Fabricius, Fallen, Panzer, Hahn, Burmeister, Spinola, HerrickZetterstedt, &^c.480 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Curt., is twisted and angulated at the tip ; the same organs in West., Trans. Ent. Soc. (from Africa), are three times aslong as the body.The tenth family, Lyg^eid^*, is of considerable extent, and consistsof species mostly of small or moderate size, distinguished by havingthe antennae jointed, with the terminal joint not thinner than thepreceding, but not forming a terminal club as in the Coreidae; theyare inserted either beneath or at the margin of the head, in a linedrawn from the eyes to the base of the rostrum. The body is generallynarrow ; the ocelli wanting in some groups f ; the rostrum is ofmoderate length (t?^. 121. 10.), with the joints of nearly equal length;the apical membrane of the hem elytra is furnished with longitudinalnerves, but rarely exceeding five in number ; the tarsi are 3-jointed,with two pulvilli between the ungues.Many of these insects are exotic, and are remarkable for their variedcolours, in which red or yellow and black are most conspicuous. Theseare mostly found upon plants. Others, however, of a smaller size andof obscure colours, are distinguished by having greatly thickened forelegs;these are found on the ground, at the roots of plants, &c.The typical genus Lygaeus, as restricted to the species varied withred, white, and black colours, and possessing ocelli (L. equestris, &c.),approach very closely to such of the Coreidye as Corizus Hyoscyami ;but the difference of the veining of the hem elytra sufficiently distinguishesthe two families.One of the species of this family exhibits, in a remarkable manner,the ordinary occurrence of an imperfect perfect state ; whilst occasionallyindividuals are found with perfectly developed organs ofBiBi.ioGR. Refer, to the Lyg^id^e.Dufur, in Ann. Soc. Ent. de France, vol. ii., and Annal. Sci. Nat. vol. xxii.(Xylocoris. )Westwood, in Ann. Soc. Ent. de France, vol. iii.Schilling. Entomol. Beitrage.And the general works of Hahn, Guerin, Burmeister, Spinola, Herrich-Sch'dffer,Perty, Boisduval. (Voy. Astrolabe.)•)- Laporte has united the groups which have no ocelli with the Capita", forming:them into an unnatural family named Astemmites.Hymenoptera LYG^ID^. 481flight* ; this is the Cimex apterus Linn. (Pyrrhocoris cahnariensis ofFallen, who has altered the specific name in consequence of its beingthus inappropriate ; Jig. 121. 8. 'specimen with fully developed wing-covers,121. 9. wing-cover of the ordinary form). This insect isfound throughout Europe, occasionally in the greatest profusion.Such was the case, some years ago, on some little islands at Torquayin Devonshire, and also on a rock in the sea off Teignmouth, which,Mr. Curtis says, looked quite red with them. I found them in likeprofusion in the neighbourhood of Berlin, in September 1835, especiallyIn the gardens of the palace of Charlottenburg, the walks of whichswarmed with them : at this time they were engaged in sucking fallenberries and seeds f, as well as such of their companions as had beentrodden under foot ; at this time, also I found some of the insects inthe pupa state. From the details of the habits of this insect publishedby Hausmann (Illiger, Mag. vol. i. p. 229 — 491., translated by BulletinHist. Nat. Ins. torn. ix. p. 374.) it appears that they are even occasionallyfound crawling about the boulevards of Gottingen in January;they seem very sociable, collecting in little groups. Hausmannalso observed their partiality for dead insects, and that they wouldnot attack living ones. He also noticed that they undergo threemounting previous to their arrival at their ordinary perfect state ; he,however, adds, that the winged or perfect specimens moult four times,acquiring wings only after the last moult : this would imply that theordinary individuals are in the pupa state ; but, from what has beenalready observed upon this subject, I have no doubt that the real pupaof these winged specimens differs entirely from the ordinary specimens,and would possess much shorter rudiments of wings, as well as2-jointed tarsi, whereas the ordinary individuals possess three joints.LygEeus brevipennis Latr. (belonging to the genus Aphanus, PachasSchilL), also, ordinarily occurs with abbreviated hem elytra, butwhich I have found with them perfect, as well as with wings.Mr. Curtis notices that climate seems to have a great influence in perfectingthe wings, since he never found them winged in this country, although he tookseveral winged in the South of France, — thus confirming the remarks made inprevious pages as to the effect of heat in analogous cases. Linnaeus, however,found a winged specimen in Calmar, a Swedish province, in a latitude equal to themiddle of Scotland.f L. Dufour states that it is partial to the Malacca?, of which it pricks the capsules,and that it does not emit any disagreeable scent.VOL. II. I I482 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Microphysa West. (Ann. Ens. Soc. France, torn. iii. pi. 6.) comprisessome minute species, ordinarily found under bark, with theabdomen very broad, and truncated hem elytra, resembling a broadPselaphus.Geocoris Fallen (Ophthalmic Hah) is remarkable for the greatbreadth of the head ; whilst Myodacha Latr. has the hind part of thehead formed into a very long neck.The largest species of the family is the Pyrrhocoris princeps Westtv.,Drury, vol. iii. pi. 43. f. 5. Another, nearly as large, is the P. grandisGray (An. K. pi. 92. f. 3.), from India.The eleventh family, Coreid/IE* (fig' 121. ll. Coreus hirticornis), isof great extent, and comprises some of the largest and most remarkablyformed insects in the order, especially distinguished by thelarge, and either thickened or elongated size of the terminal joint ofthe 4-jointed antennae {jftg' 121. 15. ant. of Pseudophlceus Alemanni),which are inserted near the lateral and superior margins of the headabove a line drawn from the eyes to the base of the rostrum ; therostrum is generally long or moderately long, with the third jointshorter than the fourth (Jig. 121.12. head of C. marginatus) ; thelabrum is long; the ocelli are not widely apart; the apical membranesof the hem elytra are generally furnished with numerous longitudinalnerves; these organs often do not conceal the lateral margins of theabdomen ; the legs are generally long, with 3-jointed tarsi, furnishedwith pulvilli beneath the ungues; the sternum is simple (Jig. 121. 13.represents the underside of the thorax of Cor. marginatus).BiBLioCiR. Refer, to the Coreid^e.Lister, in Phil. Trans. No. 72. (Cimex'Hyoscyami).Schilling. Entomologists Beitrage.Thunherg. Dissert. Insect. Hemipt. tria Gen. illust., Upsal, 1825. 4to. (Pendulous,Paclujlis, and Opium, Holhymenia.)Burmeister, Curtis, Say, Hahn, H. Sch'dffer, Perty, Giierin, Animal Kittffdom, FaJisotBeauvois, Wolff, Fallen, Laporte, Dufour, Stoll, Donovan.■}• The species, chiefly exotic, with the last joint long, form Laporte's familyAnisoscelites.HETEROPTEUA. — COREID/E. 483These insects are generally diversified in their colours, and are foundupon plants or trees, upon the juices of which they appear to subsist.They run and fly well, especially in the heat of the day ; Coreusmarginatus in flight makes a humming noise as loud as the hive bee.In many of the exotic species the hind legs are singularly enlarged,especially in the males, the femora in many being greatly thickened,curved, and spined ; whilst in others the legs are very long, thefemora thin, and the tibiae furnished on each side with a broad andflat membrane, with the edges notched ; the use of these singularappendages is involved in obscurity, the species not being saltatorial ;in some, again, the femora are thickened, and the tibise curved andhooked at the tip, fitting to the femora like the fore legs of a Mantis ;the antennae also exhibit some curious modifications, the intermediatejoints, or one of them, being occasionally dilated into a broad plate.M. V. Audouin has observed the eggs of Coreus mai'ginatus to beof a splendid golden appearance.Some larvae and pupae which I possess of several of the speciesof Coreus (C. hirticornis, marginatus, and Scapha) differ from theimago in wanting ocelli, possessing only two joints in the tarsi(although there is a slight indication of an articulation in the middleof the terminal joint) ; their antennae also are much thicker, especiallythe intermediate joint ; the pupa of C. Scapha differs also from theimago in having the margins of the abdomen notched i^fiQ' 121. 14.).Some of the species of this family are of a very slender form ; thesebelong to Latreille's exotic genus Leptocoris (not of Burmeister) andthe British genus Nieces (fig' 121. 16. N. tipularius), remarkablefor the elbowed form of the antennae at the end of the long basal joint.I have found N. elegans in great profusion in all its states about theroots and young stems of a small plant of Ononis arvensis, at the backof the Isle of Wight. Its motions are very slow, and I did notobserve it to make use of its wings. The larvae and pupae were alsofound in company with the imago, and it appeared evident that it wasfrom the plant that the insects derived their nutriment.The genus Chorosoma Curt. (Marius Hahn, Rhopalus Sci.)comprises species of an elongated form, one of which, C. miriforme,(Lyg. micropterus J5?/7Te//, in Trans. Ent. Soc. vol. i. p. Y^. 1807.),ordinarily occurs, and is described as possessing only short hemelytra:such is indeed the common appearance of the insect, and I have repeatedlycaptured such specimens in copula, although, at the sameII 2si MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.time and place, I have found others of both sexes with fully developedhem elytra and wings.A species allied to Aldus (Actors fossularum Burm., Aldusapterus Duf.) also exhibits a similar diversity of development. Ialso possess a species of Pyrrhotes West. (Leptocoris Burm. neeLatr.) from the Mauritius, having short hem elytra destitute of membrane,but possessing ocelli and 3-jointed tarsi.The exotic genus Phyllomorphus comprises some of the mostcurious species of the family, of small size, and resembling a witheredleaf with the edges notched and dilated. The type is the Cimexparadoxes Sparring*, from the Cape of Good Hope. I possess anew species of this genus brought from the Levant by Olivier. (SeeGuerin on this genus in Bull. Soc. Cuvier No, 8. 1839.)Mr. A. White has described some new species belonging to thisand the following family in a paper read before the EntomologicalSociety.The twelfth family, ScuTELLERio^f , consists of an extensive assemblageof insects of moderate or large size, in general distinguished bythe large size of the scutellum, the length of the 4-jointed rostrum,and of the transversely striated labrum ; the elongated antennae oftenconsisting of five joints, the terminal joint not thickened nor ma-seehis Memoir on this insect in Vetensk Acad. Hands. 1777.f BiBLioGR. Refer, to the Scutellerid^.Lefebvre, in Guerin Mag. Zool. pi. 126. (Canopus). — Ditto, in Ditto, variousdetached species.Dolman, in Ephcm. Entomol. vol. i. (Canopus).Hope. A Catalogue of Hemiptera in the collection of the Rev. F. W. Hope, withshort Latin characters of the new species (by J. O. Westwood).Germar, in his Zeitschr. f. d. Entomologie, No. 1.White, in Mag. Nat. Hist, n. s. No. 35. (vol. iii. p. 537.), and in a Memoir read atthe Ent. Soc.Westwood, in Trans. Ent. Soc. vol. ii., in Zoo). Ins, No. 20, ; and in Boyle's Himalaya.Garde. Anat. Cimex rufipes, in Wiedemann Zool. Mag. vol. i.And the general works of Dufour, Fabricius, Stall, Wolff, Halm, H. Schaffer, Perty,Burmeister, Drimj, Klug, Laporte, Guerin, Spinola, Fallen, Zetterstcdt, §-c.IIETEROPTEKA. — SCUTELLERIDiE.Fig. 122.eternally elongated * ; the possession of two ocelli, and the ordinarily3-jointed tarsi, furnished with two pulvilli. Several of the figures in thepresent page are intended, not only to illustrate the structure of thepresent family, but also the general characters of the land-bugs.Fig. 122. 1. represents Pentatoma rufipes about twice the naturallength, with the antennae and legs truncated, and with the wings onone side of the body extended ; jig. 2. the under side of the head andprothorax of the same insect, showing the elongated 4-jointed rostrum(labium), the basal joint of which is partially covered by the elongatedand attenuated labrum (Jig. 4.) ; and at the apex are perceived thetips of the four enclosed setae, representing the mandibles and maxillae: Jig. 3. represents the head of the same insect sideways, to showthe lobes defending the base of the labium, and the manner in whichthe latter is able to bend, with two of the enclosed setae drawnout at the tip of the second joint f ; the tips of the other two, seenat the end of the rostrum : Jig. 5. (after Savigny) represents thedilated base of the four internal setae, as seen within the head on removingthe clypeus : the two external set are the mandibles, and theother two the maxillae; between the middle pair is perceived the pointedcartilaginous tongue :{:, behind which is a small oval aperture, whichis the orifice of the pharjaix : Jig. 6. antenna of Pentatoma rufipes :Jig. 7. under side of the body of Pent, marauding Dufour; x repressedthe interesting memoir of Biirmeister, on the structure of the antennae ofthis family, in Silbermann, Rev. Ent. No. 7.■\ The set£e are capable of being drawn out of the entire length of the labium.De Geer has described the manner in which they are replaced ; he, however, figuresand describes only three seta?, whereas there are certainly four.^ Analogous to /iff. 89.8. x , g. x (p. 257.), and lo the trifid tongue in Nepa,Jiff. 119. 13. (p. 458.)I I 3486 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.seating the thoracic spiracles, and o the orifices for the emission ofthe volatile fluid, which produces the scent for which these insects areso well known : Jig. 8. the fore tarsus and part of the tibia (slightlyemarginate) of Pentatoma.These insects are very varied in their colours, and amongst theexotic species are to be found many which equal the most splendid ofthe Cleopatra. They are found upon trees and plants, upon thejuices of which they subsist, introducing their rostrum into the leaves.They will, however, attack other insects when opportunities offer,Latreille stating that several are occasionally to be seen surroundingand sucking a caterpillar ; and Kuhn (in Der Nature or seller, st. 6.,quoted by Fallen, Hemijjt Suecc. p. 142.) states that six or eight specimensof Pentatoma bides, shut up in a room swarming with thebed-bug for several weeks, completely extirpated the latter.The eggs of these insects are varied in form, but generally of an ovalshape, attached by one end to the leaves by a glutinous secretion, theother end being furnished with a cap* (De Geer, tom. iii. t. 13. f.19 — 22., and my Jig. 122. 9.), which the insect detaches on burstingforth : the young larvae are of a rounded or oval form, with thickantennae, a broad head, and the abdomen short fig. 122. ic, and DeGeer, 3Iem. tom. iii. t. 14. fig, I. 10. 16). De Geer (tom. iii. p. 262.)has made an interesting observation relative to the care with which thefemales of a species of this family (Acanthosoma grisea), found on thebirch, defend their young. In the month of July he observed manyfemales accompanied by their respective broods, each consisting of fromtwenty to forty young, which they attended with as much care as a hendoes her brood of chickens. Fig. 122. ll. represents the pupa of Pentagonrufipes, which, although much more nearly resembling the imago,still differs from it in possessing only four joints to the antennae, twojoints to the tarsi fig. 122, 12.), and wanting ocelli ; the scales of thefore wings are attached to the scutellum, and it will be seen that the rudimentalhind wings only appear at the inner margin of the fore wings :each of the three middle segments of the abdomen are furnished witha pair of tubercles, having the appearance of spiracles ; they haveKirby and Spence {{Introdd. vol. iii. p. 104. and pi. 20. f. 15.) describe the eggof a Pentatoma furnished, not only with a convex lid, but with a lever of a horny texture,and in the form of a cross-bow, for opening it, the handle being fixed to thelower part of the egg by a membrane, and the bow-part to the lid. See also Valloton the eggs of this genus, in Bull. Sci. Nat. de Ferussac, Sept. IS.'JO.HETEROPTERA. — SCUTELLERIDiE. 487been described byKirbyandSpence [Introdd. vol. iii. p.Yl^. and pi. 29.f. 22.) as pseudo-spiracles, and which M. Lefebvrej in his memoir onCanopus {fig- 122. 16.) has nsimed gibbositds excites.*There is a very great diversity of form in the insects of this family, ofwhich the most striking consists in the immense development of the scutellumin many species, which has induced Laporte to separate theminto two families, Scutellerites and Pentatomites, but the connectionbetween the two groups is so completely established by many exotic species,that I have not adopted this mode of classification ; in like manner,I have not employed the name Pentatomidse for the entire group, sincemany exotic species possess but four joints in the antennae, whereasthe scutellum in all is large, and in many entirely covers the abdomenand wings when at rest : an example of this is given in Jig. 122. 13.representing Coptosoma globus (l5. its antenna), a small Europeanspecies, in which the scutellum is broader than long ; the fore wingsare also very long, and from the peculiar form of the body in this group,it is necessary that they should be partially folded in repose {Jig.\'22. 14.),a peculiarity observed in no other Hemlpterous genus. (See my memoirhereon in Mag. Nat. Hist., n. sen, vol. ii.) The pupas of theScutelleridje are very convex, but exhibit no extraordinary enlargementof the scutellum ; this is even the case in some pupas of a Mauritiusspecies in my collection, closely allied to Coptosoma, belonging tomy genus Plataspis. Dr. Klug has figured the larva (pupa?) of Tetyraocellata (Sgmb. Phys. pi. 43. f. 7.), in which the stellar region extendsfurther over the back. The pupa of a species of Tesseratomais also figured in Griffith (san. Kingd. Ins. pi. 93. f. 1.) under the nameof T. ossa-cruelty. Amongst the exotic species, those comprising thegenus Calder deserve mention on account of their brilliant metalliccolours; Dryptocephala, Discocephala, and Phloeaf, on account oftheir apparent relation with the Aradi; whilst Cephalocteus Duf.,Scaptocoris Percy, Oncomeris ^wrm., Oncoscelis PFes^z^;., and others,From M. Lefebvre's figures of this genus, which lias so much perplexed entomologists,it is evidently an insect in an immature state, possessing no ocelli,4-jointed antenna, and 2-jointed tarsi : whether the insect always retains " ceteat de perfection imparfaite'" as suggested by M. Lefebvre, is perhaps, from thesecircumstances, questionable, as we have clearly seen that these imperfect perfectinsects are imperfect only in respect to their organs of flight.f The observations of Spinola on the relations of this genus have induced me toretain it in this family, from which it has been removed by BrulM.I I 4488 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.exhibit various remarkable modifications of structure of different organsto which I can but thus refer. In Edessa, Acanthosoma, &c. thesternum exhibits several forms, the pre sternum and mesosternum inthe last-named genus being considerably produced into a porrectedhorn fig. 121. 17.).Order APHANIPTERA Kirhy.(SucTORiA De Geer ; Siphonaptera Latreille ; Altera Lamarck,MacLeay ; Rhyngota p. Fabricius.^Char. Wings four ; minute scaly plates applied to the sides of thebody, those of the metathorax being the largest.Body compressed ; tarsi 5-jointed ; antennae minute-mouthformed for suction ; mandibles and lingua long and seti-form ; maxillse small, triangular scales with 4-jointed palpi; labiumminute, with 3-jointed palpi.Larvae vermiform ; pupa inactive, incomplete.This order is composed only of the different species of fleas, formingthe family Pulicidz-e * fig. 123. l. Pulex irritans ? magnified; 2.BiBLiOGR. Refer, to the Pulicid^.Leuwenhoeck. Arcana Natura?, tom.i.Pulling. De Pulicibus in Novo, Misc. Acad. Nature.' Curios. Dec. 3. 1695-6.D. Jacent Weston. A new Discovery of the Origin of Fleas, Phil. Trans. 1699.Latreille. Obs. sur I'Hist. Nat. de la Puce, in Rapport Gen. des Travaux de laSoe. Philomat. torn, ii., Paris 1798.Defiance. Notes sur la Puce irritate, in Ann. Sci. Nat, torn. i. 1824., and Zool.Journ. No. 2.Dupes. Recherches sur 1. Caract. genera. du Pulex, in Ditto, torn, xxvii. 1832. —Ditto, on Pulex penetrans, in Ditto, September 1836.Boscc. Descr. d'une Esp. du Puce (P. fascinates. ), in Bull. Soc. Philos. No. 44.Fahricius, in Danse. Widens. Selsk. Skrivt., n. Sail. D. 2. (n. sp. Pulex).Weiss. Observ. de Police, in Acta Velvet, vol. v.Collar, in Gistll's Faunus, 1837, No. 2. (Pulex penetrans).Schonherr, in Kongll. Vetensk. Acad. Handll. 1811. (Pulex segnis).Macquart, in Ann. Sci. Nat. April 1831.Swartz. On Pulex penetrans, in Vetensk. Acad. Handll. 1788.BoucM, in Nov. Act. Acad. Sees. Nat. Curios, vol. xvii. p. ]. (Monogr. Pulex).Gnerin. Icon. R. An. Ins., and description of ditto.AFHANIPTERA.PULICID^.Fig. 123.ditto, natural size); insects of minute size, which, in regard to theirstructural details and natural relations, have greatly perplexed naturalists,who, founding their arrangements in ignorance of their realpeculiarities, have placed these insects in situations which a moreprecise acquaintance with them has proved untenable. The body ofthese insects is compressed and covered with a hard shining integumentclothed with sharp bristles arranged in transverse seriesupon the back and legs ; the segments of the body are continuous,without any marked separation between the three principal parts ; thehead is small ; the mouth is called a rostrum by Kirby and Spence{{Introdd. vol. iii. p. 471.*), and is employed in suction. It is to Savignyand Curtis that we are indebted for an acquaintance with thereal structure of the parts of the mouth, which has been confirmed bymy own dissections, and by the researches of M. Duges ; a highlymagnified view of the parts of the mouth has been published by Mr.Aldus, of which Jig. 123. 3. is a very reduced partial copy, andfig. 123. 4. represents the parts of the mouth opened in front. Theupper lip is entirely obsolete (if the part described as the lingua benot its real representative) ; the mandibles (scalpel K. ^- <S'., tubeHook) are two elongated flattened setae, with a central rib, and withthe edges finely serrated fig. 123. 3, 4. md., and 5.) ; these, with thelingua (ligula K. S)~ S., sucker Hook), which is of equal length, butmore slender fig. 123. 3, 4. 1 3. and 7.), are united in the middleof the mouth to form an instrument which, from analogy with theThese authors figure all the parts of the inouth finer. vol. iii. pi. 7. f. 8.);they, however, like many previous writers, accounted (lie maxillary palpi as antennae,and hence their nomenclature of the other parts is inaccurate.f Savigny {{Mem. sur I. An. sans Vertebra. pt. 1. p. 27. 1816) first published adescription of the real structure of the mouth.490 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.mouth of the suctorial Hemiptera, is probably employed in puncturingthe flesh. At rest, these organs are defended by the labial palpi(fig' 123.3,4. L p , and G.), which unitedly form a tubular castellum,and which Duges figures as 5-jointed (Am. Sc. Nat, torn, xxvii.pi. 4. f. 9.), and Curtis describes as 4-jointed, although he representsthem in Pulex * as only 3-jointed, which appears to me to be theirtrue structure, having an internal membranous connection. Latreillealso describes them as 3-jointed (Gen. Cr. torn. iv. p. 365.). Thesepalpi arise from the apex of a small membranous labium (Jiff. 123.6. 0, andjtg. 123. 3. o), which is inserted upon a still smaller mentum(Jiff. 123. 6x); the maxillae (laminae K. and S., biters Hook,Jiff. 123. 3, 4. mx.) are small, lamelliform, coriaceous, and subtri-angular appendages, at the sides of the mouth, which appear articulatednear the tip; and the maxillary palpi (antennae K. sesfeelers or sellers Hook, Jig. 123. 3, 4. m. />.) arise from their base atthe anterior emarginate extremity of the head, and are porrected orrest upon the rostrum, being composed of four joints ; from their sizeand position they have been by many authors mistaken for antennas(antennae, potius palpi," Latr. Gen. vol. iv. p. scytheeyes are placed at the sides of the head, and are small androundly:, behind each of which is a small aperture, described as ordinarilyclosed by a moveable valve within which the antennae are placed ;these are minute articulated organs, varying in form in the differentspecies, composed apparently of four joints (Jiff. 123. 9. ant. of P.Canis, 10. ditto according to Duges), the third of which is very minute,and forms the cup-shaped base of the terminal joint, which in somespecies is furnished with numerous transverse incisions, which havebeen considered as so many distinct articulations by Curtis (antennaeof Cer. elongatus 8-jointed ; antennae of C. Talpae iO-jointed, Curtis,417. and 417. «); occasionally these organs are withdrawn out of theircavity, and carried erect § as in P. Musculi Duffss (Jiff. 123. 8. a,a X being the valve beneath which they lie in repose).He figures them as 4-jointed in Ceratopsyllus.■)■ This apparent articulation results, as I have ascertained, merely from the extensionof the inner membranous covering beyond the basal coriaceous substance.\ Duges describes them as 'rushes ;" and Hooke, as each being a " single lens,like a cat's eye." Mr. Newman {Ent Mag., No. 11. p. 404.) mentions their simpleconstruction as not having been noticed by any previous writer.§ In such cases they constitute the genus Ceratopsyllus Curt. I have, however,endeavoured to show that, from the variations of these organs in every species, it isnot advisable to establish a genus upon this character. (sent. Mag., No. 4.)APHANIPTERA, — PULICID^. 491The thorax is composed of three short segments, the second ofwhich, or the mesothorax, has a small scale (^^. 123. i x) affixedat its hind margin, on each side, behind the coxa of the middle legs,and resting upon the coxa of the hind legs, whilst the metathoraxhas a much larger pair of these scales (j%. 123. i x x ), which nearlycover the sides of the first and part of the second abdominal segment.These scales, evidently representing the four wings of the Pilot,were first clearly defined by Duges, although Hooke had first representedthem ; Mr. Kirby, also i^Introd. vol. iv. p. 383.), says thatsomething like elytra and a scutellum appear, and MacLeay (^HorcBEnt. p. 357.), that vestiges of wings are visible.The legs are long, the posterior formed for leaping ; the coxae arevery large ; the fore legs are singularly placed, appearing to arisefrom the front of the head, the coxae defending the sides of the rostrum.This peculiarity is caused by the pro thoracic epimera beingdetached from the body, and extended obliquely beneath the head.The large coxae articulate in the four hind legs with the epimerae * bymeans of a minute joint, which, according to M. Duges, does notexist in the fore pair ; the coxa is succeeded by a minute trochanter,considered as a supplemental joint by Duges ; the femora are short,but strong, the tibice very setose, and the tarsi 5-jointed, terminatedby a pair of strong claws (fig. 123. ll).The history of these insects in the perfect state is well known ;their eagerness for blood, and their powerful muscular activity, enablingthem to leap to an amazing distance, and which has been turned toaccount by ingenious mechanics, for the purpose of making them performvarious feats, such as drawing miniature carriages, &c., needs nolengthened account. The transformations of the insects are, however,especially interesting.On opening the body of a female flea, ten or a dozen oblong eggs,of a rounded form and white colour, are discovered, which are depositedby the female in obscure places, such as cracks in the floor, oramongst the hairs of rugs, where dogs are accustomed to lie. Fromthese eggs are hatched long worm-like grubs (fig. 123. 13, 14. dittomagnified), destitute of feet, with thirteen distinct (pilose, accordingto De Geer) segments ; the last furnished with two hooks ; the first,or the head, not variable in form, somewhat corneous, subovate, fury.Duges, erroneously regarding the epimera; as the coxae, the coxas as femora,and the femora as tibia;, has described the real tibiae as the basal joint of the 6-jointed tarsi. He has corrected this error in his memoir on P. penetrans.492 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.wished with short anteniiEe and oral appendages*, the precise structureof which has not been described (blind according to De Geer, butwith two eyes according to Rose). These larvae are very active,twisting about in all directions, and feeding upon the fleshy' particlesof feathers and the blood of animals, especially drops of congealedblood found lying near the eggs : the last, at least, is stated to betheir food by M. Defiances , but this part of the history of the fleaseems to require elucidation. When full grown, which occurs, insummer, in about twelve days, the larvae enclose themselves in asmall cocoon of silk, often covered with dust, and attached to adjoiningsubstances. Rose, however, observed that some of the larvaeunderwent their transformations without forming any cocoon. Thepupa (7%7. 123. IG., 14. ditto magnified, 15. exuviae of the larva) isquite inactive, with the legs enclosed in separate cases ; the colour ofthe pupa is at first dirty white, but it afterwards assumes the tint ofthe imago. The larvae, which are not hatched until the end of thesummer, pass the winter in that form. The period of the durationof the pupa state varies from eleven to sixteen days.The changes which the flea undergoes were not unknown to Aristotle,since he noticed not only that it had distinct sexes, but alsothat they produced (t/cwXjjc woeiceig : from not, however, tracing theinsect through its changes, he fancied this progeny was iii generis,and that the perfect insect was generated spontaneously in the earth,the Latin name Pulex being stated by Isidore to have been derivedfrom pelvis, " quasi pulverised filius." MoufFett also entertained asimilar notion, whilst Scaliger thought they were produced from thehumours amongst the hairs of dogs. It is to Leuwenhoeck (arcanaNature, tom. i. p. 35. and 353.), Rose (^Ins. Belust. torn, ii., Muse, etColic. tab. 2, 3, 4.), and De Geer (3Ie)noires, torn. vii. tab. 1.), that weareindebted for a knowledge of the real transformations of the insect.There are numerous species of this genus, peculiar to variousanimals and birds. Duges describes four species, P. irritans, Canis,MuscuH, and Vespertilionis ; whilst Bouche describes ten species, P.irritans, Canis, Gallia Schr., Felix, Martin, Sciurorum, Erinacei,The precise structure of these mouth organs has not been described : hence wearein doubt as to whether the larva be suctorial or mandibulated ; if the former, theanalogy of the order with the Cleopatra cannot be maintained.+ In the chapter on the flea, in the Natural History of Insects, in the FamilyLibrary, vol. ii., I have given an abstract of M. Defiance's observations, whichare also stated in the Encycl. Mtth. tom.x. p. 242.APHANIPTERA. — PULICIDiE. 49Talpse, Musculi, and Vespertilionis. The largest British species isfound upon the mole, Ceratopsyllus Talpte Curt. The largest species Ihave seen has been sent to me by Mr. R. H. Lewis, with the name ofPulex Echidnae, that gentleman having captured it in Van Diemen'sLand on Echidna Hysteria, or the Australian porcupine. P. gigasKirhy (^Fcmn. JBor. Amer. p. 318. pi. 17. f. 9.) is two lines long, but itis not known upon what American animal it was found.In warm and more especially in tropical countries, these insects areexceedingly troublesome ; but in the West Indies and South Americathere is an insect belonging to the family having habits different tothose of the common flea, which is even still more obnoxious ; thisis the Chigoe or Jigger, Pulex penetrans Linn*, an insect of verysmall size, which lives in the open country, and during the dryseason incredibly multiplies in sandy and dusty places. It chieflyattacks the naked feet, both of men and dogs, particularly betweenthe toes and nails, burying itself deep into the skin, and occasioningby its constant irritation the most violent indisposition, inflammation,swellings, ulcers, and even death. After one of these insects haseffected a lodgement in the skin, its body becomes enormously distended,acquiring the size of a pea fig. 123. 17. seen in front; 18.ditto magnified, seen sideways) ; the head, thorax, and legs retainingtheir ordinary size, the abdomen alone becoming swollen and filledwith an immense number of eggs ; in this state the greatest careis requisite in extracting the mass entire. The specimens whichthus burrow into the flesh are certainly impregnated females. Noauthor has noticed the discovers of larvae or pupae in the feetor elsewhere ; hence Pohl and Kollar (Brasil. vorzugl. last, Ins.tab. annex, fig. 5., translated in Mag. Nat. Hist. vol. ix. p. 294'.)Long regarded as an Acarus ; it was first proved to be a flea by Claus Swartz.Guerin icon. R. An. Ins. pi. 2. f. 9.), Dumeril {Consid. Enter. pi. 53.), and Pohland Kollar have given figures of this insect. The two former figure, also, individualswith the abdomen of the ordinary size, terminated by a slender appendage,forked at the tip. Is this the male? Kirby and Spence {{Introdd. pi. 23. f. tolandPohl and Kollar, have represented it without this appendage. Is this the un-impregnatedfemale? M. Guerin has also figured icon. R. An. Ins. 2. fig. 9. a) aspecimen of* P. penetrans with the long anal appendage, which he doubtinglydescribes (in the description of the plates of the Iconographie, of which he has beenso kind as to send me proof sheets) as the male organs of generation ; the un-impregnatedfemale not possessing this appendage, which, from the habits of theinsect, cannot be an ovipositor.f According to Pohl and Kollar (p. 10.), the Biche do Caehorro, or dog chigoe,is a distinct species from the Biche de pe, or P. penetrans.494) MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.conjecture that, like the common flea, it lays its eggs on the ground,whilst Dr. Rothschild (Medecinischewid Kyrurg. Bemerk. Colon. Essequibo,&)'c., Franks. 1796, 8vo. p. 307.) is of opinion that the larvae aredeveloped within the abdomen of the mother, and there pass into thepupa state. Some specimens of the insect, pi-resented to me by W.Sells, Esq., have enabled me to examine and describe the insect (in amemoir read at the Entomological Society), as well as to dissect theabdomen, which I found filled with ovaries containing an immensenumber of eggs : hence there is evidently no sufficient space for thedevelopment of the pupa, as suggested by Rothschild ; whilst the fact,that if the nestled chigoe be unmolested, a fearful ulcer is found,which frequently extends to the bones, requiring amputation, seems towarrant the supposition that the larvae are hatched in the wound, andit is by their action that the ulcer is formed ; in such case we mustfurther suppose that when full grown they leave their victim and undergothe pupa state in the earth, a proceeding of very common occurrenceamongst parasitic insects. One thing, however, seemsevident, that from their vast numbers their ordinary developmentmust take place elsewhere than in the foot. In my memoir on thisinsect I noticed the obsolete structure of the labium *, and had thence,as well as from the difference of its habits, separated it genericallyunder the name of Sarcopsylla or flesh-flea, fThe investigation of the natural relations of this order is attendedwith much difficulty : the opinions entertained concerning them byauthors ignorant of their precise structure cannot be considered asentitled to much weight ; and hence the situation assigned to them inthe Regne Animal, between the lice and the beetles;, is one of themost unnatural that could have been found for them, Lamarck hadpointed out the relation of the flea to the Diptera resulting from itstransformations ; and Strauss Durckheim (Anat. du Uanneton, p. 5. 9,M. Duges, in his memoir, published subsequent to the reading of my memoir,also noticed this peculiarity, but nevertheless did not think it necessary to separateit generically from the common flea.\ The same opinion was also held by the Rev. L. Guilding, who, in his collection,had applied the generic name of Sarcophaga to this insect ; this name I shouldhave retained, had it not been long preoccupied for the flesh-fly. M. Guerin hasnamed it Dermatophilus in his description of the plates of the Iconographie (notyet published).\ Mr. MacLeay insists upon this order being considered as the analogical representativeof the order Cleopatra, in consequence of the similar nature of theirtransformations.Litera. 49510.) asserts that "la puce est un Dicere sans ailes." Duges admitsthis relation, but considers the relation with the Hymenoptera* to beequally strong. The articulated sheath of the rostrum, as the labialpalpi have been called, has been supposed to establish a relation withthe suctorial Hemiptera-f- ; but as this sheath is but a pair of articulatedpalpi, we must look elsewhere for the grounds of the relation, ifit in fact exist. Whether the elongated inarticulate organs in theinterior of the mouth can be considered as analogous (but merely fromtheir action) to the setiform mandibles and maxilla of the Hemiptera,is, perhaps, questionable : beyond these I can perceive no furtherbond of union between the two orders; and the elongated maxillarypalpi and the want of a labrum are characters quite at variance withthose of the Hemiptera.Order DIPTERA:}; Aristotle.(Antliata Fabricius ; Halteriptera Clairville,^Char. Wings two; mesothoracic, membranous, not capable of beingfolded, with variable neuration, accompanied at the base bya pair of small amulets.The transformations of this order agree with those of the flea ; and an analogymay, by the exercise of considerable ingenuity, be traced between the parts ofthe mouth of the two orders ; but the flea has a suctorial, and the Hymenoptera amasticating mouth. (See Vol. 1. p. 8.)j- Hence MacLeay force Ent. p. 379.), adopting the views of Latreille (Hist.Nat. torn. xiv. p. 404.), places the flea between the Hemiptera and such Diptera ashave the sheath of the rostrum bivalve but not articulated. Its nearest relationsamong the Diptera are, however, such species as have an incomplete pupa. Someof the fungivorous Tipulidae, especially Cordyla, as suggested by Mr. Haliday(in Curtis, Ceratophyllus), make the closest approach. In their parasitic habits,however, they make a nearer approach to the Hippoboscidae.J BiBLioGR. Refer, to the Diptera in general.Schellenherg . Gattungen der Feign, 8vo. Sur. 1803.Herbst. Genre des Mouches Dipteres, 2 vols. 8vo. Zurich, 1802.Fabricius. Systema Antliatorum, 8vo. Brunsw. 180.5.Fallen. Diptera Species descriptio, 2 vols. 4to. Lund. 1814-1827. — Dit4to, Suppl.Dipt. Suecc. Lund. 1826.Wiedemann, in his Zool. Magaz. vol. i. St. 1, 2, and 3. — Ditto, Nova DipterorumGenera, 4to. Kilns, 1820. — Dit4to, Diptera Exotica, 8vo. Cilia, 1821. —Ditto, Analecta Entomological-'to. Kill*, 1824. — Ditto, Aussereuropaischezweifl. Ins., 2 vols. 8vo. 1828-1830.496 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Metathoracic wings replaced by a pair of small slender filamentsclubbed at the tip (halteres, powers, or balancers, " malleoli, or littlehammers," Sivammerd.).Mouth antedate, with a fleshy proboscis (labium), forming a canal,and enclosing several lancet-like organs, varying in number, butalways destitute of labial palpi.Tarsi 5-jointed.Prothorax reduced to a very small collar.Pupa coarctate or incomplete.Lehmann. Ins. Sp. Hamburg, ex Ord. Dipt., in Acta Nat. Cur. Bonn. torn. xii.1824.De Geer. Memoires, torn. vi.Meigen. Versuch. ein. n. Attunes. d. Eur. zweifl. Ins., in Illiger Mag. 2 band.1803. — Dit4to, Klassificaz. n. Beschr. Europ. zweifl. Ins., 2 vols. 4to. Brunsw.1804. — Ditto, Systematt. Beschr. d. bek. Europ. zweifl. Ins., 7 vols. 8vo.1818-1838.Ruth. Ein. Beitrage zu Reigns syn. Beschreib., &c. Isis, 1831. Heft 11.Macquart. Ins. Dipt, du Nord de la France, in Mem. Soc. Roy. de Lille, 1825.et seq. — Ditto, Hist. Nat. des Ins. Dipt , 2 vols. Paris, 1834-1835. (Suitesa Buffon.) — Ditto, Dipteres Exotiques, vol. i. p. 1 and 2. 1838, 1839.Leconte and Say. North Am. Dipt., in Trans. Lyceum Nat. Hist, of New York.Say. Descriptions of Dipterous Insects of United States, in Journal of Acad. Nat.Hist, of Philadelphia, vol. iii. 1823, 1824. — Ditto, Dipt, of United States, inditto, vol. vi. pt. 1, 2. (See also Guerin, Bull. Zool. p. 33.) — Ditto, AmericanEntomology.Cuvier, in Journ. d'Hist. Nat. torn. ii. (Observ. sur quelq. Dipt.)Dufour. Descr. de quelq. Ins. Dipter. Ann. Sci. Nat. tom. xxx. 1833.Holiday. Catal. of Diptera, occurring about Plolywood in Downshire. Entomol.Mag. 1832. — Ditto, in ditto, />asi//M. — Ditto, in Annals of Zool. Nos. 9.,17., &c.Roserr. Verz. Nuremberg. Diptera. 8vo. Stuttg. 1834.Bouche. Ueber d. Korpertheile d. zw. Ins., in Mag. d. Gesellsch. Nat. Fr.Berlin, 1812 (6th year). — Ditto, in Nova Acta Nature. Curios, vol. xvii.(Dipterous Larvae.)Westwood, in Taylor's Lond. and Ed. Phil. Mag., April and June 1835. — Ditto,in Ann. Soc. Ent. de France, 1835. (n. g. and sp. Dipt.)Schelver. Betrachtungen, &c. tiber den Flung u. d. Resume einig. zw. Ins., inWiedemann, Archiv., 2 b. 2 st.Burmeister, in PoggendorfF's Annalen, and Silbermann's Rev. Ent. No. 4., and inTaylor's Sci. Mem. pt. 3. (Noise made during flight.)Walker. Diptera of N. Holland, in Ent. Mag. vol. ii. p. 468. — Ditto, in Trans.Linn. Soc. vol. xvii. — Ditto, in Entomol. Magazine, passim.And the general works of Linnceus, Latreille, Guerin, Boisduval, Kirhy, Geoffroy,Panzer, Harris (li,xposit. Engl. Ins), JfaZ^Z (Reise nacli Span hen), §-c.Litera. 497The two-winged insects constitute one of the most extensiveorders of the Pilot, not only in respect to numbers of distinctspecies, but also to the swarms of individuals of the same species ;and which, from their constant attendance upon man, have attractedhis attention from the earliest ages. It is not, however, from theirsize that this has been the case, since few species exceed an inchin length ; nor is it on account of their beauty, for the majority ofthem are of dull colours; their forms, too, are rarely elegant, andthe transformations of many are unknown. They owe their notoriety,if we may so speak, in many cases, to the disgusting habitsand appearance of their preparatory states, when many of them revelin filth of every description ; and to the annoyances caused by thereiterated attacks of their numberless tribes in the perfect state,both directly upon ourselves, and indirectly upon our living and deadproperty of almost every kind. When it is borne in mind, that oneof the plagues of Egypt was caused by " swarms of flies*, and thatthe gnat, the mosquito, gad-fly, breeze-fly, Zimb, Stomoxys, Sc. areDipterous insects, which are unceasing in their attacks upon man aswell as upon many of our domestic animals, it will be at once perceivedthat the order comprises some of the most formidable of ourinsect enemies.Other species, as the Castri, deposit their eggs upon the bodiesof animals, within which the grubs, when hatched, feed : others forthe same purpose infect meat and other viands used for food; andso great are their powers of multiplication and voracity, that, accordingto Linnaeus, " tres muscle consuming cadaver equi, neque city acleo " (S?/st. Nat. vol. ii. p. 990.). Other species of flies deposit theireggs upon young corn and other fruits of the earth, occasionallyin such numbers as completely to destroy the hopes of the agriculturist.On the other hand, by clearing the surface of the earth ofvegetable and animal impurities, and noxious insects, many Dipterousinsects are to be regarded as unusually serviceable.In the Brit. Ci/cl. of Nat. Hist. (vol. iii. p. 298.), and Entomol. Teat-Book(p. 17.), I have endeavoured to prove (contrary to the opinions of various writers),that the plague of flies was produced neither by the limb, flesh-flies, nor dog-flies(nuvofjiula.), but by " swarms " of mosquitoes ; the circumstance stated as miraculous,namely, that the land of Goshen, in which the children of Israel dwelt,was not subjected to their attacks, being caused by the sandy nature of the pasturesoil of Goshen not watered by the Nile, which was consequently free from situationsfavourable for the breeding of Culicid^.498 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.The head in these insects is almost invariably distinct, and attachedto the thorax by a very short and narrow neck ; the eyes arelarge and lateral, those of the males, in many species, occupyingnearly the whole of the head ; the ocelli are generally present, andthree in number ; only two, however, are found in some of the Tipulidas.The antennae are generally inserted on the forehead, and approximatingat the base ; they are of very variable construction : thereappear, however, to be two distinct types of formation * ; one exemplifiedin the TipulidaB, in which these organs assimilate to thoseof many preceding groups, being composed of a series of distinctcontinuous articulations, often ornamented with whorls of hairs,bristles, &c. ; the other occurring in the greater number of Diptera, inwhich the antennas, unlike those of any other tribe, are very short andapparently composed of only two or three thick joints, the last ofwhich is generally the largest, and is furnished with a bristle (arista)on its upper edge ; this joint, however, is, in fact, composed of severalof the articulations observable in the other type soldered together, thebristle representing also two or three other joints, — it being quiteeasy, as we shall see in the sequel, to trace the gradation of structurethrough the various families.The mouth of these insects is formed only for imbibing fluid matter; when, therefore, such fluid is enclosed in peculiar vessels, theinternal pieces of the sucker are employed as lancets to pierce theenvelope and afford a passage to the fluid, which ascends by powerof suction, produced by the fleshy lips of the insect into the mouth.The outer case of the rostrum evidently represents the lower lip ofthe mandibulated orders, having the sides turned up, so as to form acanal, for the double purpose of containing the other parts of themouth, and of forming a channel for the flowing up of liquidsinto the pharynx : these internal pieces of the mouth are variablein number in the different families, but are found in their greateststate of development in the blood-sucking gnats and breeze-flies,in which the upper lip, the two mandibles, the two maxillae, and thetongue of other insects are represented under the form of lancet-likeorgans : another pair of jointed organs is also attached to some part ofthe rostrum, or to that pair of lancets which represents the maxillae;whence it is evident that they are the true analogues of the maxillarypalpi, although the maxillary setae themselves are sometimes obsolete.See MacLeay on the antennae of this order, in Taylor's Philos. Magaz. 1827.Litera. 499The thorax in these insects is short and robust, the distinctnessof the various portions being much diminished, and the size ofmany of them reduced, in pursuance of the rules of proportionatedevelopment, resulting from the existence of only one pair of wings;hence the prothorax is very minute, the collar only being slightlyvisible, whilst the mesothorax extends nearly over the whole thoracicregion : at the sides of this segment a pair of naked membranouswings * are placed, having, in many species, attached to their basebehind a pair of small membranous appendages, termed alulae, orringlets, which vary in size in an inverse proportion to the size ofthe halteres, and which have been regarded by some entomologists asthe analogues of the lower pair of wings in the other orders ; at thebase of the halteres, as well as behind the collar, there exists a pairof spiracles. (Seefff. 126. i., and 128. 8.)The halteres f, as Dalman well observes (Dialect. Ent. sub Chorea),are the most characteristic organs of the order, being present evenwhen the wings themselves are wanting. They are generally keptin constant vibration; respecting their uses:};, however, as well astheir analogies, dependent upon the analogous formation of the posteriorportion of the thorax, entomologists are at variance ; some authorsregarding them as representatives of the posterior pair of wings,whilst others, including Audouin and Latreille, deny them this chasmany entomologists have endeavoured with very great pains to reducethe variable position of the nerves of the wings of the Hymenoptera to one typicalform, the typical neuration of the wings of the Diptera has been but little investigated.Latreille has partially attempted its elucidation ( Genera, §-c. torn. iv.p. 237.); fond see MacLeay, in Zool. Journ. Nos. 2 and 16. (in paper on Ceratites).An observation worthy of consideration in respect to this subject, has been madeby M. Macquart (hist. Nat. Ins. Dipt. torn. i. p. 11.), that if we compare thewing of one of these insects with the fore wing of one of the Hymenoptera,we cannot trace any analogy between the neuration of the two; but if both wingsof the latter are thus compared with the single wing of the Dipterous insect, weareeasily able to distinguish in the latter the various cells of the former ; andhence, that the single wing of the Diptera represents both wings of the Hymenoptera,and that the halteres consequently cannot represent the hind wings.•j- See Robineau Desvoidy, on these organs, in Ferussac's Bulletin for May 1827.\ From being connected with the meta thoracic spiracle, they have been regardedas appendages of the respiratory system. See Schelver (in,Wiedemann's Zool. (in PoggendorfF's Annalen, translated taylor's Scientific Memoirs,vol. i. pt. 3., and in Silbermann, Rev. Entomology. 4.), on the noise made by insectsin flight; and see Kirby and Spence {{Introdd. vol. ii. p. 360.), on the variations inthe alary organs and flight of the Diptera.K K 2500 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.racer, regarding them as abdominal appendages, in accordance withtheir theory relative to the hind part of the thorax of the Diptera andHymenoptera ; and Messrs. Kirby and Spence consider them as appendagesof the respiratory organs. From a careful investigation oftheir structure and position in the chief types of the order, as well asfrom a comparison of the Dipterous and Hymenopterous thorax, itappears to me that the same arguments by which I have endeavoured,in a previous page, to prove that the hind part of the middle portionof the body in the petiolated Hymenoptera is thoracic, are equallyapplicable to these insects, in order to show, not only that such is alsothe case in the Diptera, but also that the halteres are the real analoguesof the hind wings ; and, consequently, that the alulets aremerely appendages of, or, in fact, not distinct organs from, the upperwings. Latreille, indeed, in several of his latest works, instanced thelarger Tipulidae as showing that the halteres cannot be analogous tothe hinder wings, inasmuch as they are attached to the segment,which bears a pair of spiracles, which, he asserts (but erroneously), isnever the case with the metathorax ; but, on carefully examining Ti-pulloleracea, it is quite impossible to arrive at any other conclusionthan that the segment which bears the halteres and pair of spiraclesis also that which bears the hind legs, and which is consequently themetathorax. Moreover, it unfortunately happens, for the theory ofthe French entomologists, that the abdomen of this and other alliedinsects possesses the full complement of segments, without taking thissupposed basal segment into the calculation. I have represented thevarious developments of these thoracic organs in several Dipterousinsects in the following figures.The legs are long, and terminated by a 5-jointed tarsus, having twoclaws at the extremity, with two or three fleshy vesicles or pulvilli.*The abdomen is united to the thorax by a considerable portion of itsThese pulvilli, or, as Derham terms them, " skinny palms to the feet,"have been generally regarded as the instruments wherewith, by means of the pressureof the atmosphere, flies are enabled to creep on the upright surfaces of glassand other polished surfaces against gravity. Mr. Blackwell has, however, latelypublished a very ingenious paper, proving that it is impossible, from the structureof these organs, covered as they are with minute bristles, to be employed assuckers, and suggesting that it is by strictly mechanical means, as suggested byDr. Hooke (Biographia, p. 171.), that they are enabled to retain their hold.{^Linn. Trans, vol. xvi. p. 490.) In a subsequent communication, he however considersthat an adhesive secretion is emitted by the hair-like appendage on the inferiorsurface of the pulvilli, which are considered to be tubular ; a distinct track of thissecretion being discoverable in every instance, linn. Trans, vol. xvi. p. 768.)Litera. 501transverse diameter, and is composed of from five to nine joints, terminatedin a point in the females ; in some of the latter the number ofjoints is reduced; the apparently wanting segments are, however, convertedinto a telescopic-formed ovipositor.The transformations of this order are either of the incomplete orcoarctate kind, or rather such is the nature of the pupa state.The larvae are fleshy, cylindric, footless grubs* ; but some speciesare furnished with representatives of legs. It is in this order alonethat the head is found to exhibit a soft, fleshy, and variable structure ;a character, however, exclusive to those Diptera which have a coarctatepupa. The mouth is generally furnished with two hooks, which arethrust into the substances from which the larvae derive their nutriment.In the majority of these larvas the spiracles, two in number, are situatedat the posterior extremity of the body; many are also furnished witha pair of these organs on the segment immediately succeeding the head,and in some they are placed on several of the consecutive segments.When arrived at their full size, the larvae of some of the species(Nemocera and Tanystoma) cast their skin, and appear in the formof incomplete pupae, having their limbs enclosed in distinct sheaths.The pupae of the Culicidae are not, however, quiescent. This transformationis sometimes effected in a cocoon woven by the larva. Inthe majority of the order, however (Muscidas, &c.), the outer skin isnot shed, but, by degrees, contracts and hardens, until it assumesthe appearance of an oval brownish shell or case, within which the bodyof the larva is detached in a soft and gelatinous mass, and which exhibitsno appearance of limbs or joints; by degrees, however, theseparts are found (on opening the shell) to have become distinct whenthe insect is in the true state of a coarctate pupa. In some species,however, the larva skin scarcely changes its form, on the insect's assumingthe pupa state. The perfect insect makes its escape from thiscase by causing the upper extremity to scale ois, having also sloughedoff the real envelope of the pupa. In the forest flies, Hippoboscidae, aremarkable variation occurs ; the insect passing the larva state, andBouche (in Nova Acta Nature. Curios, vol. xvii. ), MacLeay (in Zool. Journ.vol. ii. No. 5., and Taylor's PA/Zos. Magazine, 1827; Bull. Feruss. February 1829),and Dufour, in a memoir presented to the " Institut," upon some fungivorous Dipterous]arva presented to the " Institut," and noticed in the Revue Zool. Soc. Cuvier.1839, No. 7., have entered into numerous general details relative to the larvae ofthis order.K K 3502 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.undergoing the change to the pupa in the abdomen of the mother ;and being deposited in the shape of a large oval mass covered bya thick skin.The situation of the Diptera amongst the orders of insects is consideredby Mr. MacLeay to be intermediate between the Lepidoptera,with which they are supposed to be connected by means of such insectsas Pterophorus Far. (Paleness titles D. G.) and PsychodaLatr. (Linaria Schill*) and the order containing the fleas, Apha-nippers ; which latter relationship is deemed to be effected by meansof Hippobosca-j- , Nycteribia, and Pulex ; whilst the analogous appearanceexhibited by different species in almost every Dipterous familywith the Hymenoptera, has not failed to attract the attention of everyobserver. These orders are accordingly analogically opposed to eachother in the mandibulated and haustellated columns of the systems ofSavigny, MacLeay, and Kirby and Spence. (See K. and S., voL iv.p. 412— 415.)It is to Aristotle that we are indebted for the first indication, as wellas the name, of this order ; and by whom it was divided into twosections, one of which (Emprosthocentra) he distinguished from itscounterpart amongst the Neuroptera (Opisthocentra) from possessingan oral instead of an abdominal sting. Swammerdam, pursuing theprinciple of metamorphosis, united one portion with the Cleopatra,Hymenoptera, &c. undergoing an incomplete metamorphosis, whilstthe remainder, undergoing a coarctate metamorphosis, he erroneouslyplaced with the Ichneumon minute Linn. Linnaeus, in his laterworks, established it in its present extent, in which respect he wasfollowed by De Geer. Fabricius, however, pursuing the siberian characters,united it v/ith the Anoplura Leach, Trachea Arachnida Latr.,Sec. under the name of Antliata, a step which has not been adoptedexcept by his immediate followers. Glanville also proposed for it thename of Halteriptera. More recently Dr. Leach proposed to establishthe Linnaean genus Hippobosca as a distinct order, under the nameof Hymenoptera.Burmeister thinks the long rostrated Bombyliidce and Tabanidas, which heplaces in conjunction, lead to the Lepidoptera (De Insect. Syst. Nature. p. 25.).This relationship is, however, more apparent than real ; the labium of the Dipterabeing lengthened at the expense of the maxillae, &c. ; whereas, in the Lepidoptera,the maxilla are developed at the expence of the labium, &c.f The stirps Pupipara (Hippobosca), &c. is also deemed by Mr. MacLeay asestablishing the passage between the classes of Haustellata and Arachnida. I haveintroduced some observations upon this transition in my remarks upon this stirps.Litera. 503Moses Harris was the earliest British author who paid peculiar attentionto the insects of this order, and was the first entomologist whomade use of the variations in the nervures of the wings to distinguishthe groups. More recently, these insects have attracted much attentionabroad ; Fallen, in Sweden, having published many memoirsrespecting them ; Macquart has also published an admirable series ofmonographs upon the Diptera of the North of France, as well as severalsubsequent general works. But it is chiefly to Meigen, whose workupon the Diptera of Europe extends to six volumes, and to Wiede-mann, whose Exotic Diptera occupies two volumes, that we are indebtedfor the most complete series of descriptions of the species ofthis order, whilst it is to the works of Latreiile that we must look alonefor the more philosophical views relative to the affinities and consequentrelative situation of the various families of Diptera, the precedingauthors having implicitly followed him in his modes of distribution.The natural classification of the Diptera is attended with greatdifficulty, resulting from the difference in value which may be attachedto the characters respectively derived from the structure of the antennaeand trophi, and the nature of the transformations; hence wefind that Latreiile, in many of his works, has adopted various plansof arrangement, and has likewise suggested others, varying accordingto the different rank supposed to be possessed by either of these principalcharacters. Thus, in the " Genera Crustaceorum," the antennasare first employed, and thus we have the Stratiomidae, in consequenceof their multi-articulate antennae, but which have a coarctate pupa,and a mouth furnished with two or at most four setae, introduced betweenthe Tipulariee and Tabanii, which last have an incomplete pupalike the Tipularise and a more complete mouth. In a note, however, inthe same work there is another arrangement proposed, chiefly foundedon the structure of the mouth * ; and here we have the Tabanii broughtinto contact with the Tipularise, whilst the Stratiomidae are removedM. Macquart has nearly adopted this proposed arrangement, without acknowledgment,in his Suites a Buffon, as follows : —Div. I. Nemocera (composed of Culex and Tipula),Dlv. 2. Brachocera.Subdiv. 1. Hexach(Bta, with six seta; in the mouth (Tabanus).Subdiv. 2. 7V<rac/i<Eta, with four seta;, composed of three families — A. Notacari'tha (Stratiomys, &c. ), B. Tanystoina (Asilus, Empis, Bombylius, &c. ), andC. Brachystorna (Rhagio, Dolichopus, Syrphus, &c. ).Subdiv. 3-dictate (composed of the Athericera and Pupipara of Latreiile).K K 4504 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.nearly to the end of the order with the Muscidae, whereas the structureof the antennae of these two groups is totally at variance with such anarrangement. In the Families Naturelles, we find the preference givento the nature of the metamorphoses, and hence the order (after theremoval of the Pupiparse) is divided into four primary families, thusarranged: 1. Nemocera, 2. Tanystoma, 3. Notacantha, and 4. Athe-ribera ; the 3d, composed of the Stratiomidae, agreeing with the 4thin having a coarctate pupa, whilst the 1st and 2d have the pupa notenclosed within the skin of the larva.Still, however, there is a diversity in the nature of the metamorphosesof the third and fourth groups ; the larva skin of the Stratiomidaenearly retaining its form, whilst that of Musca and the other Athericerais completely altered, assuming that of an oval inarticulate mass. " Lanature," observes Latreille, " dares ses vues particulier, et quinous sont inconnues, varie sa marche et ses combinaisons." (Co?isid.ghi. p, 85.) And hence it is, that whilst Culex and Chironomus areso intimately allied in general structure and metamorphoses, as to beunited into the same natural family by some writers *, the structureof their mouths is totally different, that of Culex being exceedinglydeveloped, even to a greater extent than in the Tabanidae, withwhich, however, it agrees in the number of the pieces of which it iscomposed ; an arrangement, therefore, founded on the structure of themouth, in which Tabanus and Culex would be united, must be artificial.How far the circumstance of some of these insects possessinga coarctate pupa ought to be considered as superseding other considerations,originating in the characters of the perfect state, may perhapsbe questioned, when we consider that a coarctate pupa is in factnothing else than an imperfect pupa enveloped in the larva skin -{-,far more analogous to the true incomplete pupa of the bee and thebeetle, than it is to the objected pupa of the Lepidoptera.If, again, independently of metamorphoses or trophi, we look tothe antennae, and other characters of the imago, for affording thegrounds of a natural arrangement, we still find it difficult to decidewhether the Tabanidae or the Notacantha are nearest related to theTipulidas, the former group by Macquart, and the latter by Latreille,being made to occupy this station. By the arrangement of Macquart,Latreille ( Genera, torn. iv. p. 245. ) unites them into a section under the nameof Tipularire aquatic.f In some species of beetles, the incomplete pupa is inclosed in the skin of thelarva (Anthrenus, Chilocorus), thus being, in fact, coarctate pupas.Litera. 505Latreille's admirable group Tanystoma is cut up, as it appears to meunnaturally ; and hence, although there is a great hiatus between theTipulidaj and the Notacantha, and the antennae of some of the latter(Sargus, &c.) are aristotle, I feel inclined to retain the Notacanthain the situation assigned to them by Latreille in his " Genera."From the peculiar construction and transformation of the and Nycteribiidee, they are admitted by authors to form adistinct and terminal section of the order, under the name of Pupil; the CTlstridae, Muscidae, &c. having in several respects a neareraffinity with these than any other Dipterous insects, will occasion theirnear approach to them in the system ; whilst of all the remaining Dip-teathe Tipulae and Calicoes, from their structure and transformations,are evidently the farthest removed from the latter, and at the sametime nearest allied, both in their transformations and antennae, to someof the preceding tribes of insects.* The following distribution, therefore,nearly resembles that of Latreille's Genera, the families of theTanystoma being transposed : —Section 1. Head always distinct from the thorax; claws of the tarsi not dentated; larva annulose, not undergoing its transformations to the pupa statewithin the body of the parent ; female insects oviparous (or viviparous, someMuscidae).Division 1. (Stirps 1.) Nemocera Latr. Antennae composed of more than sixjoints; palpi 4 or 5-jointed ; pupa incomplete (Fam. Culicidce and TipuUda).Division 2. Brachocera Macqq. Antenna short, net having apparently more thanthree distinct joints ; palpi 1 or 2-jointed.Stirps 2. Notacantha Latr. Antennae apparently composed of only threejoints, the last, however, being articulated ; proboscis exserted, seldom enclosingmore than two lancets. The structure of the mouth is very incomplete,and the number of the setae variable. Latreille ( Genera) gives onlytwo as its character, but four in the Regne An. 2d ed. : in the former caseand in metamorphoses, general appearance, and, as it would seem (Regne An.p. 479., but see p. 485. contra), in the variable form of the head of the larva,this stirps approaches the Athericera. Pupa coarctate, the skin of the larva,however, nearly retaining its previous form (Fam. Stratiomida, Beside, andC(£7iomyid(B).Stirps 3. Tanystoma Latr. Antennae with only three joints, ordinarily terminatedby a seta (Tabanus excepted) ; proboscis exserted, generally with foursettee (six in Tabanidae '^ ; mouth obsolete in Acroceridee) ; larva with a scalyhead; pupa incomplete (Fam. Tahanidce, BombyliidcB, Anthracite, Acroceridce,Empire, Tachydromiidce, Hyhotlda, AsUidcB, Mydasidce, Therewith:, Leptidce,DoIichopidcB, and Scenopinidas. ,Stirps 4. Athericera Latr. Antenna with only two or three joints, ter-hencethe species which have coarctate pupa and short setigerous antennae areevidently most typical of the order.506 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.minaret by a seta ; proboscis generally withdrawn into the oral cavity, withtwo seas (four in the Syrphidse ; mouth obsolete in the Bestrides) ; pupa co-acetate,the skin of the larva forming an oval case (Fam. SyrphidcB, Conopida,Muscidce, and (Astride).Section 2. (Stirps 5.) Pupipara Lnfr. (Order Hymenoptera Leach). Head immersedin the thorax; claws denticulated; larva nourished in the abdomen ofthe mother, and not deposited until after it has passed to the pupa state (Fam.Hippdboscida and NycterihiidcB).The four stirpes composing the first great section of the Dipteraare distinguished by having the head more or less detached from thethorax, the antennae not concealed in lateral excavations of thehead, the setse of the mouth enclosed in a fleshy canal bilobed at itsextremity, and the claws of the tarsi not denticulated ; these insectsare oviparous, with the exception of a few Muscidae, which do notexclude their young until they have assumed the larva state.The first division comprises such species as have the antennaedivided into a considerable number of distinct and nearly equal-sizedjoints. This division comprises the single stirps Nemocera Latr.In the second division (comprising the Notacantha, Tanystoma, andAthericera), the antennae have the terminal joints either indistinctlyarticulated or completely soldered together.The first stirps, Nemocera, corresponds with the genera Culex andTipula of Linnaeus, the antennae of which are, for the most part, composedof from 14 to 16, or from 6 to 9 joints : they are filiform or setaceous,much longer than the head, and often ornamented with whorlsof hair, especially in the males ; the body is long, with the head smalland Rounded, the eyes large, the rostrum not concealed, with twoexternal palpi composed of 4- or 5 joints, the thorax very elevated,the halteres long, the alulae scarcely perceivable, and the legs very longand slender.Many species of the smaller size assemble in myriads in the air,where they perform their dance-like flights.* These assemblies (whichconsist almost entirely of males) may be observed almost throughoutthe year, and it is here where the intercourse of the sexes takes place,after which the females deposit their eggs, either in neighbouringwater or upon plants. The larvae are always long and vermiform,with a scaly head of a constant form, and a mouth presenting organsrepresenting the lips and maxillae. They shed their skin previous toI have observed that in these dances the insects always fly with their headstowards the quarter from which the wind blows.Litera. CULICIDJE. 507assuming the pupa state, which somewhat resembles the perfect insect,except that the Hmbs are enclosed in distinct sheaths, and folded uponthe breast and convoluted beneath the wing cases.This stirps comprises only two families, Culicidae and Tipulidse ;the first of which so closely approximates to the aquatic Tipulideein all respects except the structure of the trophi, that Meigen, followingLatreille, unites them into one section of the Tipulariae. Mac-quartalso, in his last work, has sunk the former as a distinct family,observing that the discovery of an elongated proboscis in his Tipu-hideousgenus Aporosa (to which he might have added my Lemnosand Haliday's Geranomyia), and of maxillary setse inGlochina and Boletophila, rendered the characters of the Culicidasof less importance than had been given to them. {Dipt. Exot. p. 28.)The blood-sucking propensities of the Culicidae are, moreover, met withinseveral of the small Tipulidae, especially Simulium. I must, however,observe, that the Cuneiform Tipulidae are certainly the nearest allied tothe Culicidae, and there is evidently a great hiatus between them.The family Culicidae* (or g. Culex Linn. ; Jig. Is. i. Culexpipiensf $') is distinguished from the other Nemocera, by havingthe parts of the mouth produced into a slender porrected rostrum,which is nearly half the entire length of the insect, andslightly thickened at the tip. This proboscis, simple as it appears,in reality consists of no less than seven distinct pieces:,BiBLioGR. Refer, to the Culicid^.Robiiieau Desvoidy. Essai sur la Tribu des Suicides, in Mem. Soc. d'Hist. Nat.Paris, torn. iii. 1827.Leach, Descript. of three Sp. Culex, in Zool. Journ. vol. ii.Fischer. Notice sur la Larve du Culex claviger, in Mem. Soc. Imp. Natvir. deMoscow, torn. iv.Roffredi. Mem. sur la Trompe du Cousin, &c., in Miscell. Soc. Taurinensis,torn. iv. p. 1.Stephens, in Zool. Journ. vol. i. No. 4. (Culex, Anopheles).Meigen. Abbild. aller bek. Europ. Zweifl. Ins. Harm. 1830, Heft 1.Volhnar, in Gistll's Faunus, No. 2.And the general works of Meigen, Macquart, Wiedemann, Fabricius, Sc.+ Mr. Haliday has suggested to me that the gnat of Lapland is the true C.pipes, and is confined to high latitudes, not being found in England. C. pipesMeig. is quite distinct. C. detritus Hal. is nearest allied to the northern species,\ Leeuwenhoek says four, Reaumur five, Swammerdam and Latreille (in the Fa-modernCLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.in the females* (7%. 124. 2. head of Culex $ ), besides a pairof several-jointed palpi, Which are as long or even longer than therostrum in some of the males, and very pilose at the extremity ;milks Naturelle, p. 482.) mention only six, including the labium ; he, however, aswell as all other entomologists, except Mr. Curtis, have overlooked a very slenderneedle-like instrument (ribbed up the middle, as it appears to me), which, from itssituation, is evidently the real analogue of the tongue : indeed, all the parts of themouth of a mandibulated insect are here observable, there being a broad and hollowlancet-like piece representing the upper lip (which is the most robust part of themouth, except the labium), a pair of slender needle-like pieces, or the mandibles, andwhich are serrated on the outside at the tip (^^r. 124.3.); a second pair of similar butmuch more slender organs, dilated at the base, representing theraaxillfe, to the baseof which the palpi are attached (^i^i. 124. 4.); the part above mentioned representingthe tongue, and the outer tubular canal, in which the others lodge when at rest,representing the lower lip. M. Robineau Desvoidy has published some observationsupon these organs, supposing the palpi to be analogous to those of the lowerlip, which Latreille has partially controverted in the second edition of the RegneAnimal. I have succeeded in extricating the maxillas entire (which are as long asthe mandibles, a circumstance not ascertained to be the case in Anopheles by Mr.Curtis), the bases of which are dilated, and have the palpi attached to them.It has been observed that it is only the females which are accustomed tosuck blood, a circumstance which also occurs in the Tabanidse. (See Kirby andSpence, Introdd. vol. iii. p. 343. ) And on carefully dissecting the trophi of severalmales, both of Culex and Anopheles, I have not found the formidable apparatusof setaa so easily discoverable in the females. A horny cylindrical instrument iseasily drawn out of the labial canal, and I succeeded in detaching two exceedinglydelicate filaments, but I am by no means certain that they are any thing but aportion of the central organ, which seems to represent the labrum of the female,and not to be distinct representatives of the mandibles or maxillas. M-curtis,indeed, notices in Culex that the males are destitute of the mandibles and tongue,so that the labrum and maxilla must be present as well as the labial canal. InAnopheles he has, however, represented the entire series of mouth-organs in themale, figuring, by some oversight, the female palpus apart.Litera, CULICID^. 509in the females, however, they are generally very short. The headis small ; the antennae are slender and filiform, as long as or longerthan the thorax ; they are described as 15-jointed * and plumosein the males, and as ll-jointed and pilose in the females, — the basaljoint being subglobose and tubercular in form ; the eyes are lunate ;the ocelli obsolete ; the thorax is oblong-oval ; the abdomen is longand slender, upon which the wings are incumbent when at rest; thelatter have the nervures furnished with scales ; the legs are very longand slender.The extreme irritation produced by the bite of the gnat is toowell known even in our own country. The manner", however, inwhich the operation is effected is interesting : thirsting for itsevening meal, the little animal enters our apartments, and insteadof whirling, like the moths, round the light, it betakes itself toits employment ; sounding an approach, however, by a tolerably loudhumming-}-, which, in our chambers, at least, is often sufficient tobanish sleep. Taking its station upon an uncovered part of the skin,with so light a motion as not to be perceptible when it alights (althoughit will not hesitate to make its attacks occasionally through our thickclothing), it lowers its rostrum and pierces the skin by means of itsexceedingly slender needle-like lancets, which are barbed at the tips,and, as by degrees it pushes these deeper into the skin, the lower lipor sheath, in which they were enclosed when at rest, becomes moreand more elbowed towards the breast, until the whole length of theIt appears to me that authors have erred in their computation of the numberof joints in the antennas of the male gnat. By Curtis they are described as15-jointed (including the lai-ge basal joint) ; that is, as possessing one joint morethan the females, there being 12 short joints figured, succeeding the large basalglobular joint and the long penultimate joint ; and each of these 12 joints is furtherrepresented as verticillate at its extremity. Such is not, however, their idealstructure, the articulations occurring half way between the several whorls of hairs ;the consequence of which is, that the last whorl, instead of being at the apex of theshort antepenultimate joint, is at a short distance from the base of the penultimate(13th) joint, which is greatly elongated beyond the whorl : I bave clearly ascertainedthat there is no articulation immediately following the last whorl, the articulationby which the long penultimate joint is moved, occurring half way between thelast and the penultimate whorl. Hence the number of joints is alike in bothsexes, namely, 14. fig. 124.5. represents the penultimate and antepenultimatejoints of the male antennae).f From a calculation made by the Baron Poignard de Latour, communicated tomeby M. Audouin, the gnat, during flight, vibrates its wings 3000 times in aminute.510 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.lancets are introduced into the skin. It is supposed that, at the sametime, it instils into the wound a venomous liquid, which, while itenables the blood to flow faster, is the chief cause of the subsequentirritation.The mosquito, musique, or maringouin, which appears to be aspecies of this family, is far more annoying in its attacks upon theinhabitants of America and India than our European species is tous; it is there requisite to have the beds enclosed in a curtain offine gauze, to defend the sleeper from their attacks. In the Northof Europe, also, they are very tormenting; the inhabitants beingunder the necessity of driving them away with smoke, and of anointingthe exposed parts of their bodies with grease, to secure themselvesfrom their bites.In the first part of the Trans, of the Entomological Society, Mr.W. B. Spence has published a critical examination of a passage inHerodotus, which has much perplexed commentators, relative to themeans adopted by the Egyptians * to guard against these insects,known to the Greeks under the name Honores, the fishermen merelythrowing a casting-net (aixfi^XrfaTpoy) over the bed. Juvenal andHorace, on the other hand, described the conopeum or gnat curtain.It appears very probable, that several distinct species, belongingboth to the present and following family, have been confoundedunder the common name of mosquito. The mosquito of the UnitedStates is, however, certainly a species of Culex, for specimens ofwhich 1 am indebted to Mr. R. H. Lewis. The small Simuliumis there called the black fly. Poey also communicated to RobineauDesvoidy a Culex (C. Mosquito H. D. Monogr.) known under thatname in Cuba. Pohl and Kollar have described the Brazilian mosquitounder the name of Culex molested. These authors, however, statethat the Portuguese in Brazil also give the name Mosquito to a minutespecies of Simulium.I must refer, for many curious details relative to the attacks ofthese insects in various parts of the world, to Kirby and Spence(^Introd. vol. i. p. 113-), and the Magazine of Nat. Hist. 1st series,No. 27.It is worthy of remark, that notwithstanding the great general de-thispassage in Herodotus, proving the common occurrence of these obnoxiousinsects in Egypt, is confirmatory of my suggestion in a previous page as to the mus-quitobeing the real cause of the " plague of flies."Litera. CULICIDiE. 511delicacy of the structure of the gnat, its mouth is formed of the samenumber of pieces, and upon the same plan, as the equally bloodthirstybut robust breeze-flies (Tabanus). And, as if possessed ofthe means of insuring them the most ample supply of their favouritefood, we find the mouth in these two groups of insects in thehighest state of development, no other families possessing so perfectlyorganised a structure. It is a curious circumstance, however,in the economy of nature, that these and many other species ofinsects, which delight in blood, are found in the greatest profusionin damp and other situations, where they can find but few opportunitiesof indulging their bloodthirsty propensities ; hence, if they feedat all, their aliment must be supplied from vegetables. The fondnessof gnats for the honey of flowers has been noticed by Latreilleand other naturalists ; and the females, for want of their favouritefood, will feed upon the nectar of flowers, as do also the males.The females have the remarkable instinct to deposit their eggs, bythe assistance of their hind legs, in a small boat-shaped mass, capableof floating upon the surface of the water. The eggs are of anelongated oval form, with a small and narrow knot at the top, andare arranged side by side closely packed together. (Reaumur, Mem.torn. iv. pi. 44., and Kirk. and Spence, Introdd. vol. iii. p. 81.) In hotweather the eggs are speedily hatched, and the larvae (fig. 124. 6.)may be generally observed during the spring and summer in standingwaters, jerking themselves about with great agility, or suspendingthemselves for the purpose of respiration, immediately below thesurface of the water, head downwards. The head is distinct,rounded, and furnished with two inarticulated antennae, and severalciliated appendages, which serve them for obtaining nourishmentfrom their food. The thorax is furnished with bundles of hairs ; theabdomen is long, nearly cylindric, much narrower than the frontparts of the body, and divided into ten segments, the eighth ofwhich is furnished with a long respiratory organ, terminated by asmall star (De Geer, torn. vi. tab. 17. f. 5.) ; the last joint is terminatedby setae, and by five conical slender plates. (See also Reaumur, Mem.torn. iv. pi. 43.; Swammerdam, Book of Nature, pi. 31, 32. ; Freeman,tab. 15. for the transformations of this family.)The larvae are very active, and swim with much quickness, oftendiving to the bottom of the water, and again ascending to the surface.After several mounting, they are transformed into pupae512 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.(fig. 124. 7.), which continue to move about with agility by means ofthe tail and two terminal swimming organs. In this state they are active,but unable to take any nourishment ; they also suspend themselvesat the surface of the water, but in an opposite position to that towhich they previously were accustomed ; the organs of respirationbeing placed upon the thorax, and consisting of two tubular horns ; thebody is much curved, and terminated by two slender oval plates.Here also the insect undergoes its final transformation ; the exuviaeof the pupa serving as a raft, upon which it stations itself until itswings are extended. These transformations are effected in thecourse of three or four weeks, whence there are several generationsin the course of the year. The larva of Anopheles bifurcated (Culexclaviger Fabr.), as described by Fischer (^iit sup. Meigen, tom. vip.242., and Macquart, Suites a B. tom. i. p. 32.), differs in some respectsfrom that of Culex, having two greyish oval tumours behindthe head and two others, but smaller, near the tail ; beneath thelatter is a great number of long setae.Mr. Stephens has published a monograph upon the British Culi-ridge in the Zool. Journal, vol. i. No. 4., and M. Robineau Des-voidan essay upon the family in general, in the Mem. de la Soc.Hist. Nat. Paris, tom. iii.Although so exceedingly numerous in individuals, the number ofspecies in this family is but few, six genera having only hitherto beencharacterised, three of which only have been noticed as British.The Culex ciliated, forming Desvoidy's genus Psorophora, is remarkablefor possessing a small appendage at each side of the prothorax.The family Tipulid^e * comprises a very extensive series of insectsgreatly diversified in structure, corresponding with the Linnaean genusBiELioGR. Refer, to the Tipulid^ in general.Frees. Monograph. Tanypodum Special, 12mo. Lund. 1823. — Ditto, Beschr.ein. n. g. Hydrobasnus, in Vetensk. Acad. Handll. 1829. — Ditto, Observ.Entomol. (Simulium) 8vo. Stock. 1824, and in Thon's Entomol. Archiv.vol. ii.Verdant. Geschichte d. Simulien, in Naturwiss. ans. d. All. Sew. Gesellsch.1822, No. 9. ; and in Thon's Archiv. vol. ii.Litera. TIPULIDiE. 513Tipula, and distinguished by the proboscis being very short, its internalorgans slightly developed *, and terminated by two large fleshylips ; the palpi longer than the proboscis, 4-jointed and generally foldedback : some species have been described as having five joints ; it ap-patricius.Beschr. d. Atlas, Muckle u. ir. Puppy (Simulium perineum), in Schrift.Berlin. Ges. Nat. Fr. B. 5. 1784.Schonbauer. Gesch. der Schadl. Kolumbatczer chicken, 4to. Wien, 1795.Guerin. Mem. sur un Ins. du g. Boletophile, Ann. Sci. Nat. torn. x. — Ditto,Mem. sur les Met. de Ceratopogons, &c., Ann. Soc. Ent. France, torn. ii.Meigen. Abbild. aller Europ. zweifl. Ins., Harm. 1830. Heft 1.Bull£, in Ann. Soc. Ent. de France, vol. i. and ii. p. 398. (Xyphura).Hummel, in Mem. Soc. Imp. Nature. Moscow, tom. vi. (n. sp. Ctenophora).Schummel. Bench. Schles. art. g. Limnobia, in Beverage zur Ent. die Schles,Th. 1. — Ditto, Versuch d. g. Tipula, 3 pi. 8vo. Breslau, 1833 (.57 species).Stannius, in Beitr. zur Ent. d. Schles. Th. 1. (Trans. of Limnobia Xanthoptera). —Ditto, Bemerk. einig. art. g. Macrocera, Platyura, Sciophila, Lea, and ,in Isis 1830. — Dit4to, Observationes de sp, gen. Myce4tophila, 4to.Vratislav. 1831 ; and in Rev. Entomb. de Silbermann, tom. i. p. 273.£osc, in Ann. Soc. Hist. Nat. Paris, tom. i. (Ceroplatus).Sauter. Beschr. d. Getreideschanders (Tipula cereals), 8 vo. Winter. 1817.Kirby. History of Tipula (Cecidomyia) Tritici, in Trans. Linn. Soc. vol. iv. and v.Say. Hist, of Cecidomyia destructor, in Journ. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia,vol. i. p. 45.Boscc. Sur une n. sp. Cecidomyia (C. Pope), Nouv. Bull. Soc. Phil. 1817.Mannered. Mem. n. sp. Cecidomyia, in Mem. Soc. Imp. Natural. Moscow,tom. ii.Fallow. Mem. sur quelq. Esp. d. g. Cecidomyia, in Analyse. des Travaux Acad.Roy. Sci. 1827 ; and Ferussac Bull. Oct. 1828. — Ditto, on Cec. Pope, inAnn. Sci. Nat. July, 1833.Dalman, in Vetensk. Acad. Kongll. Handll. 1816 (Chorea).Burmeister, Ueber d. g. Nematocera (Hecatomb Latr.), in Thon's Archiv. vol. ii.Holiday, in Zool. Journ. vol. v. (Orphnephila).Kufin, in Der Naturforscher, St. 18.G'ueze. Beschr. Wasserthierchen, &c., in Beschaft. Berl. Ges. Nature. &c. Band 1.1775-79. — Ditto, Naturgesch. d. Muller's Gliederwurms, in Der NatureSt. 15. 1780.And the general works of Meigen, Macqiiart, Wiedemann, Haliday, Curtis, Fa-rbricks, sc.Ordinarily the mouth consists but of a triangular labrum, a bilobed labium,and a pair of maxillary palpi ; but in Rhyphus, Ceratopogon, ^eranomyia, and Bibio,the labrum is larger and the tongue distinct. In Glochina and Boletophila, themaxillae also exist ; whilst in Sphaeromias and Simulium, the whole oral apparatusis found as fully developed as in Culex, except that the parts are shorter.VOL. II. L L514- MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.pears to me, however, from a careful examination of the structure ofthese organs in Tipula oleracea, that the first or basal joint is the trueanalogue of the maxillse. The body is long and slender, the headrather small, the eyes generally apart, the antennae very variable inlength, the legs long and slender ; the alulets (owing to the weaknessof the flight of these insects) are mostly obsolete. The larvae varyconsiderably in form, in order that they may be adapted to theirseveral and peculiar habits. Whilst some of these insects are soclosely allied in all their states to the preceding family, that Latreillein the Genera Crustuceoriim, and Meigen, united the Culicidge withthe present family, others, as Bibio, &c. in their more robust form,short antennae, &c. evidently approach the succeeding families. Thespecies which appear to be the types of the family are consequentlythe larger individuals in the family; such as Ctenophora, Felicia, andthe true Titular, which are vulgarly termed Daddy-long-legs. M.Macquart has noticed the curious relation which exists between thecharacters of the larva and imago, in many of these insects, instancingthe occurrence of plumose antennae only in those species which live inthe water in the larva state, and elongated conte only in the specieswith fungivorous larvae.Latreille has divided this family into five minor groups : Culiciformes,Gallicoles, Terricoles, Fungivores, and Florales * ; all of which, exceptingin the relative situation of some few anomalous genera, appearvery natural ; their progression, however, appears capable of beingrendered more natural by placing the Fungivores immediately afterthe Gallicoles (the genera Lestremia, Molobrus, &c. forming thepassage), by introducing Cordyla amongst the Fungivores, and Lepidopteraamongst the Gallicoles, and by uniting the Terricoles withthe Fungivores by means of Boletophila.The subfamily Chronometer Mcq. (Culiciformes Latr?) hasthe body long and slender (fig. 124. 8. Chironomus plumosus $ ),the antennae slender, filiform, and strongly ornamented with hairs,especially in the males (except in Hydrobaenus Fries, and probablySphaeromias Curt), forming a large triangular brush {Jig- 124. 10.Meigen divided the Tipulida; into eight sections: 1. Ctdicifurmes ; 2. GalH-co/cE ; 3. NoctucBformes (Psyehoda); 4. Prostrate (Tevrieolffi); 5. FungicolcB ;6. Luyuhri (Molobrus, Sciara) ; 7. Latipennes (Simulium) ; and 8. Muscceformes(Florales). In his last work, M. Macquart has adopted all these divisions exceptthe 6th and 7tli, and has added another, consisting of the genus Rhyphus.Litera. — CHIRONOMIDES. 515ant. of Tanypus S); they are much longer than the head, and composedof more than twelve joints, the basal joint being very large ; in thefemale there are fewer and simple joints (/iff. Isti. disant. of Hieronymus$ , 9. Tanypus ? ) ; the legs are also very long, the ocelJi obsolete,and the palpi short ; the eyes lunate and separated {Jiff. IS-i. 9. head,antenna, and proboscis of Tanypus $ ) ; the tibiae are simple, and notarmed with spines. The nerves of the wings are very similar to thoseof the gnats ; indeed, so close is the general resemblance betweenthe structure and habits of the two groups, that they have been regardedas belonging to the same family, and have been in commonparlance confounded under the name of gnats. This term, however,ought to be applied only to the true Culicidae, and the name of midgeassigned to those insects of the present family, which are of small size,and, like the gnats, often assemble in immense cloud-like swarms, andperform aerial dances, composed for the most part of males. Theeggs are deposited in a mass, and not arranged as in the Cilicia?.Their larvae also mostly reside in the water, and greatly resemblethose of the Culicidae. Some of them are furnished with performappendages, and in some the extremity of the body is furnished withtentacles ; these are generally of a red colour.The pupae also mostly dwell in the water, respiring by meansof external tubes or filaments, situated in front of the body, andpossessing the power of swimming ; these pupae offer a marked differencefrom those of the true incomplete pupae, their legs, from theirgreat length, being partially convoluted, and forming, with the wingsand thorax, an uniform mass, the limbs being less distinct even than inthe obtected pupjE of the Lepidoptera. De Geer (Mem. torn. vi. tab. 23.fig. 3 — 12.) has represented the transformations of a species whichis described by Latreille as the Corethra culiciformis, the larva andpupa of which are almost identical in structure with those of Culex.I fear there must have been some error either in De Geer's observationor in Latreille'ssynonyme, inasmuch as Reaumur's figures of thetransformations of a species described as Corethra plumicornis {{Mem.tom. v. pi. 6. fig. 4 — 18.) totally differ from De Geer's, the larvabeing very long and serpent-like, rather thickened in the thoracicsegments ; the head small, conical, and turned upwards, furnished withtwo deflexed hooks articulated at the tip, and two short tentacularpalpi ; the body is terminated beneath with a beautiful fan of hairs(figured by Reaumur as a membranous plate). The pupa is somersL 2516 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.what like that of the gnat, but it is straight, and the thoracic appendagesare pointed. Goring and Pritchard have figured this larva (myfig. 124. 12.) and pupa fig. 124. 13.), but have unfortunately omittedthe imago. nat. Hist. Obj. Micro. pi. 2.) These authors assertthat the larva does not shed its skin on becoming a pupa, and havemade some other erroneous statements, such as confounding the sexesof the perfect insect, &c. Slabber {Natuurk. Verlustig. p. 17- pi. 3, 4.)and Lyonnet {{Mem Posthh. pi. 7. fig 3, 4. 8. 14. 18., <S:c.) have alsofigured the transformations of a Corethra similar to those of Reaumur.Lyonnet has further noticed that the eggs are arranged in great order,being on a kind of convex disc; they are, however, laid on theirsides., and arranged in circles.The larva of Tanypus maculatus Meig. (according to Latreille,Get. Cis. tom. iv. p. 248.), figured by De Geer (torn. vi. pi. 24.fig. 15 — 19.), resembles Reaumur's figure of the larva of Corethra,except in being less elongated, with a more oval head, the thoraxhaving at its base beneath a long pediform bifid tentacle, andthe extremity of the body is terminated by four minute triangularplates, with two long pediform appendages beneath and two slendererones above, with long terminal hairs. The pupa is like that of Culex,and bent, but with broader oval thoracic appendages, and the analplates small. INIacquart hist. Nat. Dipt. tom. i. p. 43.) has describedsome larvae closely resembling the last, which he also regards as thoseof a species of Tanypus. Lyonnet has figured the transformations ofanother species of Tanypus {{Mem. Posthh. pi. 17. fig. 1, 2. 5, 6. 17.,&c.), the larva of which forms for itself a movable case of silkand moss spun together. Fries has also observed the transformationsof Tanypus varius ; the eggs of which are deposited by the femaleon the leaves of aquatic plants, and covered with a mass of gluten.The larva? and pupae do not differ from those figured by De Geer,The larvae of Chironomusplumosus (figured by Reaumur, tom. iv. pi.14. fig. 11, 12., and tom. v. pi. 5., and my fig. 1 24. 14.) are very vermiform,and of a blood colour, whence they are named blood-worms ; they arefound in stagnant water, and are very active, twisting about in alldirections. The head has two ocelli-like points, and two inarticulatepalpi, observed by Macquart ; beneath the first thoracic segment aretwo short pediform tentacles ; the extremity of the body has also twostill larger, and four small oval appendages ; each of the two precedingjoints is furnished with a pair of long fleshy filaments. These larvae as-litera.— CHIRONOMIDES. 517semble in a mass, and form tortuous tubes, which unitedly compose anirregular mass at the bottom of the water, formed of particles of decomposedleaves : those which he has figured (vol. iii. pi. l^. f. 11 — 16.)appeared to have been chiefly spun. The pupa differs from that ofthe preceding genera, by having five long, slender, and pilose filamentson each side of the thorax, and the abdomen is terminated by a thickpencil of hairs. *De Geer has figured (Mthn.tom. vi. t. 22. f. 14—20., t. 23. f. 1, 2.) thetransformations of another species, which is referred by Macquart tothe Chironomus stercorarius Bleig., the larvae and pupa; of which entirelydiffer from that of C. plumosus in structure, as well as in theplace of their abode, the larva residing in dung, and being perfectlycylindrical {my Jig. 124. 15.), without any filamentous or tubercularappendages, and the pupa (my Jig. 124. 16.) of the ordinary incompleteform, without any thoracic or anal filaments or lobes, and thefeet not confined to the body. In these respects, therefore, this insectevidently belongs to a genus distinct from Chironomus (if, indeed,there be not some error in De Geer's observation).The genus Ceratopogon, placed in this subfamily by Meigen andMacquart, is removed to the following by Latreille ; its transformations,indeed, totally vary from those of theCuliciformes, with which, however,it agrees in having the male antennae partially feathered. M. Guerinhas observed the transformations of two of the species (A?in. Soc.Ent. defiance, vol. ii. pi. 8.); the larvae fig. 125. i.) are cylindric,withthe segments rather constricted, the anterior part of the body ratherthicker; the head is small and retractile; each segment of the body isfurnished on the back with two clavate setse; these larvae are notaquatic, but were found under the damp bark of dead trees ; the pupafig. 1'25. 2.) is shorter than the larvae, and much broader in front,with two short lateral appendages. The cast skin of the larva partiallyThe genus Hydrobrenus Fries (Kongll. Vetensk. Acad. 1829, torn, ix., and his,1831) has the male antenna; not plumose; its larva, however, closely resemblesthat of Chironomus plumosus, but the penultimate segment has two dorsal filamentswith long terminal hairs, and the pupa is figured without the thoracicfilamentous seta;.j- Mr. Haliday informs me that Ceratopogon peniculus Guer. (which he hasalso reared) is C. bipunctatus Lin. ; and that he has reared C. trichopterus fromlarvcC (much more hairy) found under boleti on old planks ; adding that Guerin'sfigure, though exact enough as to general character, does not express the specificcharacter of the larva very well, but the figure of the imago discriminates it.L L 3MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.serves as a covering for the abdomen of the pupa. The larva andpupa of Ceratopogon lateralis, figured by Bouche (nature. tab. 2.f. 1 — 12.), (the former of which was found in rotten manure), differsin several respects from Guerin's description, especially in the larvawanting the clavate setae, but possessing two pediform appendages tothe prothorax and anal extremity ; the pupa has also eight long filiformappendages on the back of the thorax, which serve to represent thoseat the side of the thorax of the Chironomi. Some of the minutespecies of Ceratopogon have the habit of inflicting very sharp woundsin the naked skin with their proboscis, sucking blood as greedily as theCulicidae ; and in the allied genus Sphaeromias Curt, all the parts ofthe mouth are as perfectly developed as, although shorter than, in theCulicidte. (See also Fischer's Oryctograph. Govern. Moscow, foramemoir on Ceratopogon.)The second subfamily, Cecidomyides (Gallicoles Latr.^, is distinguishedby the antennae being for the most part more or less moniliform,especially in the males {fg. 125. 3. Cecidomyia lutea? $ ;Fig. 125.fig. 125. 4. part of its 24-jointed antenna), and composed of thirteenjoints at the least fig. 125. 5. head and antenna of Cecidomyia $ ), andsimply ornamented with a few short verticillate hairs ; the legs arelong, and not armed with spines, the basal joint of the tarsi very minute,the eyes lunate, the ocelli wanting; the wings furnished with butfew nerves, and either carried flat on the back or roof-like when atrest. These insects are of very small size, residing in their preparatorystates in gall-like excrescences, which they produce upon variousplants ; thus, as well as in their minute size, and the almost veinlesswings, offering a striking analogy with the true Hymenopterous gall-flies(Cynipidae). Their larvae being terrestrial, are not furnishedLitera. CECIDOMYIDES. 519with the exserted organs of respiration so remarkable in the larvae ofthe preceding subfamily. According to Stannius, their spiracles arearranged as in the fungivorous larvae. * ( Observ. Mycetophila, p. viii.)The species of the genera Cecidomyia and Lasioptera are verynumerous, inhabiting many different plants, some depositing theireggs in the young sprigs, others in the leaves, and others in theflowers, causing thereby either the production of galls similar tothose produced by the Cynipidae, or the distortion of the flowers.De Geer lias represented the transformations of several species (Jem.torn. vi. pi. 25, 26, including Lasioptera Juniper!, and CecidomyiaLoti and Pini, the larvae of which (fig. 125. G.) are fleshy ovalgrubs, rather attenuated in front, without any exserted appendages,except that of L. Pini, which has short rudimental feet (whichBouche, however, did not find); the pupae i^fig. 125. 7.) resemblethe imago, except in being of a much more contracted form, withthe wings and legs very short and resting upon the breast, in distinctcases. One of the species produces galls on the willow, which has accordingly described under the name of the Rose-willow.(Hill, Trans, p. 85, 86.)M. Macquart has noticed, however, that all the species do not producesuch alterations in plants. The larvae of C. bicolor Meig., whichare found upon the leaves of the mothwort, are amongst this number ;and they enclose themselves in a case, although M. Macquart couldnot determine whether this was the skin of the larva or a spun cocoon.M. Vallot also (who has observed the history of several speciesof these insects) describes the larvae of a species, which reside onthe under side of the leaves of Chelidonium manus, sucking the acarifound in that situation, thus differing from all the C'est.Some of the species in this genus are extremely injurious to thewheat crops both in England, Europe, and North America. Mr.Kirby has given ample details of the economy of one species, C. TriticiK. (linn. Trans, vol. iii. iv. and v.), the eggs of which are deposited bythe female in the centre of the corolla, where the larvae when hatched,perhaps by eating the pollen, prevent the impregnation of the plant,and thus destroy a considerable portion of the crop. Another species,still more destructive, known in America under the name of theStannius noticed the curious connection which appears to exist in these twogroups of insects — between the possession of spiracles along the sides of the bodies,and their habits of spinning a cocoon.L L 4520 MODERN Classification OF INSECTS.Hessian fly, has been described and figured by Say, under the nameof C. destructor ; it attacks the lower part of the stem of the plant.When full grown, it becomes a pupa enclosed in a covering, at whichtime it is known under the name of the flax-seed state {fig- 125. 8.).It is not described in what manner this case is formed. The speciesdiffers in this respect materially from its congeners. (See also Dry-under'sCatal. Library Banks, ^ The same, or a closely allied species,has been observed by Dr. Hammersmith of Vienna, by whomspecimens were forwarded to M. Lefebvre, who presented them tome.(See Kollar's Treatise on Injurious Insects, transl. p. 118.) Onopening some of the cases, I discovered the larvae enclosed dead, andin a shrivelled state.Another species, T. pennicornis, effects the impregnation of theflowers of Aristolochia (Willdenow, Grinder. d. Krauterkunde, p. 353.,Introdd. to Ent. vol. i. p. 298., and A7i7i. Med. Rev. vol. ii. p. 400.). M. V.Audouin has communicated to me an observation made by himself ona species which lives in the leaves of Buxus — ?, the pupa of whichpierces the epidermis of the leaf, thrusting the front of the bodyinto the air immediately before assuming the perfect state. It is difficultto conceive how the delicate species which are bred in the hardwoody galls make their escape.I regret that want of space will only permit me to notice the followingadditional memoirs upon various species of Cecidomyia : L.Dufour on C. Ericse (in Ann. Soc. Ent. de France, 1837, p. 83., andin ditto, 1838, p. 293., C. Pint maritime) ; Bouche's descriptions of thelarvae and pupae of several species, in his Naturgeschichte (tab. 2.) ;Vallot on Cecidomyia Pose ; and its parasite, in the Ann. des Sci.Nature. July, 1833 ; Gene, "on C. Hyperion, in the Trans, of the TurinAcad. vol. xxxvi. ; P. F, H. Baddele}', Esq., on an East Indian speciesof this genus which produces a kind of gall on the leaves of Ficus race-most,illustrated by beautiful figures in Corbyn's India Review, No. 7.Oct. 15. 1836; Drewsen in Ann. Soc. Ent. de France, 1835, p. Iii.The singular genus Psychoda (forming the tribe Phalaenoides Decomposedof minute species, with broad, deflexed, and very hairywings (fig. 125. 9 — 10. head and antenna), often found on windows,although agreeing with this subfamily in the elongated antennae, composedof globular verticlllated joints, differs in the greater number ofthe veins of the wings. The larva of P. Phalaenoides, figured byBouche {Naturgesch. tab. 2. f. 20.), resides in dung ; it is long, sub-litera.— MYCETOPHILIDES. 521fusiform, depressed, with a slender, straight, cylindrical tail, longer thanthe preceding segment. The pupa has two short appendages, thickenedat the tips behind the head ; the abdomen is tapering. Mr.Thwaites has found the pupa of another species of this genus in adead snail's shell. *One of the species of this genus, first noticed by Latreille andDufour, is remarkable for possessing two appendages at the front ofthe thorax, and which Latreille considered as analogous to the pre-balancesof the Strepsiptera. Mr. Haliday since detected them in aspecies which he thence named P. auricular, and Mr. Curtis suggeststhat they are accidental, and appear to him to be the analogues of theappendages of the pupa. Robineau Desvoidy also described one ofthe Culicidae with somewhat similar appendages.The subfamily Mycetophilides Mcq. (Fungivores Latr.) consistsof insects of small size fig. 125. ll. Mycetophila punctum Stann.^,distinguished by having two or three unequal-sized ocelli fig. 125.12.head and antenna of Sciophila) ; the eyes are generally round ; thehead not rostrated; the antennae slender, 15- or 16-jointed, and longerthan the head, or compressed, never fasciculated; the last joint of thepalpi is of moderate length, not ringed ; the coxae are elongated ; posteriortibiae spined, and mostly with strong spurs ; the nerves of thewings are not so numerous as in the following insects.This subfamily is composed of extremely active insects, capable ofleaping by means of their hind legs. They are particularly found indamp situations, amongst various plants ; many species enter ourThe following is the description of the pupa which Mr. Thwaites has been sokind as to send me, and which is a line and a quarter long.Head resting between the anterior femora and tibiae ; the antennae embracingthe exterior of these, and reaching to the apex of the tibiee ; thorax with a strongcentral keel extending from the head to the metathorax (?), which is smooth ; thethorax is also furnished anteriorly with two horn-like appendages (analogous, Ipresume, to the breathing pores of the pupa of Culex), slightly diverging and curveda little forwards, which arise from tubercles half way between the carina and theorigin of the wings;' posterior tarsi reaching almost to the apex of the wings,merely the last joint is visible, the rest being concealed by the intermediate legs,and these last are covered, except about two joints of the tarsi, by the anterior legs ;abdomen with a row of pointed tubercles down each side;, the dorsal segments arenearly smooth, the last slightly bifurcate, the ventral segments with a row ofsmall sharp spines just above their edges, the anal segment with two rather largespines."522 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.houses, and are found on the windows. They are also very partialto different species of boleti and fungi, in which the larvae reside.The larva of Ceroplatus tipuloides, observed by Reaumur (stem.torn. V. tab. 4. f. 11 — 18.), on the under side of the Boletus angulated,is completely vermiform, hyaline, and always covered with a viscidsecretion. It spins a web, in which it invests itself; and it is in thesame situation that it assumes the pupa state. The larva of anotherspecies of this genus, observed by Boscc in Carolina, is gregarious ;living in a common web, upon the under surface of a boletus ; andeach spins a close cocoon, in which it assumes the pupa state. (Latr.Hist. Nat, Sc. torn. xiv. p. 281.) More recently M. Dufour hascommunicated to the " Academie" a memoir on this genus, containinga complete account of the habits, transformations, and anatomy,and descriptions of five species. (Btvtie Soot. Soc. Cuvier. 1839,No. 4.)De Geer has figured the transformations of two species o^ Myceto-phil (M. avarice and fusca, Mem. tom.vi. tab. 21. f. 6 — 13., andtab. 22. f. I — 13.). The larvae of both are vermiform, the former beingmore elongated, and enclosing itself in a silken web ; the latterfig. 125. 13., which lives in Boletus lutes) is thicker, with a smallhead, bearing two short antennae, and the body furnished with twospiracles on the pro thoracic, and two on each of the seven basal jointsof the abdominal part of the body.* Bouche has also figvu-ed thetransformations of Mycetophila signata Meig. nature. tab. 3. f. 5 — 9.,representing the mandibles of the larvae as armed with several shortsharp teeth.The larvae of Boletophila, described by Guerin annal. Sci. Nat.Aug. 1827, and Bullet. Sci. Nat. Jan. 1829), live in society, in theinterior of fungi, like those of the Mycetophilae ; the head is furnishedwith two short membranous antennae and two hooked mandibles ; theyundergo their transformations in the earth ; the pupae have the limbsDufour has also observed this in various fungivorous Iarv£e (see Rev. Zool. Soc.Cuvier. 1839, No. 7.); and Meigen observed the same in Mycetophila fasciata(Si/st. Beschr. vol. i. p. 261.). Stannius observes, that Mr. MacLeay, overlookingthis description, has erred in asserting that this arrangement of the spiracles is notfound in any Dipterous larva. The same author also, relying upon the veining ofthe wings, states that the fossil insects, figured by Curtis (Edinb. New Phil. Journ.1829, tab. 6. f. 8, 9.) as species of Gnoriste, belong to the genus Mycetophila; onebeing closely allied to M. propinqua, and the other to M. lateralis. ( Ohs. de g.Mycetophila, Introdd, p. vii.)Litera. — MYCETOPHILIDES. 523enveloped in distinct segments, applied loosely to the under side of thebody. Guerin has observed that the mouth of this genus is furnishedwith maxillae, as well as the labrum and labium. I have confirmedthis in the figures published by Mr. Stephens. (^Illustr. Brit. Ent.Haust. pi. 44. f 1.)M. Macquart has reared Mycetobia pales from larvae of the ordinaryform, found in the detritus of elm wood ; whilst Meigen obtainedM. fasciata from larvae found in Boletus versicolor. Lyonnethas figured the transformations of an insect which De Haan gives,doubtingly, as a species of Bibio ; but which appears to me, especiallyfrom the nervures of the wings, to be a species of Mycetobia. french.Po5^/«. tab. 17. fig. 20— 33.) The larva (j?^. 125. 14.) is very long,slender, and vermiform, with two very short antennae ; and the pupafig. 125. 15.) is straight, and has the abdominal segments armed withtransverse series of short reflexed spines. Guerin has figured the pupaof one of the species of this genus {Iconogr. R. An. Ins. tab. 93. f. 5.).I have observed the transformations of several species of Molo-brus Laid: (Sciara 3Ieig.), the larvae and pupae of which are foundunder the bark of felled trees, or at the roots of decayed vegetables; the pupa is not enclosed in a cocoon. Olivier reared threespecies of this genus from wheat {Prem. Mem. sur quelques Insectesqui attaquent les Cereales, 8vo, Paris, 1813, f. 7, 8, 9.). Bouche hasalso figured the larva and pupa of Molobrus vitripennis nature.tab. 3. f. 10 — 15.); the former of which agrees precisely with that ofMycetophiia, whilst the latter differs only in the front of the headbeing cleft and the tail furnished with two divergent setae. The Ti-pullatomaria (De Geer, Ins. tom. vii. tab. 44. f. 27, 28.) is apterous,and appears to me to be most closely allied to Molobrus ; its antennaeare rather long, 15-jointed, the joints not being filiform. Macquartconsiders it as belonging to the section Gallicoles, and St. Fargeau tothe Terricoles, from its possessing an exserted ovipositor.*The genus Rhyphus fig. 125. 16. R. fenestralis J ), although differingin several material respects, is also nearly allied to this sublimity,especially in the possession of ocelli fig. 125. 17. head of $ ),and structure of the larva {fig- 125. 18.), which Reaumur found incow-dung; it is very long and cylindric, the mouth armed with twotentacular mandibles, and the extremity of the body with four shortSee Mr. Haliclay's observations hereon in the Generic Synopsis.524.MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.very small obtuse tubercles. {{Mem. torn. v. tab. 4. f . 3 — 10.; Bouche,Naturgesch. tab. 3. f. 21, 22. ; Guerin, Icon. R. An. Ins. tab. 93. f. 3.)Macquart forms it into a distinct tribe named Rhypliides.Whilst the Molobri, Lestremia, and some other genera exhibit apassage from these insects to the Cecidomyides, others equally appearto lead to the Tipulides. I have accordingly removed this subfamilyinto its present situation ; whereas Latreille placed them betweenthe Tipulides and Bibionidae.The subfamily Tipulides 3Icq. (Terricoles Latr.) is distinguishedby the large size of the majority of the species of which it is composed{Jiff. 126. 6. Ptychopteryx paludosa J ), having the antennae longerFig. 126.than the head, simple or rarely pectinated*, but not plumose, andcomposed of from thirteen to sixteen joints ; the eyes entire ; theocelli obsolete ; the front of the head produced into a beak, oftenterminated in a pointed nasus, distinct from the proboscis ; thepalpi long, 4-jointed, and reflexed ; the last joint longer thanthe preceding, and often flexible and ringed (Jiff. 126. i.f headand thorax of Tipula oleracea sideways ; 2. proboscis above, showingIn the New Holland genera, Gynoplistia and Ptilogyna Westiv., the femaleshave the antennas pectinated as well as the males.-f- \n Jig. 126.1. the dotted part represents the mesothorax, showing the almostrudimental collar-like prothorax, behind which is a spiracle; another spiracle isplaced close to the base of the balancer of the metathorax, of which the dorsal piece,marked x , is here very conspicuous, especially in some species, and might (fromits situation, occupying the dorsal extremity of the thorax) be supposed to representthe scutellum of the following families. It is, however, in consequence of thegreat elongation of the body that the metathorax is here longitudinally developed,and hence the part of the dotted mesothorax marked 0, appears to me clearly torepresent the scutellum of the following families.Litera. — TIPULIDES. 525the small triangular labruni ; 3. proboscis beneath, with one of the4-jointed palpi, showing its origin obliquely upon a short basalpiece which has been ordinarily regarded as a basal joint, but whichappears to me to represent the maxilla; its texture is different to thatof the palpus) ; the body, wings, and legs are long, the nervuresnumerous, and forming discoidal cells. The wings are wanting inDalman's genus Chionea. In Erioptera atra Meig. (Theophilus brevi-penniesCurt), for specimens of which singular insect I am indebted toM. Meigen himself, the wings are so short as to be unfitted for flight.This subfamily comprises the typical species of the family to whichthe vulgar name of Daddy-long-legs has been applied ; the Frenchterm them " couturieres, tail leurs," &c. The species of the typicalgenus Tipula are found in damp meadows in vast numbers, especiallyin autumn, the larvae feeding upon the roots of grass, and occasionallydoing much mischief. This is particularly the case with Tipula ole-race,the larvae fig. 126. 4.) of which sometimes thus completelylay bare wide tracks of meadow. The females deposit their eggs inthe ground by the assistance of the exserted scaly univalve ovipositorwith which they are furnished. (See Reaumur, Mem. tom. v.pi. 2.) The species of Trichocera are of smaller size, and are observedflying in the middle of winter whenever a glimpse of warm sunshineallures them from their winter-quarters. Dalman also discovered thesingular Chionea* araneoides running quickly upon fallen snow inSweden throughout the winter. (fact. Holm. 1816, p. 182., andAnal. Entomol. p. 35.)The larvae of many species reside in damp ground, or in the rottenparts of trees (fig. 126. 4.) ; they have the thoracic portion not so distinctlyobservable as in some other species; they are not furnishedwith false legs, but have two short horns at the anterior, and severalfleshy conical appendages at the posterior extremity of the body ; themouth is composed of parts which have some analogy to those of theMandibulata, but their structure requires a more precise investigationthan has been given to it. The pupae fig. 126. 5.) are naked, withtwo respiratory tubes near the head, and the margins of the abdominalsegments are spiny, enabling them to thrust themselves forward tothe surface of the ground when ready to assume the winged state.I am indebted to Dr. T. W. Harris, the celebrated American entomologist, foran undescribed species of this remarkable genus, found, but very rarely, in NewHampshire (U.S.). My specimen is a female, with an ovipositor, like Tipula;Dalman represents a male. (fact, Holm. 1816. tab. 2.)526 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.The larvae and pupae of various species of Ctenophora and Tipulaewhich agree with the above description have been observed by Reaumur{{Mem. torn. v. pi. 1 — 3.) ; De Geer (torn. vi. pi. 18, 19. and 25.);Fischer {Oryctographie Imper. Rossi); Bouche {Nahirgesch. tab. 2.f. 24< — 29., tab. 3. f. 1 — 4. Tipula pratensis) ; Rose {Abhandl. vol. ii.Muse, et Colic. tab. i.).I have several times observed battles taking place between malesof different species of Stipulatelarvae of Limnobia* xanthoptera and pilosa inhabit speciesof Agaricus (Stannius, Beitr. Entomol. Schles. vol. i. p. 202.); theyoffer no marked peculiarities of structure ; the pupae also are of theordinary form, without elongated appendages to the thorax (tab. 5.fig. 14.).M. Van Roserr has noticed several larvae of this and allied generaVei'z. Wurtemb. Dipt') ; that of the curious genus Anisomera resemblesthat of Tipula, and is commonly found by him under thesand of the banks of the Neckar.All the larvae of this family are not, however, terrestrial, the preparatorystates of several groups being undergone in water ; of thesethe genus Ptychopteryx fig. 126. 6. Pt. paludosaf ) exhibits a singulardeparture from the rest of the family; the larva fig. 126. 8.)being very long and worm-like, but much narrowed at the posteriorextremity, which is terminated by a very long and delicate tubeserving to convey the air to two trachea, which extend through theentire length of the body. In the pupa fig. 126. 9.) this peculiarityis reversed, the body being terminated by four small points, whilst theanterior extremity is furnished with a very long thread-like appendageserving, like the former, to supply air to the insect, its extremitybeing extended to the surface. Lyonnet has beautifully illustratedthe transformations of P. paludosa french. Posthh. pi. 18. f. 1.7.);See Ann. Soc. Ent. France, 1836, p. xvii. on a fossil Limnobia found at kilmarnock.\ The species of this genus possess a remarkable peculiarity in the imago state,which I have observed in no other insect of the family, and which does not appearto have been previously noticed, namely, the possession of two minute membranousand setose appendages between the base of the balancers and meta thoracic spiracles.{Fig.\'26.'] . X base of the balancer ; 0, meta thoracic spiracle-j-jthe above-mentionedappendage.) The discovery of this appendage throws further difficulty in the wayof the solution of the question, whether the halteres be the real representations ofthe hind wings.Litera. — Simonides. 527Reaumur, however, had long previously figured the pupa {{Mem.torn. V. pi. 6. f. 1, 2, 3.).De Geer has also described and figured {{Mem. torn. vi. pi. 20.) thetransformations of another remarkable species (which also resides inthe water), which appears to have been overlooked by all subsequentauthors, although sufficiently proving that the species in question(Tipula replicata Linn., placed by Macquart in the genus Limnobia)belongs to a distinct genus. The larva {fig- 126. lo.) resembles thoseof the water moths Hydrocampa, in having the body furnished withnumerous long filamentous processes which evidently appear (from hisfig. 7. and my fig. 126. ii.) to be internally supplied with air-tubes.The pupa is also remarkable on account of the singular apparatus ofhooks upon the back of the three or four terminal abdominal segments; the imago is also peculiar from its habit of having the hindmargin of the wing folded back upon the anterior part.De Geer has likewise figured {{Mem. tom.vi. tab. 24'. f. 1 — 14.) thetransformations of another species, which has also been neglected bysubsequent writers, the larva and pupa of which bear a much closerresemblance to those of the Culicidse than to the Tipulides ; the tailof the larva is, however, singularly furnished with lobes and setse ; theimago, judging from the general form and veins of the wings appearsto me to belong to the genus Dira.* The species is named Tipulaamphibia in the German edition of De Geer. "The subfamily, Simonides Macqq. (Florales Latr.^ is distinguishedfrom all the other Tipulidee, by having the body and legs shorter andmore robust fig. 126. 12. Bibio Marci 5 ) ; the antennae fig. 126. 14.)seldom longer than the head in both sexes, thick, cylindric, moniliformor perfoliated, and composed of from eight to twelve joints ; thewings are large ; the eyes in the males are large and generally contiguousfig. 126.'i3. head of Bibio $ ) ; the palpi are 4-jointed exceptin the genus Scatopse, in which they are described as possessing butasingle joint; the tarsi in Bibio have three pulvilli fig. 126. 15.).Mr. Haliday has confirmed this opinion ; suggesting to me that De Gear'sspecies is Dira cuncta. The same gentleman lias also communicated to me a figureof the larva of the winter midge, Trichocera hiemalis ; it closely resembles myfig. 124. 15., except that the hind extremity of the body is much more acuminated,and terminated by five small conical points ; and the head royal, with two very shortlateral lobes. The species whose mode of extrication from the pupa-ease is describedin the Mag. of Nat. Hist, for February, 1840, by J. B., is a species of this genus,the author having forwarded me a specimen.528 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.This family is of much smaller extent than the preceding ; the insectsare of small or moderate size, and their flight is slow and heavy ; thefore feet in the genus Simulium are kept in a continual movement, beingevidently employed as feelers. In their general appearance theyentirely differ from the rest of the family, approaching the followingtribe. The species of the genus Bibio are remarkable for the greatdiversity in the opposite sexes ; the larvae in this genus (^fig- 126. 16.)are cylindrical worms furnished with twenty spiracles, and withtransverse rows of short hairs, which serve as points to assist in progression,being destitute of feet ; they are found in dung. I havefound them in garden earth at a short distance from the surface, thepupae enclosed in smooth oval cells ; the pupa (fig. 126. 17.) is naked,and has the thorax very gibbose, with the rudimental wings and legsvery short. (Reaumur, Mem. tom. v. pi. 7. ; and De Geer, Mem. tom. vi.pi. 27. fig. 12—20. ; Bouche, Nature. tab. 4. f. 1—10. ; Rose, AhhandLIns. vol. ii. tab. 7. Muse?) Lyonnet has given a complete illustrationof Bibio Marci in its different states {Mtm. Posthh. pi. 7.). Mr. Haliday{Ent. Mag. vol. i. p. 179.) has made some interesting observations onthe unequal numbers of individuals of the different sexes of these insects.The species of Scatopse are of small size, and are found in outhouses,privies, &c. ; their larvae are long fusiform grubs, without feet,having two short points at the sides of the pro thoracic and eight basalabdominal segments ; the body is terminated by two elongated divergentsetae. (Bouche, Nature. tab. 3. fig. 16 — 19.). Mr. Walker{Ent. Mag. vol. iii. p. 406.) notices having observed myriads of oneof the species hovering and settling on a larch tree in October.The species of Simulium are also of small size fig. 126. 18. S.retains $ ) regarded by Curtis as forming a link between the last-namedinsects and Molobrus, but appearing to me to be much nearerallied to Ceratopogon, and perhaps, also, as suggested by Fries, toCordyla. They are found in damp marshy places, flying in greatswarms ; and as all the parts of the mouth are fully developed (as ascertainedby Curtis), they are enabled to inflict a very severe wound ;in fact, some of the species are amongst the greatest torments tomankind, as well as to domestic animals. According to Schonbauerone of the species (Rhagio Columbaschensis F.) is one of the greatestscourges to man and beast in the Bannat of Temeswar in Hungary. *See Schonbauer's Treatise, above referred to, and Kollar's Treatise on InjuriousInsects, translated, p. 68.Litera. NOTACANTHA. 529Fries also describes the molestations caused by these insects in Lapland,whilst Pohl and Kollar have described a Brazilian species equallyobnoxious. These authors state that it is called a mosquito by thePortuguese Brazilians ; in North America, however, as I learn fromMr. R. H. Lewis, it is distinguished from that insect, and knownunder the name of the Black Fly.The transformations of S. perineum have been observed by Friesand Verdant ; they are aquatic, living on the stems of Phellandriumand Slum. The larvae (fig. 126. 19.) are cylindric, rather slendererin the middle of the body, with the head distinct, furnished in additionto the trophi, with two short antennae and two singular flabelliform appendages;the thoracic parts the body has a thick conical and retractiletubercle beneath ; the extremity of the body has also several curvedappendages; the pupa fig. 126. 2o.) has on each side of the front ofthe sides of the thorax eight very long filiform appendages, arising inpairs analogous to the appendages of the pupa of Chironomus ; theposterior part of its body is enclosed in a removal membranous cocoonattached to the plants and open in front * ; the imago is produced beneaththe surface of the water, its fine silky covering serving to repelthe action of the water.The genus Assisted is remarkable for having its short antennae clavateat the tips. Some account of its history is given by Meigen(vol. vi. p. 3] 7.).The second general division of the first section of the Diptera iscomposed of species in which the antennae do not consist of a regularseries of ordinary-sized joints ; and corresponds with the Brachocera ofMacquart, after the removal of the Pupipara. It consists of the threestirpes Notacantha, Tanystoma, and Athericera ; the antennae of whichare generally shorter than the head, having the terminal joints eitherarticulated in an indistinct manner, or completely soldered togetherinto a mass terminated by a seta, which has at its base one or twoFrom observations which M. V. Audouin has communicated to me as to theformation of this cocoon, it appears that it is at first formed entire by the larva,and that the upper end is afterwards eaten away as far as a^ thickened arch previouslyformed ; the object of this contrivance is evidently to allow the action ofthe water upon the long filaments of the pupa, which are thus shown to be virtues.530 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.short joints, and is sometimes simple, sometimes hairy. This seta isthe evident representative of several of the terminal joints of the antennaeof the preceding Diptera. The palpi have never more thantwo or three joints.The second stirps of the order Diptera, Notacantha, is distinguishedby having the antennae composed of a number of articulations,the terminal ones being closely united, so as to form an elongated mass(fig. 127. 3. 7. 13.), which has been considered by Latreille merely asthe third joint ; the proboscis encloses only four internal organs at themost, but even these in some species are more or less obsolete ; thepalpi are minute and clavate ; the wings fold upon each other over theabdomen, and the scutellum is generally spined ; the wings have acentral cell, emitting several very indistinct longitudinal nerves, whichmostly run to the tips of the wings. These insects are generally gailycoloured, and found in moist situations, it being in such habitats thatthe larvae reside ; these undergo a coarctate kind of metamorphosis,in which, however, the skin of the larva retains its form, instead ofcontracting into a " boule allong^e."Latreille, in the second edition of the Regne Animal, guided by theformation of the antennae, considered the Mydasidae as referable tothis stirps. It appears to me, however, from their general structure,and especially from the peculiar neuration of their wings (which closelyresembles that of some Nemestrinae belonging to the Anthracidae, especiallyNem. fasciata WIeig. vol. vi. tab. 66. fig. 5.), that the Myda-side belong to the stirps Tanystoma. The tarsi of Mydas, moreover,have only two pulvilli.This stirps is divisible into two families, the Stratiomidse and Beridae; the latter of which, in general appearance, colours, sluggishmanners and habits, nearly approach the terminal Tipulidae.* Mr.Stephens, indeed, makes the Asilidae the connecting link between theTipulidae and the rest of the Tanystoma, but I can see no groundsfor such an approach. Meigen, on the contrary, followed by Curtis,has placed the Beridae (including Oesophagus and Caenomyia) betweenthe Tipulidae and Tabanidse, but has removed the Stratiomidae(whose affinity with the Beridae appears to me unquestionable) to thevicinity of the Syrphida?.I nevertheless place the Bridal after the Stratiomidae, in order to maintain thepassage between Subula and Xylophagus unbroken.Litera. — STRATIOMIDiE.The family Stratiomidjf, fig. 121. 1. Stratiomys splendors) hasthe antennae fig' 127. 3. antenna of Stratiomys) composed of notFig. 127./^^'^^more than six or seven joints, terminated in many by a style, or seta,representing the remaining joints fig. 127. 6. ant. of Oxycera, 7. dittoof Sargus). In some few (Stratiomys) the style is even obsolete ; theterminal joints, five or six in number, in such instances forming a longfusiform mass. In others, Sargus and Pachygaster, the antennae appearonly 3-jointed ; but the third joint, which is large and oval, orsubglobose, when carefully examined, exhibits rudimental annuli, moreor less distinct, indicating the situation of articulations closely solderedtogether, and is terminated by a seta fig. 127. 7.). The scutellumis often spined ; the wings are placed upon the abdomen, whenat rest ; the terminal veins very slender, and arising from a cell placedmuch nearer the centre of the disc of the wings than in the followingtribes ; the body is generally broad and depressed ; the internalorgans of the mouth are mostly rudimental fig. 127. 2. mouth ofStratiomys, having only the labrum and maxillary palpi developed ; thelatter even are wanting in many).These insects, in the perfect state, are generally found uponflowers in damp situations. They are mostly prettily coloured, some(Sargus) being of beautiful metallic tints ; they are fond of suckingthe sweets of flowers, as well as of basking in the sun on the broadand shining leaves of various plants.There is considerable diversity in their habits in the preparatorystates ; the larvae of some species (Stratiomys and O'dontomyia) beingaquatic, whilst those of Sargus are found under ground ; and Paymasterand Cliteliaria Ephippium undergo their transformations inM u 2532 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.rotten wood. They all, however, agree in retaining the larva skinnearly in its original form during their existence in the pupa state.The larva {fig^ 127. 4.) of Stratiomys chameleon (first figured bySvvammerdam, Book of Nature, pi. 39, 40, 41.; Spartan, in Swed.Trans. 1804 ; Schrank, in Der Naturforscher, st. 27.; Geoffroy, vol. ii.pi. 17. ; Frisch, Beschr. vol. i. pt. 5. pi. 10.) is of an elongated form,without feet, depressed and attenuated at each extremity of the body,especially the posterior, in which the segments are greatly elongated;the head is small, corneous*, pointed in front ; and the mouth is furnishedwith two hooks, four small points, and two palpi, dilated at thetips, and clothed with recurved hairs ; these organs are kept in continualmotion, so as to form a constant current, whereby small animalcules(which are supposed to be the food of the insect) are broughtto the mouth ; the extremity of the body is furnished with a spiracle,surrounded by a great number of bearded hairs, which form a coronet,and which are capable of being closed up so as to retain a bubble ofair, and by the assistance of which the insect suspends itself at thesurface of the water for expiration. On assuming the pupa state, theinsect floats at liberty's in the water, the enclosed pupa fig. 127. 5.)occupying only the anterior portion of its larva skinsReaumur (3Iem., torn. iv. pi. 25.) has figured the transformations ofOdontomyia ornata, which closely resemble those of Stratiomys, asdoes also those of Odontomyia hydrogen, figured by De Geer (Mem.torn. vi. pi. 9. f.4.)The larva of Vappo (Pachygaster) ater (Jig. 127. 9.), described byMacquart (Dipt, du Nord de France, are elongated, depressed, jointed,each joint having an elongated lateral seta; the head is conical,obtuse, and much narrower than the rest of the body ; the partsof the mouth appear very rudimental, and are almost obliterated ; thelast segment of the body is large, black, and semicircular. Theselarvae were discovered by M. Carcel in the rotten detritus of the elm(Enc. Methh. tom. x. p. 779.). M. Schilling has figured this larvaLatreille (iJcigrji. Anim. tom. v. p. 485. ) describes it as " ecailleuse," althoughin p. 478. he had described it as " molle, de forme variable ;" thus erroneously establishingits similarity to the Athericera.+ It is probably on this account that Knoch (^Neue Beitrage, 1801, p. 193.)and Meigen (^Zw. Ins. vol. iii. p. 133.) entertained the opinion that authors haderred in their descriptions of the larva of Stratiomys, considering that the real larvaeof those insects were parasites within the bodies of the larvae described as the truelarvae of Sti-atiomys ! !Litera. — Beside. 533(Entomol. Beitrage, vol. i. tab. 8. fig. 8.), his figure agreeing with theabove description.The larva of Cancellaria Ephippium has been discovered by M. VanRoserr of Stuttgart in a rotten nut tree ; and this gentleman observedthat, although more than half grown when found, it was two yearsin arriving at the perfect state. My Jig. \2l. 8. was made from thespecimens contained in the collection of this gentleman during myvisit to Germany last year.The larvae fig. 127. lo.) of the genus Sargus are also of an ovaloblong form, with the anterior segments narrowed ; the head scaly,narrow, with two small ocelli at the sides, and armed with two hooks ;the body has also a number of small hairs scattered over it ; and thelast segment is larger and semicircular, but narrower than the precedingsegment.The pupa is formed within the old skin of the larva, which doesnot essentially differ from its previous form. The perfect insectmakes its escape by bursting off the anterior part of its covering.Reaumur {3Ietyi. torn. iv. tab. 13. f. 19, 20., tab. 14. f. 4. 6., andtab. 22. f. 5 — 8.) has given the transformations of one of the species,which has been named after him and the larva of which was foundin cow-dung, Lyonnet {{Mem. Posthh. tab. 17. fig. 21 — 24. 29.) andBouche {Naturgesch. tai. '^. f. 31 — 36.) have figured the transformationsof S. cuprarius, but neither of these authors have figured thetrue pupa. This I am fortunately able to supply, having found manyof the larvae of S. cuprarius in garden mould. It is represented inmy fig. 127. n.Amongst the exotic species of this family, some exhibit severalcurious variations in structure. Platina cantata ( Ivied. Guinea) hasthe abdomen short, but very broad, being nearly four times as broadas the thorax Ptilocera has the male antennae strongly bipectinated.Dicranophora furciferacT , figured by Guerin icon. R. An. Ins. pi. 98.f. 12.), has a very long, slender, upright horn arising from the scutellum,and forked at the tip.The fossil insect figured by Curtis (in Ed. N. Phil. Journ. vol. vii.1829, pi. 6. f. 12.), as apparently allied to Sargus, can have no relationtherewith, the veins of the wings being totally unlike those ofany Notacanthideous insect.The family Beside (Decatoma p. Latr., Xylophagi p. Meig.) has theM M 3534 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.body moderately long (^fig.XTl.xi. Singula maculata) ; the antennae are10-jointed *, without any apical style or seta fig. 121. \Q. ant. ofSubula), the eight terminal joints forming an elongated nearly cylindricalmass ; the wings, when at rest, are laid upon the abdomen ; thetarsi have three pulvilli, both in Bevis and Subula ; the scutellum isspined in some species (Bevis); the terminal veins of the wings are ofthe ordinary thickness, and are disposed in a manner intermediate betweenthose of the Stratiomidse and Tabanidae, to which last indeedSubula makes a close approach in this respect.The species are mostly found in damp situations, and are of sluggishhabits.M. Van Roserr (Naturwiss. Abhandl. or Anti. Nat. Hist. Soc. Tubing,vol. ii. 1828 ; Meig. Zw. Ins. vol. vi. p. 319.; andFerussac, Bull.Sci. Nat. June 1829) discovered the larva of Subula varia in an oaktree; it is of a brown colour, elongated, very much depressed, ratherattenuated at each end ; the body is composed of twelve segments,furnished on the upper side with hairs arising from small tubercles.The pupa is inactive, and is described as preserving the previousform of the insect. The real pupa, however, is enclosed within theskin of the larva, which does not change its form, thus agreeing withthe other typical Notacantha. This is clearly shown in a specimenof the exuviae, both of the larva and pupa of Subula varia, given tomeby M. Van Roserr, and represented in fig. 127.14., in which it willbe seen that the delicate exuviae of the real pupa are partially exsertedout of the exuviae of the larva ; the pupa, according to M.Wesmael (who has subsequently published a description of the larvaof Subula marginal, Ann. Soc. Ent. France, 1837, p. 91. app.), possessingthe power of pushing itself forward, previous to assuming the'perfect state, by means of small ciliae directed backwards, and placedin rows at the extremity of each dorsal segment of the abdomen.The Rev. F. W. Hope has also given me specimens of Subula maculataand its preparatory state ; the latter found by him in a dryrotten tree in the New Forest, and from which he reared the imago.It is larger than that of X. varia, but does not otherwise differfrom it.The transformations of Bevis and Acting, the two other Britishgenera of this family, have not been observed.Although Lalreille names this family Decatoma, " ten joints," he describes thoantenna as 3-jolnted, the last being divided into " huit annex."DIl'TERA. CJENOMYlDiE, 535I am inclined also to place, either in this family, or amongst theCaenomyidte *, several extraordinary genera which have much perplexedentomologists in respect to their relations, such as Acanthusand Raphiorhynchus (gigantic l^fjasilian species), and probablyalso Chiromyza Wied. and Agapophytus Guer.There remains, however, another family's of great interest in regardto the transition nature of the species of which it is composed ; andalthough I here retain it amongst the Notacantha, in respect to thespined scutellum and articulation of the terminal portion of the antennae,I cannot but consider that the differences in its transformationsought to induce its removal to the Tanystoma. This group, for whichI propose the name of CiENOMYiDJE, comprises the genera Csenomyiaand Pachystomus Latr. (forming Macquart's tribe Sicarii.f ) Thetransformations of the former genus (which possesses 10-jointed antennae,and has from its singular characters been placed amongst theTabanidae, Stratiomidae, and Beridae) are not known, but Latreillehas described the pupa of Pachystomus symphonies ( Genera, &c.tom. iv. p. 2874) ^^ closely resembling that of the Tabanidae; beingconsequently an incomplete, and not a coarctate, pupa. This genushas 5-jointed antennae. Meigen, not regarding this description, andunacquainted with the transformations of some other species closelyrelated to this insect in the perfect state, retained the genus Oesophagus(previously proposed by him), the antennae of which (^ff. 127.17.) are 10-jointed, and which he divided into two sections — A, havingfor its type Xylopliagus ater § Meig. (vol. ii. pi. 12. f. 4., and my fig.127. 16.), and B (or the genus Subula Megerle, above noticed), havingfor its type X. maculatus Meig. The genus Subula, as discovered byM. Van Roserr and the Rev. F. W. Hope, has a metamorphosis exactlylike Sargus, the pupa being enclosed within the unaltered larva skin,but the transformations of the typical Xylophagi are quite different ;It is from ignorance of the transformations of these exotic groups that I expressthis indecision.f If the generic name Sicus be not retained for the former of these two genera,this name ought surely also to be rejected.\ Zetterstedt also (Ins. Lajjp. p. 513.) describes the pupa of this insect aselongata, cylindrica, subnuda, incisors ciliated et alice brewster spinuloso, tota pallida,segments seu annals 10 constant videtur." •^ Latreille confused this specific name in the plates and text of his ' Genera', andhas retained his error in the Regne Animal.M M 4536 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.M. Van Roserr having described and communicated to me those of LaterMeig* The larva {Jig- 127. 18.) of this insect f is an apod fleshy-grub,of a somewhat cyHndric form, having the tail defended by anoblique scaly plate, terminates by two short obtuse scaly horns {Jig-127. 19. sideways), whilst the anterior extremity of the body is terminatedby along acute horny joint. The structure of this larva is notthat of a species having a coarctate pupa, and I am consequently thenceled to infer the direct relation of Xylophagus with Pachystomusij:, inafamily distinct from that which contains Subula, although the onlyappreciable difference between Xylophagus and Subula consists in aslight variation in the direction of one of the veins of the wings.For the family thus constructed of Caenomyia, Pachystomus, and Oesophagus,I should have retained the name of Xylophagidse^had not thatname been used in a different extent by other authors, the retention ofwhich would therefore have led to confusion. The mouth of Caeno-myra (the only genus yet examined in respect to its oral characters,Jig. 127. 15.) has the labrum, lingua, maxilla?, and palpi fully developed,and thus resembles the majority of the Tanystoma. The apex of theabdomen in the females is produced into a long, and often exsertedovipositor. Of the relations of these insects with the other Diptera,we thus see that in regard to their trophi and transformations, theCsenomyidse in fact belong to the Tanystoma, whilst their close relationto Subula and other Notacantha has already been shown. HenceI cannot adopt the situation assigned to them by Macquart, Meigen,&c. immediately succeeding the Nemocera.The insects composing the third stirps of the order Diptera, or theTanystoma Latr., are distinguished by having the antenna composedM. Van Roscr {Verz. Hurt. Dipt. p. 6.) notices the great difference betweenthis larva (which he found in decayed birch-wood) and that of Subula varia, butwithout describing it. Baumhauer also found the larva of this insect in rottenwood, but did not describe it.j- The larva figured by Reaumur (Man. torn. iv. pi. 13. f. 12-16.) evidentlybelongs to this or a closely-allied species.^ Meigen indeed gives them as congeners, regarding P. symphonies as identicalwith X. circus De Geer ; whilst Fallen even makes this last a variety of Oesophagusater. Macquart, however, states them to be generically distinct, and placesthem in distinct tribes ; which is certainly unnatural, now that their transformationsare known.Litera. — TANYSTOMA. 537of only three joints, with a terminal seta.* The formation of theirmouth, which is generally much exserted, is also much more perfect,exhibiting internally a lancet-like labrum and lingua, and a pair ofmaxillae and maxillary palpi. In the Tabanidae, moreover, the mouthis furnished in addition with a pair of lancet-like mandibles, at leastin the females. In some of the Acroceridte, however, which are nearlyallied to the Bombyliidae, the mouth is nearly obsolete.The great character, however, by which the stirps is distinguishedfrom the Notacantha and Athericera, consists in the nature of themetamorphosis to which all the species are subject.The larvae resemble worms, being nearly cylindric, without feet,and with a scaly head of a constant form, always furnished with unguiformretractile appendages, enabling them to pierce the substanceswhence they derive their support : for the most part, they insideunder ground, and are but little known. They shed their skin previousto assuming the pupa state, in which, to a certain extent, theyresemble the imago, having the various limbs enclosed in distinctsheaths, and folded upon the breast. The perfect insect escapesfrom this state by means of a slit down the back.Many of the perfect insects are eminently carnivorous or insectivorous.The following distribution of the families composing this stirps appearsto me to combine their affinities in a more natural manner thanin the methods proposed in Latreille's later works. It will be seenthat it differs only in few respects from a portion of the sketch givenby Latreille in the Genera Crust. &c. vol. iv. p. 243. n. 1.Section 1. Proboscis with six internal set£e. (Fam. Tabanidae.j-)Section 2. Proboscis with four internal seta.Subsection A. Proboscis siphon-shaped ; body short, broad ; wings divaricating.(Fam. Bombyliidffi, Anthracite, and Acroceridse. )Subsection B. Proboscis siphon-shaped ; body long; wings incumbent. (Fam.Empire, Tachydromiidae, HybotidaJ, and Asilidaj. )Subsection C. Proboscis dilated, with two large exserted lips ; wings divaricatingor incumbent. (Fam. Mydasidse, Therewith, Leptidae, Dolichopida;,and Scenopinidas. )By this arrangement of the families, Tabanus is introduced amongstthe other groups having an incomplete pupa, instead of being unitedThe Tabanida?, however, as well as the Mydasidse, have no terminal seta, andthe third joint of their antenna is articulated.f Latreille excepts Pangonia : it, however, certainly has six internal lancets inthe females, although the males, as in Tabanus, &.c., have only four.MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.with the Notacantha into a separate division called Entomocera, asproposed by Macquart {Dipt. Exot. torn. i. p. 89.). The long rostratedgenus Pangonia forms the connection between the Tabanidse and Bombwhilst the Acroceridae appear to connect such Anthracidae asNemestrina and the Empire ; but this connection is very slight andunsatisfactory. The Mydasidse intervene between the Asilidae andTherevidae, to both of which, in general appearance, habits, and trophy,they are nearly allied, and the Platypezidae and Dolichopidse arebrought into contact with the Athericera, with which the nerves oftheir wings agree.The family Tabanid^*, corresponding with the Linnaean genusTabanus {fg. 128. l. Tabanus pagans $ ), is distinguished from allFig. 128.A ^ '^')c?4i?the other Tanystoma in the perfect development of the trophi ; allthe parts of the mandibulated mouth, except the labial palpi, havinghere their representatives, as clearly established by Savigny, in hisadmirable memoirs. The proboscis is exserted, and in the femaleBicLiOGR. Refer, to the Tabanid^.De Geer. Bromsarnas Sprung (De Origine Tabanorum), in Vetensk. Acad.Handll. 1 760 ; and in his Memoires, torn. vi.Garde, in Wiedemann's Zool. Magaz. (Anat. Laban. dominus.)Thunder. Tabani, 17 n. sp. descry. in Nov. Act. Upsal. vol. ix. — Ditto, Tanj'-glossa;, 17 n. sp. descry. in ditto, vol. ix. 1827.Duncan, in Magazine of Zool. and Bot. vol. i. ( Brit. Species. )Hardwicke. N. sp. Pangonia, Trans. Linn. Soc. torn. xiv.Fallen, in Swed. Trans. 1809.Macquart, on Pangonia, in Ann. Soc. Ent. d. France, 1837.And the general works on the order ; also Palisot Bcnuvois.Litera TABANID^. 539encloses six (Jiff. 128. 5.), hut in the male only four lancet-like instruments.It is terminated by two fleshy lip-like lobes, and is defendedat the sides by the maxillary palpi, which are large, and 2-jointed.The third joint of the antennae is large, and often with an excisionbefore the middle, and extending to the extremity of the joint ; theremaining joints, varying in number from three to seven, are closelyunited and attenuated to the tips (Jiff. 128. 6.). The eyes are verylarge, and nearly cover the whole head, especially in the males, inwhich, also, the upper facets are of a larger size than the lower ones.(Macquart, Hist. JV. Dipt. torn. i. p. 189. A similar remark has beenmade by Mr. Ashton, in a paper read before the Entomol. Society.In the males of Tabanus, which I have examined, it is only the middlefacets which are enlarged.) The eyes are, moreover, often verybeautifully coloured (Jiff. 128.2. face of male showing the small sizeof the trophi, 3. head in front, and 4. sideways, of the female) ; thewings are extended horizontally at the side of the body ; the aluletsare large ; the abdomen is triangular and depressed ; the tarsi arefurnished with three pulvilli beneath the ungues (Jig. 128. 7.); thethorax, as in the majority of the Brachoceratous division, is thickand compact, the dorsal portion being almost entirely mesothoracic ;the scutellum large and elevated ; the metathorax is reduced aboveto a very narrow ring beneath the scutellum, the major part of themetathorax being covered by the basal segment of the abdomen.*This family, which comprises some of the largest Dipterous insects,is pre-eminently distinguished for the tormenting powers which thedifferent species possess of piercing the skins and sucking the bloodof various quadrupeds, and even of man himself. They abound inwoods and pastures, and make a buzzing noise, whence they haveobtained the English name of " the breeze." (See Buffet, p. 51., andThe New World of Engl. Words, 1658.) They are also called gad-flies,and some of the smaller species are called clegs. The insect ofwhich Bruce has spoken in his Travels in Africa, under the name ofTsaltsalya or Zimb (and which attacks cattle in so dreadful a manner,that unless immediately driven to the sands of Atbara, theyforsake their food, and run wildly about the plains, dreading even " itsvery sound," until they die, worn out with fatigue, fright and hunger),has been by some writers considered to be a species of this family.Fig. 1 28. 8. represent;; the thorax of Thanks seen laterally ; the mesothoraxbeing dotted. The terminal striped part represents the base of the abdomen A, concealingthe majority of the metathorax x .540 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.The camel, and also the elephant and rhinoceros, as Bruce supposes,are subject to this enemy. " When the first of these animals isattacked, its body, head, and legs break out into large bosses, whichswell, break, and putrefy, to its certain destruction. The British Association,at the meeting held at Cambridge, selected this insect asafit subject to be proposed for further research. According toDesfontaines, the Tabanus Maroccanus Fah. torments the camels inthe North of Africa, the bodies of which are sometimes literallycovered with these insects, so that there is reason to believe that thelimb is the latter insect, or one nearly allied, belonging to the samegenus, although there seem nearly equally strong reasons for believingit to belong to the family Qistridge. (See Marquis Spine on theZimb, in Taylor's Phil. Mag. March 1834.)Olivier, Latreille, and MacLeay, are of opinion that the olffrpogof the Greeks, and Asilus of the Romans, was a species of Tabanidae,the latter author especially, from the description given of the insectby the ancients, endeavouring to prove at great length that it was aspecies of Chrysops. Mr. Bracy Clark, on the other hand, has withequal skill maintained the opinion that as no other insect thanOestrus Bovis is capable of producing such effects as are so admirablydescribed by Virgil, the oJa-pog must have been that insect.*It appears, however, to me, that in this controversy too little poeticlicence has been allowed to the old poets. Who is not aware of thedifficulty of determining the species of insects popularly noticed evenby the old poets of our own country ? I can easily believe that thesewriters, perceiving, as they could not fail to do, that the blood-suckingTabani are unceasing in their attacks upon horned cattle, would,without question, at once couple them with the effects produced bythe Castri upon the same animals. f Hence, unlike the umpire inTime Chameleon" who addressed the disputants —Sirs, cease your pother.The creature 's neither one nor t'other ;MacLeay, in Trans. Linn. Soc. vol. xiv. ; Ditto, in Zool. Jourri. No. 17. ;Bracy Clark, in Trans. Linn. Soc. vol. xv., Zool. Journ. No. 12. ; Keferstein, inBull. Sci. Nat. April 1829; and Latreille, Cours d'Entomol. p. 116.f Just in the same manner as Linnaeus was led to believe that Asilus crabroni-formis was the insect which caused all the irritation amongst the cattle in the northof Europe. stour in Lajjlatid, i. p. 215.) This opinion has been overlooked byMacLeay and Clark.Litera. TABANID^. 541I think with the Chameleon itself thatYou both are right, and both arc wrong."It has long been noticed that (as in the Culicidae) it is only thefemales of these insects which are blood-suckers, the males beingfound on flowers ; and Meigen discovered that the mouth of the lattersex is destitute of mandibles. The same remark has also been madeby Curtis in Htematopota *, whence he is induced to believe that it isthe mandibles which are the real piercing instruments, and that theother enclosed lancet-like pieces form a canal for the upward passageof the blood. M. Waterman observed of Pangonia rostra ta (Silver.Rev. Ent. No. 3.), that its bite is very powerful, but it is onlyable to inflict a wound upon cattle whilst on the wing, owing to thevery great length of its proboscis f; it seems, however, to prefer theflowers of Pelargonium, upon which it is often found. M. Serville,however {^Ann. Soc. Ent. France, tom. ii. p. 493.), suggests that it isonly the males which are found in the latter situation from analogywith the Tabani.We are indebted to De Geer for the knowledge we possess ofthe transformations of this family. The larva (fig. 128. 9.) of Tabanusdominus De Geer {{Mem. tom. vi. pi. 12. f. 6.) is found in theearth, and is of an elongated subcylindric form, attenuated at eachend, especially in front; it is destitute of feet, 12-jointed, havingthe head distinct, narrow, elongated, horny, armed with two strongcurved hooks, antennae and palpi ; the fourth to the tenth segmentshaving an elevated dorsal papillose ridge used in progression ; theterminal segment is minute and tuberculiform ; the pupa is naked, incomplete,elongated, sub cylindrical, with six spines at the end of thebody fig. 128. 10.) ; the margins of the abdominal segments ciliated,and the forehead bi-tubercle.He is silent as to the composition of the mouth of the male of Tabanus.f In the species of Pangonia observed by Meigen (vol. ii. tab. 13. fig. 3, 4.), theproboscis is not more than half the length of the body, and the enclosed lancets areaslong as the labium ; but in P. longirostris Hard. , which I have dissected, andin which the rostrum is nearly three times the length of the body, the six enclosedlancets are not half the length of the labium. I consequently do not think that theinsect can use these lancets, except by detaching them from the labium, and holdingthe latter at a great angle from the other parts of the mouth.542 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.The family Bombyliid^ *, corresponding with the genus BombyhusLinn. fig. 128. ll. Bombylius major), has the body short and thick;the wings extended horizontally on each side of the body ; the alulaesmall ; the proboscis long, and porrected in front of the head ; the labrumis spear-shaped, the lingua as long, but more slender, themaxilla? exceedingly delicate fig. 128. 12. mouth of Boml^ylius afterCurtis) ; the palpi are composed of a single joint ; the antennae areclosely approximated at the base, often with a short terminal stylefig. 128. 13. ant. of Bombylius) ; and the thorax is much elevated, sothat the head appears to be inserted very low ; the antennae have thethird joint oval or fusiform and flattened, terminated by a short style,but without any seta, and the legs very long and slender ; the wingsare generally apart when at rest, and they have mostly four posteriorcells ; the body is often thickly clothed with hairs ; the ocelli arethree in number. These insects fly with astonishing rapidity, hoveringat times over flowers without settling, and extracting the nectar bymeans of their long proboscis, making at the same time a considerablehumming with their wings. (White, Seldom, vol. ii. p. 233. ; Bree, inMag. Nat. Hist. No. 31.) Latreille supposes that their larvae, aswell as those of the Anthracidae, are parasites f, whilst Macquart conjecturesthey live in the ground hist. Nat. Dipt. tom. i. p. 376.), andZetterstedt states that they feed on the roots of plants {Ins. Lapp.p. 510,).I am indebted to Mr. Pickering for an opportunity of delineatingthe pupa fig. 128. 14.) of Bombylius major, which that gentlemandiscovered in sandy gravel pits at Coombe Wood, on the 28th of Marchandfrom which the imago was produced in a kw days. This pupahas the back much arched, the front and under side of the head armedwith strong spines ; the abdominal segments furnished at the sideswith numerous long curved setae, as well as dorsally with transverseBiBLioGR. Refer, to the Bojibyliid^.Milan. Monogr. Bombyliorum Bohemia, 8vo. Pray. 1796.Modeer, in Physiol. Salsk. Handll. vol. i. (Descr. g. Bombylius.)Duncan, in Mag. Zool. and Botany, vol. ii. (Brit, species.)f MacLeay (Annals of Nat. Hist. Sept. 1838) states that the larvae of thosetropical Bombylii vfhich have such a bee-like form live on the larva? of the beesthey so strikingly represent.DIPTEUA. — Anthracite. 543series of strong reflexed booklets ; the leg cases extend considerablybeyond the wing-cases, and the case which encloses the long proboscislies between the legs ; the extremity of the body is also spined.M. ImhofF has also figured the pupa of this insect in the Isis for ISS-i.The species of this family are for the most part exotic ; many ofthem differ from the typical species in the much longer form of thebody, and of the antennae and the shorter rostrum ; amongst thesethe more remarkable are Sj'stropus Wied., which in its form resemblesthe Hymenopterous genus Ammophila and Lepidoptera West.(in Phil. Mag. June, 1835), which has the remarkable aspect ofegeria, with long scaly antennae and a tasselled tail. I have figuredthe typical species L. ^Egeriiformis in Griff. An. Kingd. Ins. pi. 128.I possess this as well as another species, both being from Georgia inNorth America.The family Anthracite fig. 128. 15. Anthrax Hottentots), formingpart of the Linnaean genus Musca, differs from the preceding familyto which it is nearly related, in having the thorax but slightly elevated; the head is nearly spherical fig. 128. 16.) ; the antennas arevery short, and inserted at a distance from each other, and terminatedby an elongate pear-shaped joint, being very attenuated at the tipfig. 128. 18.); the proboscis is generally very short, and often withdrawninto the oral cavity; in a few instances, especially in the exoticgenus Nemestrina, it is, however, very long ; the palpi are slender,filiform, and composed of a single joint fig. 128. 17. mouth of Anthraxafter Curtis) ; the abdomen is squarer than in the Bombyliidae,and the legs are long and slender, the tarsal pulvilli very small orobsolete. They are generally of moderate or large size, often coveredwith hair and beautifully coloured, the wings also being muchmaculated ; they are for the most part exotic, very few species beingfound in this country ; they fly in the sunshine with great agility, andthe species which 1 have observed on the Continent appear to delightin alighting often on the ground and upon walls exposed to the sun.They subsist in the perfect state upon the juices of flowers.Macquart states that the larvae are not known,* and Latreille says,Larva parasitic ? Pupa nuda, incomplete, spinosulo-annulata." ( Genera,S^c. tom. iv. p. 307.) Reaumur {{Mem. ton), vi. pi. 2?. f. 13.)544< MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.figures Anthrax moro, of which he observes, " Plusieurs mouches decette espece ont ete threes d'un nid creuse dans le bois" (p. 290.);he, however, considered that these specimens had been stored up bysome of the fossorial Hymenoptera for the food of their progeny(p. 272.). Zetterstedt observes, " Plerumque species ova in terra are-nose(corpore scilicet perpendicularly erect vaginaque anal elongatain arena orissa) deponent saepe observant. Igitur, ' Larvas in terra uli-ginosa metamorphosis subire' imperio statut Fallen, nee ' imaginesjuxta aquas stagnates' versa vidi. ' Larvas in ligne putrid vivere,'dicit Meigen, quod tamen vix credible mihi videtur." {Ins. Lapp,p. 521.) This author also discovered seven or eight pupae of Anthraxsituate (which he describes exactly corresponding with my specimenssubsequently mentioned) under a stone, " intra folia Betulae nana informam cylindrorum conglomerate, occult."All these authors have, however, overlooked the direct observationsof Chafed, who has figured the larva {fig- 129. l.), pupa, and imagoof Anthrax ornata (or a closely allied species) as one of the parasitesin the nest of the mason bee (Megachile muraria) {Abliandl. v. Ins.volsci. pi. 5. fig. 11, 12, 13.).M. V. Audouin has confirmed in his unpublished observations theparasitic habits of Anthrax moro by rearing it from the nest of anAnthophora. He has given me one of the exuviae of the pupa, whichretains its previous pupa-form, and exactly resembles the pupa of BombHe remarked that the Anthrax makes its way out of the cellof the bee, immediately before assuming the perfect state, by the assistanceof its dorsal spines, in the same manner as Cossus. I havealso found exactly similar exuviffi in the nest of Megachile muraria.M. Percheron, on the other hand, figures the pupa of Anthrax situate,together with a cell of earth formed by the larva ( Genera Insect.Dipt. pi. 1.).M. Macquart has separated the genus Nemestrina * from the Anthracidaefrom its shorter form, the great elongation of its proboscisextending beneath the body, and several other characters ; it appearsto me, however, to constitute a link between the Bombyliidae and theAnthracite, the veins of the wings of the latter being very variable,See Olivier sur le g. Nemestrina (A^ojry. Bul. Soc. Phil. 1810); Fischer (inAct. Most. Nat.) (Hydrocephalus, Nemestrina'); Westwood (in Land, and Edinh.Phil. Magazine, June. 1835).Litera ACROCERIDiE. 545leading to those of Nemestrina, which in some species are very muchreticulated fig. 128. 19. wing of N. longirostris). The species ofthis interesting group are exotic, especially frequenting hot localities.M. Waterman has observed that N. longirostris (in which the proboscisis at least three times as long as the entire body, and exceedinglyslender, and which is an inhabitant of the Cape of GoodHope), solely' resorts to the species of Gladiolus, of which it sucks thehoney with its long snout, which just equals the length of the tube ofthe flower; when unemployed, the proboscis is directed back beneaththe body (Silberm. Rev. Ent. No. 3.).The family Acrocerid^* fig. 128. 20. Ogcodes gibbous), alsoforming part of the Linnaean genus Musca, is of small extent, andcomposed of insects generally of small size, having the body shortand thick, the abdomen being round, and very much swollen ; whencethese insects have been termed Vesicles. The thorax is veryelevated, with the wings deflexed ; the ringlets are very large, coveringthe balancers. The antennae fig. 128. 21.) are very minute, andinserted close together ; and the proboscis either long and bentbeneath the body, or obsolete. The eyes are very large, and occupythe major part of the head, which is, however, so minute, and attachedso low, as to be almost invisible from above. The veins of the wingsare variously and singularly arranged, and sometimes very indistinct.The species exhibit a general degree of weakness in their construction.Their movements are slow ; and they are found upon plants,and amongst flowers. The species are but few in number, and chieflyexotic. Their larvae have not been observed. In a preceding page(p. 189.) I have noticed the curious fact, observed both by the SenatorVan Heyden and M. V. Audouin, of the vei-y rare Ogcodes gibbousbeing selected by a species of Crabro, which burrows in wood, as thefood of its progeny.The true situation of this family, in a natural system, is verydifficult to be determined.BiBLioGR. Refer, to the Acrocerid^.Lamarck, in Ann, du Mus. d'Hist. Nat. torn. iii. (Panops). •And the general works of Mei^eji, Wiedeviann, Macquart, Griffith (An. King's),and Perty (Del An. art. Brass).VOL. II. N N5^6MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.The family Empire*, nearly corresponding with the Linnaean genusEmpis (Jiff. 129. 2. Empis tesselated), closely resembles the Asilidae,in the elongated form of the body, incumbent wings, and voracioushabits. The head is small, rounded, and nearly globose ; with theFiff. 129.eyes large. The proboscis is generally elongate, and either perpendicular,or folded beneath the breast ; with the palpi reflected, andgenerally 2-jointed (Jiff. 129. 3. head and mouth of E. tesselated).The antennae are as long as the head, and attenuated to the tips ;the second joint the smallest, and the third joint longest, terminatedby a inarticulate style (Jiff. 129. 4. ant. of E. tessell.). The wings arelarge, with an elongate discoidal cell a little below the middle of thewing, which is, however, sometimes wanting. The abdomen is narrowerthan the thorax ; the legs are of moderate length. Theseinsects are of small size, but of robust and active habits, living byprey, or upon the nectar of flowers ; the latter being especially thefood of the males. They are ordinarily very voracious, seizing uponother insects of considerable size, from which they suck the juices.Many species assemble in considerable numbers : these swarms areoften to be observed over standing water, where they alternately flyforwards and backwards, as though endued with but a single impulse,or driven about by the wind. The females, especially, are quiteravenous ; and it is seldom that a pair is taken coupled, without thissex being found to be occupied in sucking another insect nearly aslarge as herselfBiBLioGR. Refer, to the Empire.Fallen. Empides Special 4to. 1816.Macquart. Monogr. Ins. Dipt. Empides de la France, Lille, 1823.Litera. TACHYDROMIID^. 547But little is known of the preparatory states of these insects. M.Macquart, indeed, states that he once found a specimen of Empisopaca in the act of disengaging itself from the pupa skin, which hedescribes (JFJist. Nat. Dipt. tom. i. p. 326.), and which closely resemblesthe pupa of Asilus : the front of the head had probably fallenoff, as he does not describe any horns, which are so remarkable inAsilus. Bouche has observed the transformations of Ramphomyiaspinipes {Naturgesch. pi. 4. f. 26—30.), the larva of which {^fig. 129.5.) is a long apod grub, with the segments much constricted, andrather broader towards the hind part of the body, the last segmentwith two spiracles on the upper side, and with two long impressionson the under side. The pupa is incomplete, elongate-oval ; it has amucro at the end of each antenna-case, and four long bristles on thehead : the segments of the abdomen are also furnished at the extremitywith rows of bristles. The larva was found in garden vegetablemould.The Tachydromiid^ is a family of minute, very active insects,nearly allied to the Empida; (with which they are united by Latreilleand Stephens), remarkable for the peculiar construction of the legs,and which have the antennae apparently only 2-jointed, with along terminal seta (t?^. 129. 7.): another basal joint, however, exists,but it is very small. The proboscis is generally short, and the palpiare incumbent i^fig. 129. 6. head of Tachydromia). The wings havenot the large cell beyond the middle fig. 129. 8. wing of Tach.arrogant) ; they are often ornamented with coloured fasciae. Thefore legs in the genus Hemerodromia are raptorial, having the coxaevery much elongated, and the femora thickened and spined fig. 129.9.) : the latter character, in the first or second pair of legs, alsooccurs in the genus Tachydromia. The latter generic name is verycharacteristic of the habits of the typical species, which run withwonderful quickness, with their wings lying flat on the back, especiallyon the trunks of trees ; others are found amongst herbage.There has been so much confusion in the employment of thegeneric name Sicus (first proposed by Scopoli for the insects whichFabricius afterwards called Myopa ; subsequently, in 1796, usedby Latreille for the typical genus of the present family, afterwardscalled Tachydromia by Meigen ; then, in 1798, given by Fabriciusto the genus afterwards named Caenomyia by Latreille ; and, lastly,N N 2.548 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.used by Macquart for the name of the family typified by the last-namedgenus for which, however he employs the name Csenomyia,and not Sicus), that it would be advisable that it should be entirelyrejected, unless, indeed, it be restored to the genus Myopa.Like the last family, the Hybotid/"e are of a small size, and ofdark uniform colours (^y. 129. lo, Hybos flavipes). The head issmall and spherical, with the eyes, in the males, occupying nearlyifs entire surface. The clypeus is but slightly hirsute. The proboscisis short, and directed horizontally. The mandibles and maxillae appearto be wanting (^fig- 129. il. mouth of Hybos). The veins of thewings resemble those of the Empire, having a discoidal postmedialcell ; but they are much fewer in number than in the Asilidae, nothaving the internal triangular cell observed in that family. Thefemora of the hind legs are often thickened. The thorax is veryelevated, and the abdomen narrow.The species are active, and, for the most part, prey on other insects ;some, however, are found upon flowers. Their transformations havenot been observed.The genus Cyrtoma, placed by Mr. Haliday in this family seems tometo belong to the Suicide. The nervures are totally different fromthose of any Hybotidae.The family Asilid^, answering to the genus Asilus of Linnaeus, iscomposed of numerous species, of large size fig. 129. 12. As. crabro-uniforms), and of which the body is long, and clothed with stiff bristles,with the thorax narrowed in front. The wings are incumbent, with aperfect triangular cell terminating near the interior margin of thewing : above this is a perfect elongate post medial cell. The head istransverse, and very depressed ; the eyes lateral ; the lower part ofthe face bearded ; and the proboscis porrected in front, about as longas the head [fig. 129. 13. head and mouth of Asilus) : the labial lobesare scarcely distinct. The antennae have the third joint either sub-elevateor elongate-attenuated, and terminated by a short 2-jointedstyle or seta [fig. 129. 14.). These insects (some of which are amongstthe largest Dipterous insects) make a humming noise when on thewing. They are very powerful and active in the sunshine, preyingLitera MYDASID^. 549voraciously upon such other insects* as they can overcome, and ofwhich they suck the fluids. Macquart states, that the large speciesattack cattle in the same manner as the Tabani.t The species arefar more numerous in the hotter regions of the globe than in temperateclimes.The larvae, which reside under ground, and feed on the roots ofplants, are apod, elongated, depressed, 12-jointed grubs fig. 129. shavinga scaly head, armed with two moveable unguiform appendages;and the pro thoracic and anal segments are respectively furnished witha pair of spiracles, the posterior pair being tubular. They are transformedinto pupae (^^r. 129. 16.), which are naked and incomplete,posteriorly attenuated ; the forehead being armed with two strongcurved spines, and the sides of the head with three, placed closelytogether. On each side of the thorax, near the head, is a tubercle,which Latreille presumes may be a spiracle. The abdominal segmentsare armed with rows of spines, and the apex is-inspired. Frisch{Beschr. i. pt. '6. tab. 7. and 8.) has illustrated the transformationsof Asilus fortunatus and crabroniformis ; the former of which liasbeen also described and figured by De Geer. (Mem. torn. vi. pi. 14-.f. 5 — 9.) Harris also (Exposed. Engl. Ins. t. 17.) figures the transformationsof this genus.The family Mydasidje:}: is of very small extent and anomalouscharacter, some of the species being the most gigantic of the wholeorder, and for the most part exotic. The antennae are generally muchRouleau Desvoidy (compte Rends 1836, No. 23.) states that he had observedAsihis Diadems flying with a bee in its hold several times, and had seen itsettle in a situation where there was a burrow ; he did not, however, see the Asilusactually bury the Apis. Indeed, it appears to me unquestionable, that it was forits own food that the Asilus had captured the bee, and not for a supply of food tobe laid up for its progeny, as in the case of the fossorial Hymenoptera.■f- Linnifius, indeed ( Tour in Lapland, vol. i. p. 217.}, describes Asilus crabroni-formis as the cause of the terror evinced by cattle, now attributed to QLstri ; and heaccounts for the animals seeking retreat in water, from the circumstance that theAsilus flies close to the ground, and attacks the lower part of the legs of the animals.The latter statement, given in the first edition of the Fauna Suecica, on theauthority of the common people, is omitted in the second edition of that work.See Wiedemann's monograph on the genus Mydas, in Nova Acta Nature. Curios.vol. XV. pt. 2. ; also Westwood, in Taylor's phil. Mag. April, 1835 (additionalspecies).N N 3550 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.longer than the head, with five distinct joints ; the two terminal ones(which are distinct, although much smaller, in the Asilidse and Empire)being large, and forming a club fig. 129. 17. head and antennaof Mydas). The apical nerves run parallel with the posterior marginof the wing fig. 129. 18.), as in Pangonia. The body is long, thelegs strong, and the tarsi furnished with two pulvilli ; the hind femoraare thickened.These insects, according to Macquart, attack and devour otherinsects, seizing them with force whilst on the wing, and holding themwith their fore legs. Mr. MacLeay has informed me that the larva?of M. tricolor (which he observed in Cuba) are parasitic upon thelarva; of the giant Priori. In some of Latreille's works we find thisfamily united with the following ; but the neuration of the wings isquite different. M. Macquart has entered into an inquiry as to theirreal affinities, and seems to have no hesitation in assigning to them aclose relation with the Asilidae. Such is also my opinion.The family Therewith, or the tribe Xylotomae of Meigen, is ofvery small extent fig. 129. 19. Thereva plebeia), having the wingsdivaricate, and offering several perfect cells, formed nearly as in theLeptidge ; the apical nerves running to the extremity of the wing.The palpi are enclosed in the oral cavity. The proboscis is terminatedin a pair of large membranous labial lobes, thus differing fromthe preceding Tanystoma. The third joint of the antenna; is ovateconic, and terminated by a minute inarticulate style. The abdomenis conical. Many of the species are clothed with a silky kind ofdown. They are of moderate size, and are generally found upontrees ; sometimes they are seen flying in swarms. The larva ofThereva plebeia, first observed by Frisch {Beschr. pt. 1. tab. 9.), andrecently by Bouche {Naturgesch. tab. 4. fig. 16 — 20.), is very long,slender, and serpentiform fig. 129. 20.). The head is small, withtwo short antennae. The body appears to consist of twenty distinctsegments (at least the intermediate segments seem divided into twoparts) : the body is furnished at the extremity with two respiratorytubes. These larvae were found in vegetable garden mould. Thepupae fig. 129. 21.) are oblong, having the front of the head armedwith two spines, and each side of the thorax with three, the middleone being the longest and curved. Meigen has also observed theLitera. — LEPTID^.transformation of Thereva nobility (Syst. Beschr. vol. ii. p. 117.)>the larva of which he found in rotten wood. L' Admiral has alsofigured the larva, pupa, and imago of an insect which appears to meto be a large species of Thereva. (Naauw. Warn. tab. 19.)The Leptidje (Reptiles Latr., Rhagionides Latr. olim) fig. 130. l.Leptis scolopacea) are distinguished from theTherevidae, to which theyFig. 130are very nearly allied, by having the palpi large, externa , filiform orconical ; the proboscis large, fleshy, and terminated by two elongatedlabial lobes fig. 130. 2. mouth of Leptis); the antennae are insertednear the base of the head, with the third joint either short and roundedor kidney-shaped, and terminated by a long seta fig. 130. 3. antennaof Leptis) ; the tarsi are terminated by three pulvilli ; the wings aredivaricate, and exhibit several perfect cells ; the external nerve isfurcate ; the middle and posterior tibiae have two apical spurs.The species are of a moderate size, and generally varied in theircolours, their wings being occasionally spotted. The species of thetypical genus frequent the trunks of trees, especially preferring thesides exposed to the sun. On alighting, their first movement is toplace themselves in a position with the head downwards. Other speciesfrequent low plants, grass, &c.De Geer has observed that the females deposit their eggs either inthe earth or in vegetable mould. The larvae fig. 130. 4.) are elongate,apod, sub cylindrical grubs, with the posterior segments graduallywidening, and terminated behind in two points, beneath which is anoblique truncation with two spiracles fig. 130. 5.); the head issmall, scaly, and bears a pair of antennae in the typical genus (Bouche,N N 4552 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Nature. tab. 4. fig. 11 — 15. larva and pupa of Leptis scolopacea); thepupa fig. 130. 6.) is naked, incomplete, cylindrical, with transverserows of spines on the abdominal segments, and with larger spines atthe extremity of the body; the larva fig. 130. 7.) of one of thespecies of this family (Vermileo De Geerii Macquart, Leptis Ver-milesFab), has the singular habit of forming small conical holes inthe sand, like the ant lion, for the purpose of entrapping small insects,round which it entwines itself, and then destroys and sucks them.It twists itself about with the greatest activity. The larva of this speciesis elongate, cylindric, attenuated in front, with a small soft head ofvariable form, furnished with two hooks ; the last segment of the bodyis broad, curved upwards, and terminated by four pilose tentaclesfig. 130. 8.). This larva, which has been fully described by De Geer{{Mem. torn. vi. pi. 10.), is three years in attaining the perfect state ;the pupa is naked, incomplete, and only covered by the sand ; M.De Roman, who has also published a few observations upon thisinteresting insect fatal. Soc. Ent. de France, 1833, p. 498. ),noticed that the larva was able to undergo a fast of six months.The European genus Clinocera of Meigen appears, from the arrangementof the wing-nerves, to form the passage to the next family.The family Dolichopidje * comprises a considerable number ofsmall brilliant metallic-coloured flies fig. 130. 9. Dolichopus cranes),having the wings when at rest incumbent upon the abdomen,seldom with more than one perfect cell, the disposition of the nervesnearly resembling that of the Muscidae ; the antennae fig. 130. il.ant. of Dolichopus) are short, terminating in a small palette-shapedor oval joint, emitting a long seta ; the palpi are very broad and flattened; the labrum horny and dentate, serving as a defence to the labiumwhich is very large and fleshy, especially in the females, in whichBiBLiOGR. Refer, to the Dolichopid^.Cuvier, in Journ. d'Hist. Nat. vol. ii.Fischer. Notice sur une Moulin carnivora (Medeterus), 4to. Mosc. 1819.Stannius, in the Isis, 1831.Holiday, in Zool. Journ. No. 19. ; and in Entomol. Mag. passim.Litera. SCENOPINIDiE. csit forms a conical muzzle ; the tongue is short and acute, but themaxillae and mandibles are wanting (^ff. 130. 10. mouth of Doli-chorus)* ; the abdomen is compressed and incurved at the tip, withthe male organs of generation often exserted in the shape of flattenedsetae or plates ; the legs are long and slender, armed with strongbristles. In several important characteristics, these insects approximateto the Athericera, and recede considerably from the type of theTanystoma.Some of these insects are found running with great agility forwards,sideways, and backwards, upon walls, trunks of trees, &c., in dampsituations; others delight in frequenting the wet edges of water,flying over its surface, and resting upon any thing which may happento be floating upon it. It is seldom that they are found upon flowers.The Medeteri and Hydrophobia subsist upon other insects ; and M.Macquart states that he once captured a species of the latter genusengaged in sucking the larva of a Tettigonia; Mr. Doubleday also observedMedeterus tories engaged in capturing Course on the surfaceof water (Jena. 3Iag. vol. iii. p. 414.).The larva of Dolichopus ungulatus (the only species of which thetransformations have been observed), according to De Geer (Mem,tom. vi. pi. 11. fig. 19.), resides in the earth ; it is apod, cylindrical,12-jointed (Jiff- 130. 12.), with a head of variable shape, furnishedwith two hooks ; the last segment is incrassated, and reflexed andbicuspidate at the tip, with two tubercles above, each bearing aspiracle; the pupa (fig. 18. and vay fig. 130. 13.) is naked, incomplete,elongate-ovate ; the thorax with two curved horns ; and thesegments of the abdomen are dorsally furnished with rows of bristles.The British genus Diaphorus, having the eyes in the males nearlyextending over the entire surface of the head, appears to connect thisfamily with the Scenopinidae.The family Scenopinid^ {fid- 130. 14. Scenopinus fenestralis), inwhich, after Latreille, I have united Meigen's families PlatypeziuEe,Megacephali, and Scenopinii, or the tribes Scenopiniens, Cephalop-sides, and Platypezines of Macquart, is of small extent, and composedof insects of small size, obscure colours, and difficult location. In theMr. Haliday describes them as present in Machaerium and Porphyries.354f MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.formation of the antennae and wings, they very nearly approach theDolichopidae, with which some of them were united by Latreille inthe Genera Crustaceorum. The body is, however, flattened ; the headhemispherical, and almost entirely occupied by the eyes in the males ;the legs are short, the posterior tarsi are dilated at the base in somegenera ; the labium is thick, and terminated by large lips ; the palpilong, and thickened at the tips ; the setae of the mouth minute{fiQ' 130. 15. mouth of Scenopinus) ; in some the antennae want theseta; in others the seta is terminal, and in some dorsal ; the veins ofthe wings are few in number compared with the other groups of Ta-systema.The tribe is of difficult location, but it appears to me that it is atthe confines of the Tanystoma and Athericera that the groups ofwhich it is composed ought to be arranged ; the determination of thispoint will depend in a great measure upon the nature of the transformationsof the insects. We learn, therefore, from Bouche s figuresof the larvae and pupae of Scenopinus senilis, that it is a Tanysto-natus insect, the larva so exactly resembling that of Thereva plebeia{^Jig. 129. 20.), that I have not thought it necessary to figure it. Thepupa (^Jig- 130. 16.) is of the incomplete species, long, narrow, withthe abdominal segments much constricted, and of nearly equal width ;each of them is furnished with two rows of spicula, and the body isterminated by two long curved setae ; the head has two short horns infront. The larva was found in the rotten fungi of willows.The larva of Platypeza bolting observed by M. Van Roserr, andwhich he says resembles some seed (Gelbrubensaamen^ Hurt. Dipt.p. 11.), resides in rotten mushrooms. I am indebted to him for aspecimen of the larva represented in Jig. 130. 17.; it is flat, withthe sides of the body furnished with curved rigid setae. I shouldconceive that the pupa would be a coarctate one.The fourth stirps of the Diptera, or the Athericera of Latreille,has the antennae composed of two or three joints, the last of which isnever annulated, but is terminated by a style or seta ; the proboscis isgenerally elongated, thick, and membranous, with two large labiallobes ; it is elbowed near the middle, with the palpi (which are composedof a single piece, and entirely concealed when inactive) inserteda short distance before the bend of the proboscis, which isLitera. — ATHERICERA. 555generally completely withdrawn (when at rest) into the oral cavity ;occasionally (as in the Conopsidae) it is porrected; but there are onlytwo, or at most four (as in the Syrphidae*), lancet-like organs. In theBot flies (CEstridse) the mouth is generally entirely rudimental.The larvae are soft fleshy grubs, with the body very contracted,and ringed, without any appearance of legs ; the front part is attenuated; the head is of a variable figure, and its external organsconsist of one or two unguiform appendages, accompanied occasionallyby fleshy lobes, and probably in all, by a kind of tongue destined toreceive the nutritious fluids upon which it feeds. These larvae undergothe coarctate kind of metamorphosis, never shedding the skin inwhich they are enclosed at the period of their exclusion from theegg, and which hardens and becomes, when the larva has attained itsfull size, a kind of cocoon in which the pupa is enclosed ; this iseffected in the following manner : the larva by degrees contractsitself and becomes much shorter, assuming an oval form; the anteriorpart, which before was narrow, increases in thickness, and is sometimeseven larger than the opposite extremity of the body ; the segmentsbecome more and more indistinct until the insect appears under theform of an oval chestnut-coloured mass, in which scarcely any tracesof rings or spiracles are visible. The body of the enclosed insect isdetached by degrees from the inner skin of this cocoon or ,as it may be considered, and appears under the figure of a verysoft elongated mass, in which none of the parts of the future insectare at first visible ; it soon, however, assumes the appearance of apupa, in which the rudimental limbs are traceable. From this cocoonthe perfect insect escapes by scaling off the interior part of the case,which it detaches by repeated efforts of the head, having also cast offthe pellicle in which it was encased whilst a pupa.These insects in the perfect state are attached to flowers, leaves,&c., very few being carnivorous, or feeding upon other insects.This stirps comprises the Linnaean genera Conops, Oestrus, andthe greater portion of Musca ; amongst the latter, a great number ofspecies were placed by Linnaeus, the proboscis of which encloses fourlancet-like organs (including the Syrphidae), instead of two, as in allthe other Athei'icera, furnished with a proboscis.Hence Macquart, relying on the structure of the mouth, arranges this familyamongst the tribes which have an incomplete instead of a coarctate pupa.556 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.The stirps may, therefore, be divided in the following manner : —Section 1. Proboscis with foi" internal pieces. (Fam. Syrphidae. )Section 2. Proboscis enclosing two pieces. (Fam. Conopsidas, Muscidas. )Section 3. Proboscis rudimental. (Fam. CEstridse.)A connexion between the Syrphidae and Conopsidae is thus effectedby means of such genera as Ceria and Conops ; and the communicationbetween the Conopsidae and Muscidae, by means of the generaStomoxys and Bucentes, as indicated by Latreille, is adopted. TheQistridse are not further removed from the Pupipara than the genusPhora, with which the true Diptera are generally terminated. Indeedthe imperfect structure of the mouth of the Qistridae appears to pointout the propriety of placing them at the end of the order. In theirparasitic nature they are also nearer to the Hippoboscidae than any ofthe preceding Diptera.The family Syrphid^*, composed for the most part of portions ofthe Linnaean genus Musca, is distinguished from the preceding familiesby the nature of its transformations, noticed above, and from the remainderof the Athericera in having the mouth more perfectlyorganised (Jiff. 130. 18. Syrphus Pyrastri) ; the proboscis is long, membranous,elbowed near the base, terminated by two large labial lobes,and enclosing in a channel on the upper surface four setae, viz. a longhorny upper lip, hollow, and notched at the tip ; a pair of slenderacute maxillae, and a slender acute tongue ; at the base of the maxillaeare also attached a pair of small inarticulate palpi, thickened at thetips (Jiff. 130. 19. mouth of Syrphus); the head is hemispherical,and generally covered for the greatest part by the eyes, especially inthe males ; the front of the head is often produced into a kind of beak,hollow beneath ; it is mostly short and broad, but sometimes elongated,cylindrical, or clavate at the tip, receiving on its under side thetrophi when at rest; the antennae (Jiff. 130. 20.) are 3-jointed, thethird joint being the largest, dilated, oval or reniform, &c., withoutany traces of articulation, and emitting a seta articulated at the baseand sometimes plumose (Jiff. 131. 3. ant. of Volucella) ; the abdomenis never inquired at the extremity ; the wings are much moreBiBLioGR. Refer, to the Syrphid^.Macquart. Dipteres dii Nord de France (Syrphies), 8vo. 1829.And the general works on the order.Litera. — SYRPHIDiE. 557nerved than those of the Muscidfe, having several perfect cells, thenerves closing the apical cells run parallel to the posterior margin ofthe wings ; the hind legs in many species are thickened and toothed.I have observed in some of the Helophili (whilst experimenting on theorigin of the buzzing of these insects) an organ not hitherto noticed,connected with the thoracic organs of respiration, and the instrumentswhereby the buzzing is produced; this consists of a slender elongatedfilament clothed with very long and delicate hairs, fixed near theunder side of the alla at its base, and at a little distance from thebase of the balancer.These insects are either of a moderate or large size, and generally ofvariegated colours ; they are very numerous, many species so muchresemble humble bees, wasps, and other Diptera, that they areconstantly mistaken for them by the inexperienced. In one genus,Volucella* (fig. 131. 2. Vol. mystacea), this similarity to the humblebees is of eminent service to the insects which deposit their eggs inthe nests of those bees, an admirable provision of nature, since, asMessrs. Kirby and Spence observe, " Did these intruders venturethemselves among the humble bees in a less kindred form, their liveswould probably pay the forfeit of their presumption."This family is of considerable extent, upwards of thirty genera, includingmore than 100 species, having been recorded as indigenous.In their perfect state they are particularly partial to flowers, especiallysuch as are syngenesious. They fly with amazing rapidity, and manydelight to hover immovably over certain spots, to which they willreturn, if disturbed for a considerable number of times.The typical genera are interesting on account of the peculiarity oftheir habits, the larvae feeding upon Aphides, amongst which theparent Syrphus has the instinct to deposit her eggs singly, so that theyoung are hatched in the midst of their food, which is soon devouredby these foes, which have but to extend their bodies in order to obtaina fresh victim. They are apodal grubs, destitute of eyes, and whichhave the mouth armed with a peculiar organ for suction, carefully describedby Reaumur (fig. 130. 21. larva of Syrphus Pyrastri) ; whenfull grown, which takes place in summer in a short time, the larvaSaint Fargeau has made some interesting observations on the occasional connectionof the opposite sexes of allied species of this genus, and the supposed productionsof hybrid individuals resulting therefrom. fenced. Methh, torn. x. p. 785. ;Ligne Animal, torn. v. p. 490. ; Bulletin Sci. Nat, Oct. 1828.)MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.attaches itself by a glutinous secretion to the leaves or stems ofplants, its body then contracts and hardens i^fig. 131. l.), and theinsect assumes the pupa state within the larva skin. De Geer (JS'Iem.tom. vi. tab. 6.) figures the transformation of Syrphus Ribesii andPyrastri, the larva of the latter of which is much more transverselywrinkled than the former. In pi. 7. he has figured the transformationsof another species, the larva of which is armed with transverse rows ofstrong spines. See also Reaumur's memoir on the enemies of theAphides (JSIem. tom. iii. and pi. 30, 31.), in which he has illustratedseveral species. Bouche has figured the larvae and pupae of Syrphus bal-teatsand taeniatus (^NafMrg. tom. v. fig. 1 — 6.) ; other species have beenillustrated by Rose {Ins. Belust. Muse. tab. 6.), and Chafed (Ab-hand.vol. iii. tab. 13.), Albin (^Ins. pi. 63. and 6Q.~), Swammerdambook of Nature, tab. 45. fig. 26 — 30.), Vallot in Annales Soc. Ent.France., 1834, p. QS. App. (S. balteatus and Pyrastri). The larva ofCeria Conopsoides, observed by Van Roserr ( Verz. Wurtemh. Dipt.p. 9.), resembles that of Syrphus.The larvae fig. 131. 4.) of the genus Volucella, above mentioned,are also insectivorous, but reside in the nests of Bombs and Vespae,upon the larvae of which they subsist ; they have the body long, narrowedin front, transversely wrinkled, with fine lateral points, and thetail armed with six radiating points ; the mouth is armed with twobifid mandibles, and with three pair of tentacula. The pupae of thisgenus have not been described, De Geer figuring only the larva andimago of V. bombylans {{Mem. tom. vi. tab. 8. fig. 4 — 9. ; and seeReaumur, Mem. tom. iv. pi. 33.). All the species are not, however,insectivorous, some feeding upon vegetable matter, and being eitherterrestrial or aquatic. Amongst the former are the species of Mi-litera.SYRPHIDiE. 559lesbia, Criorhina, and Xylota, the larvae of which live in the detritusof wood, as does also that of Chrysostom arcanum, observed byVan Roserr. That of Milesia vespiformis has been observed byBaumhauer ; it is thick, nearly oval, and of a reddish grey colour.The pupa of Criorhina apical was discovered by Schrank ; it is brown,convex above, flat beneath, the head furnished with two maxillarytumours, and the body terminated by a small tail. It closely resemblesthat of Xylota nigra, of which the exuviae alone has beenobserved, and which is also probably found in rotten wood. Thepupa, or rather the puparium, of Xylota Forum, communicated to meby M. Van Roserr, is short, and very much swollen, with two shortappendages in front, the extremity of the body armed at the sideswith short spines, and terminated by a short cylindrical tail {^fig.131.5.).The larva of Merton clavipes was found by Reaumur {{Mem.tom. iv. pi. 34.) and Van Roserr in the bulbs of Narcissi, of which itdevours the inside. It has the body fig. 131.6.) whitish, thick,cylindrical, rather pointed at each end ; the mouth is furnished withtwo scaly hooks, above which are two short bifid horns ; the extremityof the body has two stigmata placed posteriorly upon a short footstalk,and two pointed tubercles ; the real pupa is oval, with twoanterior horns connected with two vesicles which communicate withthe spiracles. Messrs. Serville and Saint Fargeau have confirmedthese observations {Encycl. Methh. tom. x. p. 525.) ; Bouche has figuredthe larva and pupa of Merton Narcissi nature. pi. 5. f. 7 — 11.).The pupa of Cheilosia ruficornis has been found at the root of atree by Fallen, who has not, however, described it ; and the larva ofSyria (Xylota) pipes in horse-dung by De Geer ; it is thicker infront than behind, with a small point on the head. That of Rhingiaappears to reside in cow-dung, Reaumur having found a full-grownspecimen in a vessel filled with that material.Van Roserr found the larva of Milesia Oxyacanthae in the rejectsof the river Neckar ( Ver. Wurtemb. Dipt. p. 10.) ; that ofBrachyopa bicolor in the exuding sap of trees, and that of Syrphusscutellum in rotten fungi. ibid.)The larvae of Eristalis and Theophilus fig. 131. 7. larva of H. tenax)differ materially from those of the rest of the family, not only in thesituations in which they reside, but also in their structure, fitting themfor their peculiar mode of life. It is in stagnant water and muddy560 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.places that they reside, and as it is generally at a considerable depthfrom the surface, the hind part of the body is furnished with a verylong and slender tube which serves as an organ of respiration ; hencethey have obtained the name of rat-tailed larvae; the mouth is surroundedby a cartilaginous margin, enclosing a conical fleshy organ ;the under side of the body is furnished with seven pairs of membranousfeet, provided with small hooks, being the only instanceof such appendages which occurs in the order. When full grownthey quit the water and bury themselves in the earth ; their bodyshortens, hardens, and becomes the puparium, in which their organs ofrespiration consist of four small horns placed in the front part of thebody i^fig' 131. 8, 9. represents the pupa extracted from the pupa-rum).Reaumur {JSlem. tom. iv. pi. 30 — 32) has illustrated thetransformations of several species of these rat-tailed larvae, as has alsoSwammerdam {Booh of Nature, pi. 38. fig. 9. N. B.).In the works of Latreille we find various methods of distribution ofthese insects into sectional and subjection groups, differing accordingto the organs selected to characterise the division, as, for instance,the length of the antennae and of the proboscis, the prolongation ofthe nasus, &c.The family CoNOPSiDiE, formed of the genus Conops of Linnaeusfig. 131. 10. Conops flavipes), is particularly distinguished by havingthe proboscis long, and always exserted, elbowed, and siphon-shaped,either cylindric, conic, or setaceous fig. 131. 12. rostrum of Conops) ;the mandibles and maxillary lancets are obsolete, those representingthe upper lip and tongue only remaining ; the palpi are minute andinarticulate ; the reticulation of the wings is nearly similar to that ofthe typical Muscidae ; the antennae have the seta very short, andeither terminal fig. 131. ll. ant. of Conops) or dorsal (as in Myopa);the abdomen is generally incurved at the extremity, with the maleorgans of generation exposed. These insects are generally prettilycoloured, and are met with upon plants and flowers. The species areparasites in the larva state upon bees, as first discovered by Baum-haue.Latreille also states that the Conops rufipes undergoes itstransformations in the interior of the abdomen of living humble bees,escaping at the margin of the segments, having reared four specimensLitera. MUSCIDiE. 561of the Conops in a box in which he had placed some of the Bombs ;and Messrs. Lachat and Audouin have published an interesting memoirupon an apod larva found in the intestines of Bombus lapidariuslAnn (Apis), which Latreille attributed to this species of Conops.This larva was very soft, whitish, 11-jointed, with a long neck and amouth armed With lips and hooks, and an anus vertically slit, and twolateral elevated plates supporting the two spiracles, (^Mtm. de la Soc.d'Hist. Nat. de Paris, tom. i.) M,, Robineau Desvoidy has also observeda species of Conops pursuing a Bombus with great patience, andflying on it several times (compte Rendus de VAcad. No. 23. 1836),as has also M. Dufour, who, moreover, possesses a Bombus terrestrial,from the anal part of which a Conops rufipes is dependent, the swollenextremity of the abdomen of the latter being retained within theformer. (Ann. Sc. Nat. Jan. 1837.) I have also frequently observedMyopa atra flying about sand-banks in which were the burrows ofvarious bees. Latreille has united to this family several small genera,which Meigen formed into a distinct family, Stomoxidse, having nearlythe appearance of the common fly, to which they are allied in thestructure of the antennae, abdomen, and wings ; the proboscis is, however,porrected and elbowed once or twice. Nitzsch has described aminute insect, which he refers to this family, under the name of Carushemiptera, of the size of a flea, with minute rudiments of wings, whichis parasitic on the birds of the genus Turns. (Germar's Mag. No. 3.p. 306.)The family Muscidte *, corresponding with a portion only of thegenus Musca of Linnaeus, or with that genus as restricted by Fabricius(fig, 13L 13. Echinomyia gross), is distinguished from all the otherBiBLioGR. Refer, to the Muscid^.Robineau Desvv icy. Essai sur les Myodaires (tom. i. of Mem. d. Sav. Etrang. deI'Acad. d. Scienc. Paris, 4to. 1830.Gimerthall. Observ. sur la Metamorph. de quelq. Dipteres de la Fam. d. Muscides,in Bull. Soc. Imp. Nature. Moscow, tom. i. 1829.Dufour. Mem. pour serv. a I'Hist. du g. Ocyptera, in Ann. Sc. Nat. tom. x.MacLeay. Notice of Ceratites cltriperda, Zool. Journ. vol. iv. 1829.Passerini. Observation sul Bruce dannegiatore delle Live, e sua Musca in cuisi transforma, in Giornale Agrarian Volcano, No. 10. Firenze, 1829, 8vo.Brigantine. On ditto, in Atti del Real Instit. di Napoli, tom. iii. 1822.Warwick, on Musca Munitions, in Trans. Linn. Soc. vol. ii. 1794.VOL. II. O O562 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Athericera by having the proboscis distinct, short, thick, membranaceous,terminated by two large labial lobes, and entirely retractilewithin the oral cavity, enclosing only two internal setiform organs*, anda pair of palpi fig' 131. 15. head and mouth of Musca); the antennaeare inarticulate, the third joint being the largest, and furnished with adorsal seta, chetum, or arista, sometimes articulated at the base (^fig-131.14. antenna of Echinomyia) ; the body is generally short androbust, and the legs and wings of moderate length ; the nerves of thelatter are much fewer in number than in the Syrphidae, and extend tothe posterior extremity of the wings ; the abdomen is not inflected atthe extremity.Corners. Beschr. der Schadl. Gerstenfliege Musca Tritici, in Nachricht d. Schles.Patriot. Gesellsch. p. 55.Bjerhander. Hist, of various obnoxious species, in Vetensk. Acad, nya Handll.1775—1793.Dormer. Sur 1. Psalidomyia fucicola, in Ann. Soc. Ent. France, 1833.Robert. 3 n. sp. Diastata, and 1 n. sp. Opomyza, in Ann. Soc. Ent. France, 1834.Walker. Obs. on Brit. sp. of Seaside, in Ent. Mag. No. 3. April 1833. — Ditto,on the Brit. Nephritis, in ditto. No. 11. — Ditto, Obs. on Brit. sp. of Pipun-culidffi, in ditto, No. 8. July, 1834.Keller. Gesch. d. gemeinen Stubenfliege. 4to. Nuremberg, 1764 and 1796.Sparring, om Flieg-maskar (1, of Musca meteoric), in Vet. Acad. Handll. 1778,Coquebert, in Bull. Soc. Philomat. an. 7 (Musca 8-punctata).Home, on the Foot of Musca domestica, Phil. Trans. 1816.Blackball, on ditto, in Linn. Trans, vol. xvi., and in Append, to ditto.Macquart, in Mem. Soc. Royale de Lille, 1833; Dipteres du Nord de France,(Muscides. ) — Ditto, in ditto (g. Tamiclea).Linnaeus. Dissert, bias Ins. sisters (Diopsis). 4to. Upsal, 1775.Latreille. Mem. sur le Diopsis, in Journ. Soc. Medicine et d'Hist. Nat. de Bordeaux,torn. i. p. 77. ; and Mag. Encycl. torn. vi. 1797.Dolman. Notes sur le g. Diopsis, in Vetensk. Acad. Handll. 1817; and in hisAnalecta Entomol.Westwood, in Trans. Linn. Soc. vol. xvii. Mong. Diopsis. — Ditto, in ditto. Supplementto ditto.Gu^rin. Achias oculatus, in ]Mag. Zool. 1831, Ins. No. 7.JViedemann. Achias g. illus. spec, nevis. KilicC, 8vo. 1830.Haliday, on the British Sphajroceridas, in Ent. Mag. — Ditto on Hydromyzidae, inAnn. Nat. Hist., June and August, 1839.Laporte, in Ann. Sci. Nat. tom. xxv. 1832 (n. g. Macrotoma).Zetterstedt, in Ann. Soc. Ent. de France, tom. iv. 1835 (Scandinav. Scatophaga).And the general works of Fabricius, Meigen, Macquart, Wiedemann, Haliday, Perty.In Diopsis, however, I have discovered a pair of maxillary lancets, and Mr.Curtis also detected Them in Lucina, Sapromyza, Borborus, and Drosophila,f In Phora the palpi are not concealed.DIP FERA. — MUSCID^. 563The insects of this family are of small and moderate size, and ofvery variable habits ; the larvae feeding upon various substances bothanimal and vegetable, and both in a dead and living state. Theselarvae are in general apod, soft, vermiform, annulated grubs, of a cylin-trial-conic form, attenuated in front, and thickened and obtusebehind, with a head of variable form, furnished with two retractilehooks ; the terminal segment of the body, in many, and also that immediatelysucceeding the head, furnished with two spiracles, in somespecies inserted upon horn-like appendages. The pupa, which is veryimmature in its form, with a swollen head (Reaumur, Mem. tom. iv.pi. 21.; Westwood, in Mag. Nat. Hist. March, 1835), is enclosedwithin the contracted and indurated skin of the larva, which sometimesassumes the form of an oval horny inarticulate mass, but in otherspecies retains more of its former appearance. De Geer {ISlem. tom. vi.tab. 1 — 6.) and Reaumur (JMtm. tom. iv.) have figured the transformationsof various species of this family ; but it is difficult, if not impossible,to determine with precision the insects represented by them.Some idea of the extent of this family may be obtained, from Meigenhaving described nearly 1700 European species; and about the samenumber (belonging, however, only to a portion of this family, andforming upwards of 350 genera), having been described by RobineauDesvoidy, in his Essai sur les Myodaires, a quarto volume of 812pages, most of which species are extra-European. In England 700 or800 species have already been recorded, which is probably not morethan two thirds or one half of the actual number of indigenous species.Hence, as well as from the great diversity in the structure andhabits of the numerous tribes of which the family is composed, it isnot surprising that the study of the Muscidge is attended with greatdifficulty, and can scarcely indeed be said at present to be more thancommenced. The works of Latreille, Meigen, Fallen, Wiedemann,Desvoidy, and Macquart, have done much to reduce this immensemass to something like order ; but the difficulties attending thesubject are far from being smoothed, nor can the arrangement ofthese tribes be perfected until we are better acquainted with thehabits and transformations of many of the groups.It is to Latreille, Fallen, Desvoidy, and Macquart, that we areindebted for the attempts which have been made to establish sub-familiesand other sectional groups, facilitating the study of thespecies ; but these groups differ in extent in the works of theseo o 2564 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.authors in consequence of the adoption of various characters as ofprimary importance.The corrected arrangement of these insects, as given by Fallen{Diptera Siiecice, vol. ii. p. 1. 1818—1825), is as follows: —Area alarum angular. Nulla setaanteiinarum dorsalis in(Hydroclio subterminalis).A. Proboscis vix ulla.Fam. 12. Hcematomyzides. ( Corpus polymorphum. ) Gen. Stomoxys, Oestrus, andHippobosca.B. Proboscis distinct.Squama sub alis magna.Fam. 13. Rhizomyzides. Oculi oblong. Os mystaceum, Nervus alarum eostalis,cum nerve tertio longitudinal connects. Gen. Phasia ( TherevaFall. ) Ocyptera.Fam. 14. Muscides. Oculi oblong. Os mystaceum. Nervus alar, eostaliscum nerve quarto longit. connects. Gen. Tachina (74 spa), Musca,(133 sp. ), Lisps.* Squama sub alis para.a. Palpi simplices.Fam. 15. Scatomyxides. Oculi rotunda. Os mystaceum. Antennae truncated. Gen.Scatomyza ( Seatopbaga), Corcyra.Fam. 16. Sciomyzides. Os nudum. Nervus alar, auxiliaries a secondary remote.Gen. Seddon, Tetanocera, Sciomyza, Dryomyza.Fam. 17. Ortalides. Os nudum. Nervi alar, auxiliaries et eus. approximate.Gen. Tetanus, Tephritis, Ortalis, Sepsis, Palloptera, Lonchasa, Laux-anna, Sapromyza.Fain. 18. Opomyzides. Os nudum. Nervi auxil. et secunda. coadunati. ,Tanypeza, Chyliza, Loxocera, Seatopbaga, Tenura, Opo-myra.Fam. 19. Heteromyzides. Os mystaceum. Antennae rotundity, subsessiles. Hete-romyza, Helomyza, Copromyza, Piophila.Fam. 20. Geomyzides. Os mystaceum. Seta antennae pectinata. Nervus alar.auxil. brevis, simplex. Gen. Geomyza, Drosophila.Fam. 2]. Oscinides. Os nudum. Antennae rotundity. Nervi alar, transversi approximate.Gen. Platycephala, Oscinis, Madiza, Gymnopa.Fam. 22. Agromyzides. Os submystaceum. Antennae 1. rotunda, 1. angulated.Nervus trans. ordain. 1. in medio, 1. paulo pone medium alae situs.Gen. Heteroneura, Agromyza, Anthony, Chlorosis.Fam. 23. Phytomyzides. Os saepius nudum. Antennae rotunda. Nervi transversiad basin alas retract. Gen. Dips, Phytomyza, Trineura.Fam. 24. OchtidicB. Antenna? angulated porrectaj. Nervus alar, auxiliaries brevis.Phyllomyza, Ochtiphila.B. Palpi dilatation.Fam. 25. Hydromyzides. Oculi rotunda. Antennae deflexed. Corpus ovatum.Gen. Hydromyza, Ocbtbera, Epliydra, Psilopa, Notopbila.Fain. 26. Dolichopodes).Litera. MUSCID^. 565We have already seen that in respect to then transformationsthe Dolichopodes do not enter amongst the Muscidae, whilst thefamily Hjematomyides is as unnatural a group as could well be conceived.The arrangement of Robineau Desvoidy differs materially fromthat of Fallen, and is founded not only on the characters of the imago,but on the habits of the larva. It is as follows : —1. CalypteratcR. Chetum distinct inarticulate. Calypta (the alulets) majora.Nervus transversus celliilas 7 C, semper manifests. Corpus breve, gros-sum,nigrum, nigro-nimium, nigro-ferruginous. Larva? in fidelis, radicibus,cadaverous, insectorumque larvls. QSstrus, Echinomyia, Syphon, Ta-china,Ocyptera, Gymnasia, Myopa, Trichopoda, Xysta, Phasia, Delia, present,Stomoxys, Musca, Resembling, Achias, &c.2. Mesomyda. Chetum obscure triarticulatum. Calypta jam minora. Nervustransversus cellulose 7 C, baud manifests. Corpus medium nigrum, ,nigro-cinereum. Larva; in folios, radicibus, stipitibus, et fungus.Anthomyia, Lisps, Drymeia, &c. &c..3. Malacosomm. Chetum obscure triarticulatum. Calypta minima. Nervustransversus ut ad Mesomydas. Corpus oblong, flavescens, flavum, flavorLarvae in fungus, in putridis, stertorous, cinque phantasm medullainterior. Thryeophora, Scatophaga, &c.4. Palmyra. Chetum saepius quasi inarticulate. Calypta quasi nulla. Nervustransversus ut ad Mesomydas. Alae augustines. Corpus oblong necnonet filiform, brunneo-flavescens, flavian. Larvae in plants hominis, litto-radius, aquatic. Loxocera, Seddon, Tetanocera, Dyctia, &c.5. Phytomyda. Chetum quasi inarticulate Calypta nulla. Nervus transversusut ad Mesomydas. Corpus polite, delicately, saepius filiform, nigro-nimium,nigro-flaveolum. Larva; in plants et fractious interdum et in putridis.Oscinis, Calobata, Micropeza, &c.6. Aciphorece. Chetum quasi inarticulate. Calypta utpote nulla. Nervustransversus ut ad Mesomydas. Ale solito variegated. Corpus mediocre .Anus $ solide status et exterior. Larvae in gallus corti-callousphantasm. Tephritis, &c.7. NapeeellcB. Chetum quasi inarticulate tertio antenna. articulo saepius orbicular.Calypta nulla. Frons et facies saepius quadratic. Corpus parum,atro-brunnicans. Larva in putridis vegetation animaliumque. Ochthera,Sphferocera, &c.8. MicromydiE. Chetum simplex. Calypta quasi nulla. Nervus transversus cellula;7 C, nullus. Corpus parum, brunneum, brune-flavum, flavum, flava.pallium. Vertebra $ interior. Larvas in glorious, seminibus, et in Crucis.(Not yet described in detail).9. Miiciphorea. Chetum quasi inarticulate. Calypta utpote nulla, Nervustransversus cellulae 7 C, nullus. Corpus parum delipatum, flavescens, palladium.Larvffi in succis putridis vegetation animaliumque. (The detailsof this stirps not yet published).o o 3566 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Each of these tribes is subdivided into a great number of minorsections and an immense number of genera, founded in many instancesupon very trivial characters. Another great objection to the work ofRobineau Desvoidy consists in his negligence in not citing the worksof Meigen and Fallen, and his continual substitution of his own newnames for the long-established specific names of Linnaeus and Fabricius.Latreille also (jRegf)ie An. tom. v. p. 509.) objects to the distributionproposed as above, with the exception of the group Calypterata^,which he asserts to be equivalent to the first section of the family,Which in his Families Naturelles he had proposed under the nameof Creophila. This assertion is not, however, correct, because Desvoidy first introduced (and as it appears to me naturally)into this family and tribe, Stomoxys and the allied genera, which La-triflealways arranged with Conops ; and secondly, because R. Des-voidalso added to the Calypteratae the family CEstridse, whichLatreille always (and naturally) kept distinct. With these exceptions,the two groups are nearly identical. The Mesomydae R, D. also nearlycorrespond with Latreille's 2d section, Anthomyzides. The 3d group,Malacosomae of i?. D., forms part of Latreille's eth section, Scatoiny-sides ; other portions of which last, together with Latreille's 5thsection, DoUchocera, form the Palmyra? R. D., whilst the Phyto-mydae R. D. consist of still further portions of Latreille's Scatomy-sides, and his 6th section Leptopodites. The Aciphorese R. D. formpart of Latreille's 7th section, Carpomyzce ; and the NapjEella) R. D.nearly correspond with Latreille's 3d section, Hydromyzides. La-triflehas proposed two additional sections in the Regne Animal :namely, the Gymnomyzides, composed of the genera Lauxania, Ho-madura,Gymnoniyza, &c. ; and Hypocera, composed of the single anomalousgenus Phora.M. Macquart, in his Hist. Nat. d. Dipteres, has sought to simplifythe arrangement of these tribes, and at the same time to combine theviews of his predecessors in the following distribution: —Section 1. Trophies, having a inarticulate or inarticulate style to the antennae,large alulets, and with the first posterior cell of the wings closed or nearly closed,corresponding with Latreille's Creophila, with the addition of Stomoxys, &c.with Robineau Desvoidy's Calypterata2, after the removal of Oestrus andMyopa, and with Fallen's Rhizomyzides and Muscides.Section 2. A>itliom>jzides, having an inarticulate style to the antenna?, the first posteriorcell opened, the front narrow, and the alulets small or most rate-sized,Litera. MUSCIDiE. 567and corresponding with the Anthomyzides of Latreille, and the MesomydaB ofRobineau Desvoidy.Section 3. Acalyptei'es, differing from the Anthomyzides in having the front broadin both sexes, and the alulets rudimental or wanting, and corresponding withLatreille's seven terminal sections, as well as with the seven terminal groups ofRobineau Desvoidy.The third section is divided, however, by Macquart into seventeensubscribes ;" namely, DoHchoceres, Loxocerides, Cordylurides, ScanPsilomydes, Ortalidees, Nephritis, Sepsidees, Leptopo-dites, Thyreophorides, Lichens, Lauxanides, Hydromyzides, Piophi-hides, Sphserocerides, Heteromyzides, and Hypoceres, of which subscribesMacquart might well remark, that they " etonnent Imagination parInfinite des modifications dans les organes et dans les moeurs." fop.Cit. torn. ii. p. 357.) The anomalous genus Lonchoptera {JiQ' 132. 15.wring) is also placed in this family by Latreille and Fallen, but Meigenand Macquart form it into a distinct family.In the following account of the transformations of these insects, Ihave adopted the arrangement of M. Macquart, as being the mostrecent and most complete yet published.The Machines are parasitic upon other insects, the females depositingtheir eggs upon the bodies of caterpillars, &c. whence the nameMusca Larvarum, given to the typical species, and the young larvaepenetrating into the body as soon as born, where they subsist uponthe adipose matter so abundant in the interior, thus resembling theIchneumonidge. It was long ago observed by Godart and other earlynaturalists, that these flies were produced from the caterpillars andchrysalides of Lepidopterous insects; and Serville has reared as manyas eighty specimens from a single larva of Acherontia Atropos. Otherspecies were observed by Reaumur and De Geer, but recent observationshave proved that the other orders of insects are similarlysubject to these attacks.L. Dufour has given the details of a species of Tachina, which hereared from a larva found in the intestines of Cassia viridis, one ofthe tortoise beetles, as well as of Ocyptera bicolor, which he rearedfrom Pentatoma grisea. ann. de Sci. Nat. March, 1827.) The larvaof the latter {Jjg. 131. 16.) has the body terminated by a long caudalsiphon fig. 131. 17. head, and 131. 18. apex of siphon of this larva,131. 19. puparium of the same species). M. Von Winter has observedthat Tachina pacta is parasitic upon Carabus germanus and568 Moderns CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.violates. (Isis, 1831, No. 7.) M. St, Fargeau has also observed aspecies of Myopia emerging from the body of one of the Curculio(according to Macquart). The same author has also observedvarious species of these insects unceasing in their endeavours to deposittheir eggs in the nests of various Hymenoptera, already provisionedwith the bodies of other insects, upon the store of provisions inwhich the parasitic larva, first hatched, is fed ; and thus the real inhabitantof the cell is starved to death, its supply of food being devoured.Mr. Curtis also mentions that he had observed Miltogrammapunctata pursuing Colletes bodies. (Brit. Ent. pi. 529.) The bee,however, only provisions its nest with pollen paste ; so that, if theMiltogramma were its parasite, it must destroy its larva. I haveobserved other species, which frequent the burrows of other .R. Desvoidy states that he has observed a spider withits body pierced, and several paria of Machine close to it ; and Ihave reared a species of Tachina from masses of spiders' eggs. Bouchehas described a species of Tachina (T. influx, forming, with two otherspecies, a distinct subgenus, Compilers), the larva of which is parasiticin the larva of Tenthredo grossulariata. The larvae of Ta. cincinnati(Bouche, Nature. tab. 5. f. 15., and my Jig. 131. 20.) have thesegments much constricted, and of nearly equal thickness throughout;the head is very small ; the last segment bears two spiracles, andis much smaller than the preceding segment (Jig. 131. 21. representsone of the pro thoracic spiracles). Robineau Desvoidy states that hepossessed the pupa of one of these insects, which lived in the body ofone of the Noctuidae, but which was in its turn filled with a greatquantity of the larvae of smaller Myodaires.* This author has proposeda variety of interesting questions as to the habits of the Machineand especially with reference to certain species or tribes beingappropriated to particular groups or species on which they are parasitic.(See also Gimerthall on the transformations of various speciesof Tachina, in Bull. Soc. Naturalists de Moscow, 1829, No. 4, 5. ;Reaumur, Mem. tom. ii. pi. 36.)Sarcophaga (S. carrara, the flesh-fly, &c.) and the allied genera arevery peculiar in their mode of development. The female being viviparous,the ovaries are of very large size, and arranged in a spiralIn the Mar, of Nat. Hlsl. No. 25. is a notice of the parasitic larva; of TachinaLarvarum, bcin^; siil)jcct to the parasitic attacks of Ptcronialidcoiis insects.Litera. MUSCID^.manner, in which the larvae are developed, sometimes to the numberof 20,000. (De Geer, 3Iem. torn. vi. pi. 3. fig. 5—18. ; Reaumur, Mem.torn. iv. pi. 29.) It is upon animal matter, as weW as upon other substancesin a state of decomposition, that these young larvae are deposited.Bouche has described the larvae of several species. Those ofthe genus Cynomyia have only been found on the dead bodies ofdogs.Fis. 132.Stomoxys and the immediately allied genera (which, althoughordinarily arranged with the Conopidae, are in all respects, except themouth fig. 132. 8. head and geniculated mouth of Siphon), mostclosely allied to the typical Muscidas) frequent our apartments, andare remarkable for their habit of piercing our flesh, even if covered byclothes, for the purpose of sucking the blood. The larva of St. cal-citrons,observed by Bouche, lives in horse-dung, and closely resemblesthat of Musca domestica.The species of the subgenera Lucilia (Musca Caesar, the blue-bottlefly) and Calliphora (Musca vomitoria, the meat-fly, &c.) have the instinctto deposit their eggs (well known under the name of fly-blows)upon meat and other dead animal matter.* The larvae are soonhatched, and are of an elongated conical form, pointed to the head,which is furnished with two fleshy horns, and the mouth is furnishedwith one or two corneous hooks; the hind part of the body is truncated,and furnished with a pair of spiracles in Lucilia, and with threepain's in Calliphora. When the period of transformation is arrived,these larvae descend into the ground, where they assume the pupastate, enclosed in their own larva skin, which is hard, short, and testisinstances have been recorded of these and allied species depositingtheir eggs in the wounds of persons incautiously sleeping in the open air. (SeeKirby and Spence. )570 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.tune of any appearance of articulation. The entire development ofthese insects is effected in a very short time in the summer. Meigenhas given some curious calculations as to the multiplication of theseinsects (vol. v. p. 20.). Rdsel has given the details of the history of oneof these meat-flies ; the species, however, is difficult to be determined.{Ins. Belust. vol. ii. tab. 9, 10., Muscidum.) Mr. Newport hasalso given an excellent figure of one of these larvae (art. Insect, inCyclop, of Anat. p. 21., and my Jig. 132. I — 2. anterior part of thebody still more highly magnified), as has also Reaumur (tom. iv. pi. 12.fig. 1 — 9.). (See, also, the work of Keller on the domestic fly, withfour plates, above referred to.)The species of the subgenus Musca, as restricted to Musca domestica,the small common house-fly, are found more especially in houses,settling upon and sipping at almost every article of food. Their larvaeare found in dung, &c. as are also those of the Mesembrinae. Thelarva of M. domestica is elongated, slightly attenuated in front, witha small head ; and the terminal segment bearing a pair of spiracles,entire, and smaller than the preceding, without any radiating points.The larva of M. Hortorum is much thicker behind, with a larger head.Bouche has figured these larvae, and has described those of severalother species. De Geer has also given the details of the transformationsof M. domestica. (mem. tom. vi. pi. 4. fig. 1 — 10.)The species of the genus Anthomyia and the allied genera undergotheir transformations in rotten vegetable matter, or in manure, excrement,«S:c. Bouche has described the larvae of many species of Anthomyia,some of which reside in cow-dung, and others in the rootsof vegetables, such as onions, radishes, and other vegetable matter,earth, rotten leaves, &c. The species which feed on onions andother garden plants are occasionally very obnoxious. (See my memoiron Anthomyia Parum in Gardener s Mag. No. 87.) Fig. 132. 3. representsthis species, 4. its antennae, 5. its larva magnified, and 6. itspuparium. (See also De Geer, Mem. tom. vi. tab. 5. fig. 2 — 7.) Twoother species, Anthomyia Brassicae and Lactucarum, are also obnoxiousto cabbage and lettuce plants. (See Bouche, and Kollar, Ohnox.Ins., transl., p. 160.)Bouche has very properly separated from Anthomyia some species,the larvae of which have the body much depressed, narrowed towardsthe front, with the sides furnished with long setose filaments.* ToFallen observes upon his Musca canicularis, " Larvae onisciformes e stomachhominem egress, ad hand vel M. meteoric corsican pertinent ? "^Litera. — MUSCID^. 571this group belong Anti. canicularis Meig. and salaries Meig. Bouchefound the larvae of the former insect in rotten vegetables * and decayedcheese, and those of the latter in human excrement. The Rev. L.Jenyns has given a very detailed account of some of these larvae, withlateral filaments (^^. 132. 7.),which were discharged from the intestinesof a clergyman still alive, and which are assigned to Anti. canicularis.(trans. Ent. Soc. vol. ii.) In the 3Iedizm. Correspondenzhlatt for 1832an account is given of the occurrence of the larva of A. salaries in thehuman body. In the Memoirs of the Medical Society of London, vol. ii.1789, Dr. White also detailed the case of a patient who dischargedsimilar larvae, described, but erroneously, as those of Musca carnaria.fSwammerdam has selected one of these filamentous larvae (being theoffspring of the common fly of privies) to illustrate his fourth orderof mutations. (book of Nature, pi. 38. fig. 1 — 8.) Meigen refersthis figure to Anthomyia canicularis.The larva of Ca^nosia vaccarum Bouche lives in cow-dung, and resemblesthat of Musca domestica.M. Robineau Desvoidy observed a female of the genus Lisps depositingits eggs upon the petals of a Nymphs. Bouche, however,describes the larva of L. tentaculata as living in puddles of water(Pfutzen), and also in human excrement ; it resembles that of Muscastabulans, but is more pointed in front.The larvae of the genus Pegomyia, or, at least, P. Hyoscyami, devourthe parenchyma of the leaves of various plants, living betweenthe two surfaces. Mr. Haliday informs me that a number of speciesare known to be fungivorous, as P. fulness, &c. The mouth of theselarvae is furnished with a corneous instrument in the shape of S, whichmoves round a small fixed point, enabling them to scrape up the softparenchyma of the leaf.Amongst the Acalypterse we find the habits of the majority agreehave reared a species of Anthomyia from larva; found in rotten fungi, closelyresembling Reaumur's fig. 1, 2. pi. 13. torn. iv. the lateral appendages of which arebristles instead of membranous pilose filaments.f The occurrence of these larva; in the human intestines, although singular, maybesatisfactorily accounted for in various ways ; but at the meeting of the EntomologicalSociety on the 4th of April, 1840, Professor Owen exhibited a Dipterouslarva (distinct from that of Anthomyia canicularis, and wanting the lateral filaments),several of which had been discharged from the urinary bladder of a patient.See, also, other similar cases, noticed in Germar's Mag vol. iii. p. 419. The Rev.F. W. Hope has collected a great number of cases of these occasionally intestinallarvas in his memoir on that subject.572 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.ing with those of the Anthomyzides rather than with the Creophilaejthe larvae feeding upon dead animal matter or upon plants, either aliveor in a state of decomposition. The species of Scatophaga revel uponexcrement, in which also they deposit their eggs, which are of an ovalform, but have two broad divergent appendages at the upper end ; theobject of which appears to be to prevent them from sinking in thematter in which they are deposited. The larvae of this genus are conical,broadest behind, with the last segment armed with twelve orfourteen fleshy points. (Bouche, Nature. p. 93, 94<. ; see also Reaumur,Mem. torn. iv. pi. 27.)The species of Sapromyza, as the name implies, are developed inanimal matters in a state of decomposition, whilst the larvae of Helo-myra live in fungi ; that of H. tuberivora, the largest species in thegenus, inhabits the truffle. This larva, observed by Reaumur {{Mem.torn. iv. pi. 27. fig. 13 — 16.), has two hooks at the anterior extremity,which, as well as the posterior extremity, bears two spiracles.Bouche has observed the transformations of Sepsis cylindrica andLeachiiii, the larvae of which reside by thousands in human excrement.They are cylindrical, attenuated in front, with the terminal segmentconical, bearing two spiracles. The pupa is shorter, with the twocircular appendages of the terminal segment elongated, with a shortpoint on their upper side. Mr. Haliday informs me that the larva andpupa of S. cynipsea do not resemble Douche's characters of the otherspecies. They have the posterior extremity attenuated and forked,the spiracles terminating the branches ; thus approaching the form ofHydra.The larva of Dorycera graminum is aquatic ; it lives amongst theleaves of water plants, and is of a green colour. The pupa is brown,the front furnished with two small horns, and a tubercle is placed oneach side, near the middle of the body. De Geer has figured thelarvae and pupa; of several subcutaneous species {{Mem, torn. vi. tab. 5.fig. 8 — 16.), but omitting the perfect state.The larva of Ortalis Crash feeds on the pulpit of the cherry(Reaumur, Mem. torn. ii. pi. 38.) ; that of Decus Oleae feeds on theolive, and often commits great injury. It is known to the natives ofProvence under the name of Chiron ; it is of a whitish colour; itsmouth is furnished with two hooks ; it at first feeds on the youngleaves, but afterwards penetrates into the fruit. (See the memoirs ofPasserini on this insect in the Giornale Agrarian Volcano, No. 10. ;Litera. MUSCID^. 573as well as a memoir by Brigantine in the Atti del Real Instit di Napoli,torn. iii. 1822.) A small but beautiful allied insect has been describedin detail by Mr. MacLeay (Zool II. No. 16. 18.), under the name ofCeratites citriperda, the larva of which feeds upon the pulp of ripeoranges. The male is remarkable for possessing two minute clavatefilaments on the crown of the head.The females of many of the species of Tephritis, and the subgeneraseparated therefrom, deposit their eggs in growing plants by the assistanceof their elongated ovipositor ; causing also the production ofgalls of large size, in which the larvas reside, and the flies are produced; such is especially Urophora Cardui. (Reaum. Mem. torn. iii.pi. ^i, 45.; Swammerdam, Book of Nature, pi. 45. fig. 1. ; Fallenin Swed, Trans. 1814, Monogr. Swed. Nephritis.) De Geer hasalso figured the history of two species of Tephritis. (Mem. torn. vi.tab. 2. fig. 6— 18.)The larvae of other species are developed and reside in the parts offructification of different plants, which they devour. Such is the casewith Tephr. Arctic, which Mr. Curtis states to have been reared frompupa found in the calyx of Centaurea Cydnus. Its larva is also statedto be found on Artium lappa and Leontodon taraxacum. M. Blot hasdetailed the history of a genus allied to Tephritis, named Myopites,in Bulletin de Set. Nat. September 1828. I have reared two speciesof Tephritis from subcutaneous larvae, namely, Tephritis (Euleia) Ono-ordinis, from celery leaves, to which it is very injurious, and Tephritis(Acadia) Artemisia, from the leaves of chrysanthemums. I have publisheda memoir on these two insects in the Gardener's Magazine,March, 1839. The larva of Trypeta continua, according to Bouche,lives in the berry of Rosa villa ; that of Psila Rose lives in theroot of the carrot, to which plant it is sometimes very destructive.(See Kollar's Obnox. Ins. transl. p. 160.) The larvae and pupae ofPhytomyza lateralis are found in the centre of the receptacles of Pyrethruminodorum (corn feverfew), there being seldom more than onein each. Mr. Curtis has given no description of their preparatorystates. The larvae of Ph. flava are subcutaneous in the leaves of Scolopendriumvulgare (Doubleday, in Entomol. Mag. No. 14. p. 415.) ;those of P.obscurella in the leaves of the holly, and those of P. flavicepsin those of the woodbine. (Haliday,in ditto, No. 17.p. 147.) The cheesemaggot, so well known for its remarkable saltatorial powers, is the larvaof Piophila Case Fall. Its habits and structure have been fully MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.tailed by Swammerdam book of Nature, pi. 43.), as well as by Kirbyand Spence.The larvae of Drosophila cellars inhabit fermented liquids, in cellarsand similar places. They are white, and have the mouth armedwith two corneous jaws, Mr. Haliday reared Drosophila febrisfrom pupee found in boleti. The puparium figured by Curtis (C E.p. ^TS.) is oblong-ovate, with two frontal horns, setose at the tip, andwith two shorter anal appendages.Borborus nitidus resides, in the larva state, in rotten fungi, as observedby M. Robert. (Macqq. Dipt, tom.ii. p. 566.) Mr. Haliday hasgiven a detailed description of the larva of Borborus echinus in hismonograph on the Borborides, published in the Entomol. Mag. No. 14.It resembles that of Scatophaga stercoraria in general form. The terminalsegment has the usual conic protuberances behind the analcleft, and its margin bears a circle of smaller ones : the openings ofthe anterior and posterior trachea; are of the usual form ; the formerfan-like, and each of the latter consisting of three oblong spiracles,surrounded by a dark ring. The larvae of Ulidia demandata was observedby Bouche in old horse-dung, by thousands. nature. p. 98.)Oscinis Frit, is a small species, which commits great ravages in thebarley crops of Sweden. Other species, allied to this insect, are injuriousto wheat crops ; such are Chlorops Pavilions (Bjerkander, inTrans, Acad. Stochh. 1778, and Warwick, in Linn. Trans, vol. ii),also Chlorops glabra (Westwood, in Gardener s Magazine, vol. xiii.p. 289.). Olivier, also, in his 1st Memoire sur quelques Insectes quiattaquent les Cereales (Paris, 1813), has described several allied speslies which are injurious to wheat crops. The larvae of another species,referred doubtingly by Macquart to the same genus (Musca LepraeLining), is considered as the cause of the disease to which the negroesof South America are subject, named Elephantiasis.Many of the species of Ephydra frequent salt marshy situations.The larva of the Silesian species, E. linaria, was observed by Klugin great numbers in salt boilers (Salzsiederei). The larva is cylindrical,without feet, and the terminal segment of the body very long, andterminated by a long fork, the prongs of which support the spiraclesat the tip; the puparium scarcely differs from the larva (my Jig. 132.11. ; Bouche, Natiirg. pi. 6. fig. 13.).The larvae of the genus Phora are supposed by Macquart to feedupon moist or decomposing substances ; although Bouche states thatLitera. Bestride. 575he had seen many specimens of the larva of Phora Sphingidis emergefrom the body of a sphinx,, and Mr. Carpenter found the larvae ofPhora atricapelia (Curtis, B. E. p. 437.) hanging to the pupae of Cochineal,which soon afterwards underwent their transformations. I haverepeatedly observed, on disturbing the nest of the common brown gardenant, a very minute species of Phora hovering over and flying uponthe ants. The larva of Phora Dauci (^fig- 132. 12.) was, however,observed by Bouche in rotten radishes ; it is cylindrical, somewhatnarrowed in front, and the terminal segment has eight radiatingpointed appendages, and also bears the two spiracles on its upperside. The perfect insect materially differs from the rest of the familyin the neuration of the wings (fig. 132. 13. Phora — ? 14. its antenna).Amongst the exotic species of this family many exhibit remarkablevariations of structure : of these, the more striking are the splendidUtilise, from New Holland ; the Indian genus Celyphus, in which thescutellum is dilated into an immense semi-hemispherical mass, coveringthe body, as in the Scutellarse ; the genus Diopsis has the sides ofthe head extended into a pair of long inarticulate horns, at the extremityof which the eyes and antennae are placed (^fig- 132. 9. DiopsisMeigenii, lo. mouth of D. Sykes). Wiedemann has described someallied and equally singular genera, chiefly from Brazil ; and DiateinaHolhymenioides Westiu. (Microtoma Peleterii Lap.) has exceedinglylong legs, and antennae considerably longer than the body, greatlyresembling the Hemipterous genus Holhymenia.The family of the Bot flies, Bestride*, corresponding with the Linnaeangenus (Estrus fig. 132. 16. Gasterophilus Equi), is destineRefer, to the Bestride.Linnaeus. Om Renarnas bromskulor (CEstr. Tai-anti), inVetensk. Acad. Handll. ) 739 ;and in Act. Soc. Upsal. 1741.Treiwald. Utter ligare Ron, &c. Experiments on CEstr. Tarandi, in Vet. Acad.Handll. 1739.Arture. Observ. sur I'Esp. de Ver nomme Macaque, in Mem. Acad. Sci. Paris,1753.Modeer. Styng-flieg slate (Monogr. Cestus, 10 spa), in Vetensk. Acad. Handll.1786.Fischer, J. L. Observ. d. CEstr. vino atque bovine, 4 pi. 4to. Leipsic, 1787;and in Werner's work on intestinal worms, Svo. Leipsic, 1788.Bracy Clark. Observ. on the g. Oestrus, in Trans. Linn. Soc. vol. iii. 1797. —5Y6 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.gushed from all the other Athericeraby having the mouth completelyobsolete, no other traces being visible except two or three minute fleshytubercles fig. 132. 17. front of head of Gast. Equi), except in thegenus Cephenemyia Latr. (CEstr. Trompe), in which both the palpi andproboscis are visible. In Cuterebra, also, the proboscis is distinct andretractile. The antennae are very short ; the terminal joint rounded,and emitting a dorsal seta, thickened and articulated at the base {fig-132.18.); the wings are divaricate, the alulets very large, hidingthe balancers. The nervures are ^^v^ in number, in some they extendto the tip of the wing, as in Gasterophilus Equi ; in others theyform cells, having the external nerve running parallel to the marginof the wing. These insects, whose habits are so formidable, andwhose economy is so extraordinary, have the appearance of large hairyflies, the hairs being often coloured in transverse bands.Malpighi, Vallisnieri, Reaumur man. tom. iv. mem. 12. pi. 34 — 38.,and tom. v. pi, 9.), De Geer {{Mem. tom. vi. tab. 15), and Fischerdevoted considerable attention to the elucidation of the natural historyof this genus, but it is to our own countryman, Bracy Clark, thatwe are indebted for a history of many of the species of this family,which leaves nothing farther to be desired.Each species of Oestrus is parasitic upon a peculiar species ofmammiferous herbivorous animal, and selects, with wonderful instinct,as the spot in which to deposit its eggs, that portion of the body of theDit4to, An Essay on the Bots of Horses and other Animals, 4to. 1815 Dit4to,on the Insects called Oistros by the Ancients, in ditto, tom. xv. 1827.Maclean, on the Insect called Oistros by the ancient Greeks, and Asilos by theRomans, in ditto, tom. xiv. 1824. . — Ditto, on the Oestrus of Mr. Bracy Clark,in Zool. Journ. tom. i. and v.Keferstein. Remarques sur I'Oistros des Anciens. Isis, 1827.Leach, on the Arrangement of the Qistrideous Insects, in Wernerian Trans. 1817.Isidore Geoffroy Saint Hilaire. Report on Trois Notices relatives a I'Existeiice derOSstre chez Homme, in Ann. Soc. Ent. de France, tom. ii. 1833.Metaxa. Hist, de deux Larves d'OEstres extracted de 1' Oreille d'un Paysan, inMem. de Zool. Medical. 8vo. Rome, 1835.• ? Von Oestrus, &c. On the QLstrus which attacks Man in Peru (sinNeuen Nord. Beytr. band I . ).Schroeder. Organ, interne de la Larve de I'Qistre de Cheval, in Ferussac Bull.1831. No. 1.Human. Ueber die Bremen Larven, im Magen der Pierce. 8vo. 2 pi. Berlin,1837.And the general works of Meigeti, Curtis, Wiedemann, Acquaint, Fahricius, sc.Litera. — (Astride. 577animal which is best adapted for the welfare of its progeny, that is,in places either where the larva?, when hatched, may burrow into theback, or other part of the body, or where the larvae may be removedby the tongue of the animal itself into its mouth, and thenceto the stomach ; in which, exposed to a temperature of more than 100degrees of Fahrenheit, they remain until full grown, when in eithercase they quit the body, and making their way to the earth, undergotheir transformations under ground. The ox, horse, ass, reindeer,stag, antelope, camel, sheep, hare, and rhinoceros *, are the onlyquadrupeds hitherto observed to be subject to the attacks of theseinsects, which appear to instil, as their name implies, a surprisingdegree of dread f amongst these animals whenever they make theirappearance. The larvae exhibit three principal variations in their habits,being either cutaneous, when the grubs (commonly called Worries,Morals, or Warbles) reside in tumours beneath the skin of theanimal attacked ; cervical, when the grubs burrow into the maxillaryand frontal sinuses through the nostrils ; or gastric, when the grubs,called in this case bots, are introduced into the stomach. It wouldseem, however, that these insects occasionally extend their attacks evento man ; Humboldt having observed some of the South AmericanIndians whose abdomen was covered with small tumours, produced, aswas supposed, by the larvae of some Oestrus. Moreover larvae, apparentlybelonging to this family, have been extracted from the maxillaryand frontal sinuses of the human body. (Latreille, R. An. v. 502.)For further notices upon the occurrence of larvae of this family inthe human body, I must refer to a Memoir by Say, in the Transactionsof the Acad, of Natural Scienc. Philadelphia. vol. ii., and J3idl.Scienc. Nat., 1823, part 8., in which is contained the description of aAn ffistrideous larva, obtained from the body of a rhinoceros, is contained inthe Museum of the College of Surgeons. The imago is not known. Can it be theZimb ? M. Rob. Desvoidy has communicated to the Academic des Sciences anotice of the occurrence of one of these insects in a badger ( Comptes Rendus, \ 836,No. 2.); and M. Vallot, their existence in the bodies of monkies. (See the memoirof M. Saint Hilaire, noticed above. ) M. V. Audouin has shown me the larva ofan Oestrus which infests Antilope reduce, which is remarkable for having some ofthe central segments of the body furnished with very large fleshy tubercles ; likewisethe larva of another exotic species, which, instead of the ordinary double rowof reflexed points, is entirely covered with minute horny acute tubercles, the sidesof which, when magnified, are found to be serrated.f See p. 540. ante, for a notice of the controversy between Messrs. B. Clark andMacLeay, relative to the oTa-rfoi; of the ancients.VOL. ir. p p578 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.larva not exactly agreeing with any of the known species of Bestrideslarvae, and which Dr. Brick had himself extracted from a tumourin his thigh. Mr. E. Doubled', whose recent Entomologicaltour in America has added such stores of novelties to our museums,has informed me that he suffered from the presence of a larva inthe calf of one of his legs, which unfortunately he destroyed. M.Goudot, the Entomologist, whilst travelling in America, was also similarlyattacked. Mr. Cowslip has also described two cases observedin South America, in one of which the larva was found in the back,and in the other in the scrotum.* He has also published a figure of oneof these larvae. A similar case to the last has also been recorded byM. Moulin, and M. Guerin has also communicated another case fromMartinique to the Academic des Sciences, upon which M. I. G. SaintHilaire has published a report in the A?in. Soc. Ent. de France, 1833,p. 518., and see also a notice by M. V. Audouin of an additional caseinthe same volume, App. p. 65. Likewise the Mag. of Nat. Hist, No.27.} and Arture's Memoire sur l' Espece de Ver nomme Macaque.The larvae of the CEstrldae are, in general, thick fleshy grubs, somewhatattenuated towards the head, not furnished with legs. Their bodyis composed of 1 1 segments, exclusive of the head ; furnished withminute tubercles and spines, the latter often arranged in rows, whichfacilitate their progression, and are the cause of great irritation to theanimals upon which they are parasitic. The chief respiratory organsare placed upon a scaly plate at the posterior extremity of the body,which is thicker than the anterior. It would seem that the mouth ofthe cutaneous larvae is composed only of fleshy tubercles, whilst thatof the cervical and gastric species is always furnished with two strongunguiform appendages. How far these larvae (which subsist on thepurulent humours secreted by the animals on which they are parasitic,and originating in the irritation produced by their presence) arereally detrimental to the animals on which they are parasitic, is a matterof controversy. Mr. B. Clark, whose long experience in veterinarymatters gives great weight to his opinion, maintains that they arerather beneficial than otherwise ; a contrary opinion has been maintainedby Mr. Sells, in a memoir on these insects presented to theEntomological Society, as well as by some other authors. (See Kollar,Ohnox. Ins. Translate.) The pupa state is passed under ground, the" Some account of two cases of inflammatory tumour produced by Oestrushumanum."Litera. Bestride. 579skin of the grub becoming a cocoon for the inclosed nymph, as in theother insects undergoing a coarctate transition.The horse bot-fly deposits its eggs on the hairs of those parts ofthe horse, which can be easily reached by the tongue of the animal, bywhich means the larvae are conveyed into the stomach. The larvaeof this species {^fig- 132. 19.) are VQxy strongly armed with short thickspines, directed backwards*, and arranged in double transverse rowsat the base of each segment of the body ; the head is very small ; itsupper part is produced into two tubercles, which may possibly be ocelli;the maxillae, judging them to be such from their situation, are a pairof very strong hooks, bent outwards ; rather above and between thebase of these organs is a pair of much smaller slender corneous organs,which must be the mandibles, and which do not appear to have beenpreviously noticed (fig. 102. 20. head of the larva of G. Equi) in thislarva. The spiracles are numerous, placed at the posterior part of thebody, but defended by the folds of the terminal segment.Mr. Newport has given a highly magnified figure of the head of thelarva of OEstrus Ovis, which lives in the frontal sinus of the sheep (art.Insect in Cycle o/Anat. p. 23.), in which the fi'ontof the head is similarlyproduced, but each side is furnished with two minute ocelli ;towards the front of the head are the horny mandibles ?, much longerthan in CE. Equi, hook-like, and directed backwards, whilst the maxillae? are still smaller hooks, directed inwards. This larva is destituteof the recurved spines ; it is furnished with two spiracles at the extremityof the body, which are defended from injury in the same manneras in the horse bot.In the larvae of Oestrus Bovis,whlch reside in the large open tumoursof the backs of horned cattle, we find a double modification of structure,admirably in accordance with their habits. Residing immovablyin a fixed spot, they do not require the strong mouth-hooks whichthe horse-bot employs to retain it in its station in the stomach, whereit is of course subject to a variety of action ; the parts of their mouthsare therefore soft and fleshy ; on the other hand, the extremity of thebody being exposed at the orifice of the tumour, it is in this part ofthe insect that the two large principal spiracles are found. Whenfull grown, they push themselves backwards out of the tumours, andWe have seen in many instances that spines of this kind are employed inprogression ; hence their importance in enabling the larva to make its way out ofthe stomach of the horse to the earth, when full grown.MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.fall to the ground, in which they undergo their changes ; the front ofthe larva skin forming a kind of flat cap, on scaling off which the headof the real pupa is seen (fig. 133. l.).These variations in the larvae of these three species render the establishmentof at least three genera requisite for the British species.In the very admirable memoir of Fischer ample details are given ofthe larvae of the CE. Bovis and Ovis.The second general section of the order Diptera, or those formingthe fifth stirps, is composed of a small group of parasitic insects ofvery peculiar structure, forming the Linnaean genus Hippobosca*Fig. 133.(fig. 133. 2. Hipp, equina) ; and differing from the flies composingthe former section, in the structure of the mouth, the immersion of theantennae within the head, and of the latter within the front of thethorax ; the gesticulation of the tarsal claws, and the nature of theirtransformations.These differences, with others of minor importance, induced La-trifleto form these insects into a primary section, which he at firstnamed Coleostoma hist Nat., t. ii. 365.), and afterwards Eprobos-idea. This name Dr. Leach, who considered these differences suffRefer, to the HippoboscidjSE.Slabber, in Verandah der Match. te Harlem. Feel 10. St. 2. bl. 413. St. .Leach, on the Gen. and Spec, of Eproboscideous Ins. in Wernerian Trans, vol. ii.Nitzsch. Die Fam. und Gatt. d. Thierinsekten, in Germar's Mag. d. Ent. vol. iii.Modeer, in Gotheborgska Handling. Vetenskap. St. S. p. 26.Dufour. Rech. Anat. sur THippobosca equina, in Ann. Sei. Nat. toni. vi. —Ditto, Descr. n. s. Ornithomyia in ditto, torn. x.Litera. PUPIPARA. 581anciently strong to warrant the establishment of the insects into adistinct order, changed to Omaloptera, which MacLeay, with moreprecision, altered to Hymenoptera, regarding it however merely as anosculant group. In the more recent works of Latreiile, they arestill recorded as a primary section of the order Diptera, under thename of Pupipara (suggested by Reaumur's name of Nymphipares).Although Dr. Leach has been followed by several English Entomologists,it will be seen that Messrs. Kirby and Spence introducedthe Pupipara amongst the Diptera ; and, indeed, when we considerthe modifications to which the true Diptera are subject in every materialcharacter — mouth antennae, transformations — we are fullywarranted in retaining these insects in the order Diptera, as well asin considering it to be possible that other Diptera will be found intermediatebetween them and the true Diptera.These insects form two families, Hippoboscidae and Nycteribiidae.The Hippoboscidae (or the Coriacea Latr.) have the head always anteriorand distinct ; the legs are short and robust, with the 5th joint ofthe tarsi the longest. The head of these insects is generally circularfig. 133. 3. head of H. equina above, 4. beneath), and is closely unitedto the thorax, being inserted without any distinct neck into the frontalcavity of the latter; the eyes are often very large, occupying the entiresides of the head ; the anterior part of the head, or clypeus, is distinct,and separated by a curved impression from the latter. This clypeusis of a reversed heart shaped form, having the antennae immersed inthe anterior angles ; these organs, when extracted, are either of arounded shape, having several bristles arising from their external partfig. 133. 5. ant. of H. equina), or plate-like and bristly. Many erroneousviews have been entertained respecting the structure of themouth ; and the opinions of authors, upon the affinities of these insects,have thence been very unsettled. It is only very recently that the trueformation has been shown by Curtis, Latreiile, Newport, Duges, andin the posthumous work of Lyonnett, whose views I have confirmed bydissection, whereby' I am enabled to add a few observations to whathas been previously recorded. The anterior portion of the vmder surfaceof the head in Hippobosca is covered with a membranous plate,which, at its apex, is furnished with a small central orifice, and at thesides with a pair of coriaceous plates, narrow, elongated, and bristly,extending beyond the front of the head, and forming, when in inaction,a kind of rostrum, as in fig. 133. li.582 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.In the inner part of the head, between the roots of the antennae,arises an elongated fleshy lobe, which, when in action, is folded back,extending quite to the hinder extremity of the cavity of the head, andcapable of protrusion, having at its extremity, but placed so as topoint forwards, a long curved, horny, slender, and nearly tubular seta,channeled along its upper edge, and dilated at its base, receiving in itsupper channel two other setae* of unequal thickness, but of equal length{^fig. 133. 8.). The apex of these three setae passes through the minuteorifice above mentioned {^fig. 133. 7.), and when at rest is tobe observed sheathed between the two coriaceous valve-like plates ;but when in action the internal lobe is pushed forward, and the setaeare conjointly porrected (passing through the minute orifice like athread through the eye of a needle), their basal portion extending asfar as the base of the rostriform plates. It is exceedingly difficult totrace the analogies presented by these various organsThe three internal setae being of unequal size, and consequentlysingle organs, cannot represent either mandibles or maxillae, andmust therefore be regarded as the analogies of the labrum, lingua, andlabium; the mentum must therefore be the base of the latter, andcannot be regarded as represented by the membranous plate coveringthe front of the underside of the head, as described by Mr. Curtis.What then are the two rostriform plates ? these being double mustrepresent either mandibles, maxillae (as doubtingly described byCurtis, Duges, and Newport), maxillary palpi, as supposed by La-trifle,or labial palpi or labial lobes, as regarded by Dufour. Thetwo latter analogies would be negatived by the existence of a distinctand separate internal labium. They can scarcely be maxillary palpi,because the maxillae are not developed, whilst their situation, arisingfrom the underside of the head, seems to imply, regard being had tothe other parts of the mouth, that they cannot represent either mandibles\ or maxillae. Moreover there are only a single pair of theseLatreille states this instrument to be composed of two seta?, and Duges of four.I have only found it to consist of three, as has also Curtis.f Duges (in his Memoir on Pulex), Curtis, Newport (art. Insect, in Cycl. Anatomy),and Percheron ( Gen. des Ins. Dipt. pi. 6. ) have attempted to trace theseanalogies, and have arrived at various conclusions.I That they are not mandibles, seems to result from the non-development ofmaxillae, the latter existing in all Diptera which possess the former. Latreille hasobserved that " dans les Oesophagus la base des lames du sri9oir est recovered pardeux petites pieces cornices, triangulaires, denies, et formant une sorte de sabre.Elles sera blent representer, en petit, les deux pieces qui recouvrent la base de laLitera HIPPOBOSCID^. 583organs, and I recollect no instance in the Diptera in which mandiblesexist without maxillae, or maxillae without maxillary palpi. If welook at the usages of these organs, a very material variation mustexist in the manner of taking the food ; the rostriform plates mustperform the office of the palpi in the other Dipterous families, to clearaway the hair or feathers from the spot in which the long setae are tobe thrust ; the largest of which setae forms a canal for the ascentof the nutritive fluids into the pharynx. In the other Diptera, thisis effected by the assistance of the large fleshy labial lobes, acting assuckers to draw these fluids to the surface of the skin ; but here theseare wanting, and consequently there can be no suction ; but this iseasily accounted for, from the great length of the internal settee, whichmust penetrate far deeper than those of the other Diptera, exceptingthose of the Gnat, in which, owing to this peculiarity, the labial lobesare very slightly developed.These insects are of small size, and much clothed with bristles, andhave been termed by French authors. Spider-flies ; they reside uponquadrupeds and birds, running with great agility, and often sideways,and burying themselves amongst the hair or feathers. The body isshort and depressed, covered with a tough leathery skin. Latreillelays it down as a rule, that the Pupipara are destitute of ocelli, butthis is not the case ; none exist in Hippobosca ; in Criteria they arevery obscure, and sunk in 3 minute foveolae, but in Ornithomyia theyare quite distinct, as Dufour observed : the thorax is dilated behind,having 2 spiracles on each side ; Latreille has discovered the posteriorpair in the forest fly (Hippobosca), which Dufour had overlooked,situated near the base of the balancers. Curtis also observed 4 inStenepteryx. Latreille described 10 spiracles in the abdomen of thesheep tick (Oesophagus), but Lyonnett^ with still greater precision,discovered two pairs of thoracic, and seven pairs of abdominal spiraclesin the last named insect. The wings, when present, are either incumbent,or divaricate, and are always accompanied by balancers ;the apical nervures of the former in some species are very indistinct,i^fig- 133. 6. wing of Hipp, equina; 13. wing of Stenepteryx Hirun-troupe de la puce," ( R. An. torn. v. p. 539. ) ; that is, the maxillae, in which viewof the subject the large lateral lobes of the mouth in thee insects would necessarilyrepresent maxillary palpi. Mr. Curtis has figured these " petites pieces," inOrnithomyia, as anterior lobes of the mentum, and Mr. Newport, in Oxypterum, asundeveloped mandibles.581' MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.denis). In others, the wings and balancers are entirely wanting, thelegs are short and strong, and terminated by very powerful denticulatedclaws fig. 133. 12.).The abdomen is covered with a continuous membrane, capable ofgreat distension, which occurs in the females, the larvae hatching andbeing nourished in that situation until they have assumed the pupastate, when each is deposited in the shape of a soft white roundishQ.^'g notched at one end, without any trace of articulation, and nearlyas large as the abdomen of the parent fly (fig. 133. 9.). Subsequentlythis puparium becomes hard, and dark coloured, and within this pupa-rumthe real pupa (fig. 133. 10.) is found, and from which the flyescapes by scaling off the notched extremity of the case. Althoughthese insects are furnished with a pair of remarkable ovaries, theirprogeny consists but of a single pupa, after the exclusion of whichthe abdomen becomes shrivelled and contracted.Mr. MacLeay considers that the Pupipara effect the passage betweenthe classes of Haustellata and Arachnida. Mr. Curtis, however,in his observations, has endeavoured to show that a more natural transitionis effected between the Mandibulata and Arachnida, by meansof the voracious Cicindelidae and the spiders. The instances whichhe has adduced in support of this view, appear to me to be remoteanalogies, whilst, on the other hand, the connexion between the and Nycteribiidae, and certain Arachnida is so strong asto become almost an affinity. The latter, it is true, are not thetypical Arachnida, or Spiders, as might be imagined from the vernacularFrench name given to these insects, expressive of their resemblanceto spiders — " mouches assignees," but to others whichhave not hitherto been regarded as affording so strong a relationship,namely, the Avaricious Arachnida or Ticks. This relationship is sostrong, as regards habits and economy, that there is no wonder thatone of the Hippoboscidae should be called the Sheep-tick. Whilst,if we look at the construction of the mouth, we have precisely thesame number of organs, the external pair of which are exactly similarto the rostriform plates of the Hippoboscidse. ( Vide M. Audouin'sadmirable paper, in the Ann. Sc. Nat. torn. xxv. pi. 14.)These insects vary greatly in the animals they inhabit. The speciesof Ornithomyia, Stenepteryx (remarkable for the narrowness ofits wings), and Oxypterum are parasitic upon various kinds of birds(see Curtis) ; those of Hippobosca upon quadrupedS;, especially theLitera. NYCTERIBIID^. 585horse, as well as occasionally upon oxen ; Lipoptena Servi * Nitzsch(Pet. Servi Panzer Ins. Germ. 51. 15.), upon the stag; Oesophagusovinus (Jiff. 133.11.) upon the sheep. Lipoptena PhyllostomatisNitzsch ( Voyage of Prince Maximilian of Bavaria ; and Pertj'^, Del.An. art. Bras. pi. ^I.Jig. 16.), infests a Brazilian species of bat. Thegenus Treble, of which I possess several species, are likewise parasiticupon the same tribe of animals, as are also all the NycteribiEe,Nitzsch also describes a minute insect which is parasitic upon thehoney bee, as a " genus Epizoicum Dipteris affine," under the nameof Braula caeca, in which the head is vertical, broad, triangular, withantennas apparently resembling those of Stenepteryx, each beingformed of two lobes ; the eyes and ocelli are wanting, the thoraxshort, bipartitOj apterous ; the abdomen continuous, with the latterbroader and oval ; legs six, short with 5-jointed tarsi. It is figured byAhrens in his Fauna, fasc. 6. Nitzsch only notices that of four hivebees given to him by Keferstein, each was infested with a single Braula,but M. Stern, whose observations are given by Kollar, observed asmany as eleven on a single queen bee. (Treatise 07i Obnox. Ins. Transp. 74.) Authors have overlooked the figures given of this insect byReaumur (Mem. torn. v. pi. SS. fig. 1 — 4.).Various remedies are suggested by Kollar against the attacks ofsuch of these insects as infest domesticated animals or birds. (Treatiseon Obnox. Ins. Trans) See Reaumur (3Idm. vol. vi. 14th Mem.pi. 48.) Hipp. Equina, tom. iv. 3d Mem. pi. 11. (Stenepteryx Hirun-denis) ; — De Geer (Mem. vol. vi. tab. 16. Hippo. equina and Orni-thomyia avicularia); — Lyonnett, PostJi. Researches, pi. 1, 2, 3. (Oesophagusovinus); — Dufour, in the memoirs above referred to; — andCurtis (Brit. Ent. pi. 14. 122. 142. 421. 585.), for further details ofthese insects.The second family of the stirps Pupipara (Nycteribiid^ f )• This species possesses very short rudiments of wings and halteres. In Oesophagusovinus (^t;-. 133. ll.)both the wings and halteres are wanting, being theonly instance I am acquainted with, except in the species of Molobrus noticed byMr. Haliday under the name of Chionea venetia, in which halteres are wanting.See Generic Synopsis ; Molobrus. )•j- BiBLioGB. Refer, to the Nycteribiid^.Montague, in Trans. Linn. Soc. London, t. II. 1813. (Nycteribii).VOL. ir. Q Q586 Modern CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Phthiiomyia Latr.), composed of the single genus Nycteribia (fig.133. 14. 15., N. Sjkesii Weston), has the head very small and dorsal,not being received into a deep anterior excavation of the prothorax(Jiff' 133. 16. head above, 17. beneath, 18. sideways). The antennaeare very short and inarticulate. The mouth consists of two largelateral setose valves, and a central style, which I found to encloseseveral setae, thus perfectly analogous to the mouth of the Hippobos-cider. They have neither wings * nor balancers, but the intermediatelegs are connected at the base with a pair of strong comb-like organs,(Jiff' 133. 19.), which are the probable representatives of the wings.The thorax is flat, and singularly constructed, and the first abdominal segmentis very short, and on its ventral surface armed with a row of strongshort bristles (Jiff. 133. 21. under side of thorax, and base of abdomen).The legs are very long, with the basal joint of the tarsi exceedinglylong and articulated, and the terminal ungues very strong and hooked(Jiff' 133. 20.). The under side of the extremity of the abdomen ofthe male is furnished with two elongated slender incurved appendages(Jiff' 133. 24. N. inarticulate <J ) ; that of the female is destitute ofexserted organs, except in the last named species, in which there aretwo elongated, clavate, and setose styles (Jiff. 133. 23,). The onlyspecies hitherto discovered live upon the bodies of bats, and composethe genus Nycteribia Latr., Phthiridium, Hermann. In my memoiron this genus, I described the puparium (Jiff' 133. 22.), which I hadsucceeded in extracting from the abdomen of a large Indian species(N. Sykes JVesiw.), thus further proving its relation to Hippobosca.I think this the fittest place to notice some anomalous insects ofminute size communicated to me by J. Hogg, Esq., F.L.S., discoveredby him inhabiting Spongilla fluviatilis, and respecting whose naturalrelations, and even the order to which they belong, I am in doubt.Dufour, in Ann. Sci. Nat. x\pnl, 1S31 (Nycteribia).Guerin. Icon. R. An. Ins. (Nyct. Westwoodiiii;.Ilardwicke, Gen. Drawings of Indian Ins. in Brit. Museum.fleetwood, in Ti-ans. Zool. Soc. vol. i. (Monogr. Nycteribia).Such at least is the case with all the hitherto described species. Mr. MacLay has, however, shown me a species from the West Indies possessing shortwings.Litera. NYCTERIBIID^. 587They are scarcely more than one-eighth of an inch in length, and havesix moderately long slender legs. They have at first sight the appearanceof Aphides, being apterous, with two long slender antennae, andthe mouth consists of four naked setae, equalling the antennae in length,and porrected ; they arise in pairs, and are not enclosed in any sheathnor are they palpigerous. The body is clothed with numerous longhairs, and each of the abdominal segments is furnished at the sides witha pair of long flattened articulated filaments, somewhat like those of thelarva of Salis lutaria, which are evidently organs of respiration, andkept in constant agitation in their watery abode. I know no insectsof which these animals can be considered as the larvae * ; whilst asthey possess certain points of resemblance with the permanentlyapterous Coccidge and Aphidae, it is not impossible that they may havearrived at the imago state. I must refer for further details to thedescription and figures which I have presented to the EntomologicalSociety of London.Can they be the larvae of the anomalous genus Acentropus?THE END.Printed by A. SpomswoonE,New-Street-Square.SYNOPSISGENERA OF BRITISH INSECTS.*Class. Hexagon Metamorphosis INSECTS.Subclass I. Mouth with Jams.Order I. COLEOPTERA Aristotle. (Eleutherata Fabi\, ElytraClairvv.)Sect. I. Pentamera Latreille.Tribe 1. Cfiilopodomorpha MacLeay.Subtribe 1. Adepliaga Clairvv.Stirps 1. Geodephaga MacLeay.Family 1. CICINDELIDjE Kirby. (Cicindela iiMn.)CICINDELA Liii, §-c. Buprestis p. Geoffroy. 6 sp. Cic. campestris Linn.Anterior tarsi c? with the three basal joints elongated and dilated ; elytra oblong,ovate, depressed ; thorax sub quadrate. Curt. Brit. Entomol. pi. 1.Family 2. CARABIDJE Leach. (Carabus Linn.)Subfamily 1. Bracliinides West. (Brachinidae MacLeay,Truncatipennes Latr.}DRYPTA Far. Carabus p. Marsh. 1 sp. D. marginal Far. Curt. 454.Basal joint of antenuce very long ; thorax long, eylindrie ; penultimate jointof tarsi bilobed ; palpi with the last joint securiform.POLYSTICHUSj5o?2effi. Galerita p. i^o6r. 1 sp. P. vittatus Brute. Curt.223.Depressed; head triangular ; thorax subcordate ; palpi long ; tarsi simple ; triangular.ODACANTHA Pay. Attelabus p. Z/Zww. Isp. Jttel. melanurus L-inn. Curt. 227.Thorax long, eylindrie ; tarsi simple ; basal joint of antennae short ; headbroader than the thorax.Demerits Bonelli. Theophilus Leach. 4 sp. Carat, atricapillns Linn.Depressed ; thorax cordate; penultimate joint of tarsi bilobed ; second joint ofantennae short; claws simple. Curt. 110.Promis Bonelli. Demerits p. Pam, 19 sp. Arab. 4'maculatus Linn.Depressed ; thorax subcordate ; tarsi simple ; second joint of antennae as long asthird; last joint of max. palpi truncate. Curt. 231.Throughout this Synopsis, the first line of each genus'comprises the followingparticulars: — I. Name of the genus ; 2. name of its founder ; 3. synonyme of thegenus ; 4. author of the synonymical genus ; 5. number of British species ; 6. typicalspecies ; 7. reference to the best figure; this last item being occasionally, forwant of space, placed after the description of the genus.B2 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.Lesbia Latreille. Carabus p. Linn. 3 sp. C. crux minor Linn. Curt. 87.Depressed, broad ; thorax transverse, lobed behind ; penultimate joint of tarsibilobed.Lampreys Bonelli. Lesbia p^ Latr. 4 sp. C. cyanocephaltis Linn. Curt. 282.Depressed, broad ; thorax transverse, cordate, lobed behind ; labrum quadrate ;fourth tarsal joint bilobed.Tarts Glanville. Cymindis Latr. 7 sp. C. huweralis Marsh. Curt. 235.Depressed ; thorax cordate, truncate ; claws denticulated ; tarsi simple; labial palpi(J with the basal joint securiform.Brachial Weber. Carabines p. lAnn. 5sp. C. crepitans lAnn. Curt. 554.Oval, convex ; thorax narrow ; labrum transverse; tarsi simple ; palpi filiform ;claws simple.Subfamily 2. Charities ^esiw. (Scaritidae Mac i. BipartitiLatr.)Scares Fdbr. Tenebrio p. Liyin. 1 sp. C. Beckwithii Stephh.Oblong, subdepressed ; antenna elbowed ; mandibles with strong teeth. Stephh.111. Brit. Ent. vol. i. pi. 3.(Olynthus Des. Arpephorus Hope Mss. 1 sp. O. anglican Stephh.Oblong depressed ; antennae elbowed; mandibles not toothed. Stephh. 111. 1. pi. 3.)Living Latr. Tenebrio p. Linn. 2 sp. T. Fossor Linn. Curt. 175.Thorax quadrate ; mandibles denticulated ; anterior tibicc palmated.DYSCHIRIUS Panz. Living p. Gill. 14 sp. Scares gibbus Far.Thorax globose ; mandibles denticulated ; anterior tibia; palmated. Curt. 354.Distorts Leachiiii. DiTOMus p. Des. 1 sp. Dis. Leachiiii Stephh.Anterior tibise not palmated ; head unarmed. Stephh. 111. 1. pi. 3.Subfamily 3. Harpalides ^esfw. (Harpalidas ikfacX. ThoracicLatr. )Division 1. Veronica West. (Felonies Des. SimpleLatr.)Porous Zeigl. Raptor Megerle. 5 sp. P. Barrels Haw. Curt. 47.Anterior tarsi $ with two dilated joints ; thorax sub quadrate ; labrum emarginate.Patrols Megerle. Blethisa p. Pz. 2 sp. Car. rufipes. Curt. 192.Anterior tarsi $ with two dilated joints; thorax subcordate ; labrum straight.Obs. All the remaining genera have the three basal joints of the male tarsi dilated.Calamus Bonelli. Carabus p. lAnn. 11 sp. C. melanocephalus lAnn.Tarsal claws toothed ; thorax sub quadrate ; palpi simple. Curt. 1 84.ODONTONYX Stephh. Carabus p. Marsh. 1 sp. C. rotundicollis M.Tarsal claws toothed ; thorax rounded ; wings 0.SYNUCHUS Gyll. Taphria Bon. 1 sp. Car. rivals* Pz. Pz. F. I. G. 37. 19.Tarsal claws toothed; labial palpi with the last joint securiform ; thorax rounded jwings, 2.PRISTONYCHUS Des. Demosthenes Bon. 1 sp. Car. Terricola, Pk.Tarsal claws toothed; thorax subcordate; last joint of labial palpi simple;wings 0. Pz. F. L G., 30 f. 3.This has generally been written vitalis, but improperly. Vit. Pz. F. I. G.and Ind. Methh. p. 53. and Aud. and BruUe, Hist, des Insectes, vol. iv. p. 307.COLEOPTERA. CARABIDiE. 3Obs. The following genera have the tarsal claws simple : —SPHODRUS Civ. Carabus p. Linn. 1 sp. Car. leucopthalmus Linn.Antennae with the third joint as long as the two following united. Pz. F. I. G.9. f. 4.Platinum Bon. Anchomenus p. Sturm. 2 sp. Car. angusticollis F.Mentum-tooth entire ; thorax cordate ; posterior angles acute ; elytra depressed ;head narrower than the thorax. Pz. F. I. G. 73. f. 9.ANCHOMENUS cow. Carabus. Jar. 4sp. Car.prasinus ¥. Vz.\6. t.6.Mentum-tooth entire ; thorax cordate ; posterior angles acute ; elytra oblong, sub-convex; head as broad as the thorax.AGONUM Bon. Carabus p. Linn. 30 sp. C. 6-punctatus Linn. Curt. 183.Anterior tarsi of males with the joints elongated ; mentum-tooth simple ; thoraxrounded.OLISTHOPUS Bej. Carabus p. Pai/k. 1 sp. C. rotundity Pk.Thorax rounded; mentum-tooth obsolete; basal joints of tarsi elongated. Stephh.111. 1. pi. 6.Platters Stephh. Argutor p. Des. 1 sp. Car. ruficoUis M.Thorax broad, sub quadrate, depressed ; body flat ; palpi with the terminal jointovate, cylindric ; truncate at tip.ARGUTOR Megerle. Platysma p. Sturm. 10 sp. Car. vernal F.Thorax subcordate, truncate ; body depressed, narrow ; palpi with the last jointfusiform. Curt. 666.PCECILLUS Bon. Carabus p. Line. 7 sp. C. cures Linn. Curt. 107.Thorax sub quadrate ; elytra sub convex ; palpi cylindric ; mentum-tooth broad,obtuse ; colours metallic.Shines Leach, Pcecillus p. Zee;. 1 sp. Car. puuctulatus III. Pz. 30. f. 10.Thorax with an elevated lateral line on each side ; head large ; body depressed ;palpi robust ; terminal joint obtusely truncated.Amadeus Zeiffl. Pterostichus p. Sturm. 13 sp. Car. aterrimus F.Thorax sub quadrate; elytra entire, subdepressed ; palpi cylindric; antennae withthe second joint nearly as long as the third. Curt. 15.Serous Megerle. Molops p. Sturm. 4 sp. Car. maids F. Curt. 171.Thorax sub orbicular ; elytra entire ; oval sub convex ; wings ; mentum-toothbroad, bifid.Priscus Pz. Cephalotes Bon. 1 sp. Car. cephalotes Linn. Donov. 484.Thorax very much attenuated behind ; body elongate ; mentum-tooth obtuse ;head large.MISCOBERA Esch. f Leighton C«r^. 1 1 sp. Dgsch.L Oncoderus and Sph^roderus Stephh. J arctic Fk.Thorax globose ; elytra ovate, convex ; head small ; mentum-tooth obtuse, entire,small. Curt. 346.STOMIS Civ. Carabus p. Marsh. 1 sp. Car. pumicatus 111. Civ. 2. pi. 6. f. A.Body elongate, narrow, sub convex ; thorax cordate ; mandibles very long andporrected.PTEROSTICHUS Boni. Copious p. Bet. 6 sp. Car. fasciato-punctatus F.Body depressed ; thorax subcordate, truncate ; palpi robust ; mentum-tooth short,bifid. Pz. 67. f. 9.Copious Zeigl. Pterostichus p. Curt, 1 sp. Copy. elongatus Des.Body long, cylindric, parallel ; antennae short j palpi stout ; wings 0. Curt.196.B 24 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.ADELOSIA Stephhhh. Pterostichus p. Stephhhh, 1 sp. Car. macer Marsh.Body very depressed ; thorax much narrowed behind ; antennas rather short ;palpi very slender. Stephh. 1. pi. 7. f. 5.PLATYSMA Bon. Simothelus A/e^. 1 sp. Car. niger Far. Oliv. 3. 48 pi. 1.Thorax sub quadrate, narrower than the elytra; elytra subovate, subdepressed ;palpi slender ; mentum-tooth robust, bifid.Ajax Bon. Pterostichus p. Sturm. 1 sp. Car. striola¥abr. Pz. 91.f. 6.Body depressed ; thorax square, as broad as the elytra, which are soldered together,with an elevated humeral carina ; colours black.Chorus iafr. A^ ax -p. Stephh. 1 sp. Car. metallicus ¥abr . Pz. 11. f. 7.Body subdepressed ; thorax nearly as broad as the elytra, which are separate,ovate, and sub convex ; joints of antennae short, submoniliform.Modes Bon. Carabus p. Far. 1 sp. Car. helopioides Far. Pz. 30. f. 11.Body sub convex, elongate, ovate ; thorax as broad as the elytra ; mentum-toothentire.Samara Bon. Carabus p. Linn. 27 sp. Car. vulgaris Linn. Pz. 40. 1.Oblong, ovate, broad, subdepressed ; thorax as broad as the elytra ; wings, two ;mentum-tooth bifid ; last joint of the palpi ovate.(Croton Zimm. Amara p. Stephh. 5 sp. Harp, brunneus Gyll. Sturm.D. F., 146.)(CELT A Zimm. Amara p. Stephh. 2 sp. Harp, herons Gyll.)BRADYTUS Stephh. Amara p. Sturm. 6 sp. Car. ferrugineuslAnn. Pz. 39. 9.Body sub convex ; mentum-lobe entire ; thorax nearly as broad as the elytra, rathernarrowed behind, subcordate.CURTONOTUS Stephh. Leirus Me. 2 sp. Car. conve.Tiusculus M.Body elongate, ovate, sub convex ; mentum lobe bifid, intermediate tibise (J tubercledand spined ; third joint of max. palpi long, clavate. Stephh. pi. 8. f. 1.Sabres Civ. C AK ABU s Far. 2 sp. Car. gibbus Fahr. Curt. 188.Body gibbous ; elytra very convex ; mentum-tooth obtuse.Division 2. Harpalidea West. (Harpaliens Def.)Quadrant Latr.HARPALUS Zrtifr. Carabus p. Jar. 56 sp. Car. ruficornis fahr. Curt. 458.Elongate, ovate, sub convex ; thorax as broad as the elytra; mentum-tooth obtuse,simple; antenna with the two basal joints naked.ANISODACTYLUS Z)e/. Hahvai^us p. Stephh. 4 sp. Car. binotatus Far.First tarsal joint <? small ; the fourth joint largest ; mentum tooth obsolete ;thorax sub quadrate or trapezoid. Pz. 92. f. 3.P ANGUS Zeigl. Harpalus p. Stephh. 1 sp. Harp, scar Hides Sturm.Palpi with the terminal joint subcylindric ; thorax narrowed behind ; anglesrounded ; antennae rather short. Stm. D. F., 91. c.ACTEPHILUS Stephh. Carabus p. Ducts. 2 sp. Car. vernal Ducts.Thorax transverse ; posterior angles rounded ; anterior legs stout ; antennaeshort ; palpi with the terminal joint longest. Stm. D. F. 90. a.OPHONUS Zeigl. Harpalus p. Z)e/. 13 sp. Harp.obscurusFa.hr. Curt. 191.Body pubescent ; thorax punctured, sub quadrate ; max. palpi with the lastjoint ovate ; mentum transverse, short ; mentum-tooth scarcely visible, not bifid.DIACHROMUS Erichson. Ophonus p. Stephh. 1 sp. Car. germains Linn,Thorax punctured ; mentum-tooth short, rather obtuse ; anterior tarsi <? dilated,beneath equally cushioned; the penultimate joint transverse, cordate. Curt. 191.COLEOPTERA. CARABID^. 5STEN OLOPHUS Zeigl. Trechus p. Stm. 3 sp. Car. vaporariorum Linn,Mentum tooth obsolete; palpi truncate at the tips; thorax sub orbicular ; bodydestitute of pubescence. Stephh. 111. M. 1. pi. 9. f. 2.MA SO RE US Zeiffl. Barrister p. Crests. 1 sp. M. latus Des. Curt. 287.Thorax transverse ; posterior margin, with a transverse lobe ; elytra oblong, depressed; palpi truncate at the tip ; antennal joints equal.Trochus C/v. AcuPALPus Bej. 13 sp. Car. meridians Linn. Pz. 75. 9.Body ovate, sub convex ; palpi with the last joint conic, acute ; posterior anglesof thorax obtuse.(BRADYCELLUS ^rMsoM. Trechus p. Stephh. M. 5. 384. Harp, placid Gyll.)BLEMUS Zeigl. Trechus Des. 5 sp. Car. discus Far. Curt. 310.Elongate, depressed ; palpi with the last joint as long as the third, conic ; thoraxnarrowed behind ; angles acute.EPAPHIUS Leach. Trechus p. Des. 1 sp. Car. seals Pz.Thorax orbicular, cordate ; elytra oval, broad, convex ; wings ; anterior tarsi $with two dilated joints. Stm. D. F. 6. 152. d.opus Lea. Trechus p. Des. 1 sp. jEp. fulvescens Lea. Curt. 203.Head large ; elytra flattened ; mandibles porrected, multidentate ; terminaljoints of palpi attenuated.Division 3. Chlseniidea West. (Chlseniens Des.Patellimani Latr.)Lorimer Latr. Carabus Far. 1 sp. Car. pilicornis Far. Donov. 367.Antennae with the third and three following joints emitting long bristles ; thoraxsuborbicular.PANAG.^US Latr. Carabus p. Linn. 2 sp. Car. crux major Linn.Thorax orbicular, convex ; palpi with the last joint securiform ; mentum toothbifid. Stephh. 111. 1. pi. 4. f. 6.Bannister Civ. Ambltchus Gyll. 5 sp. Car. hipustulatus Far. Curt. 139.Body subdepressed ; palpi with the last joint elongate, ovate ; labrum deeplynotched ; mentum tooth obsolete.Timorous Stephhhh. Barrister p. Sttcrm. 2 sp. T. scapulars Stephhhh.Mandibles obtuse ; labial palpi with the last joint oval; max. palpi with the lastjoint longer than the third ; thorax cordate. Stephh. 111. 1. pi. 9. f. 5.Vicious Latr. Carabus p. Far. 3 sp. Car. cassius, Far. Curt. 75.Mandibles very obtuse ; mentum tooth obsolete ; palpi with the last joint arosesecuriform.(DIPLOCHEILUS ^rw/Ze. Rebus Stephh. 1 sp. Car. impressus Var.Palpi with the last joint subovate ; thorax subcordate ; elytra elongate ; tarsi ^with three dilated joints. )EPOMIS Bon. Chl^nius p. Sturm. 1 sp. E. circumscribed Des.Palpi with the last joint elongate, securiform; mentum tooth distinct, bifidhora truncate, cordate. Stephh. 1 . pi. 5. f. 3.CHLjENIUS Bon. Carabus p. Lii. 7 sp. Car. marginatus Linn. Curt. 83.Palpi with the last joint ovate, truncate ; mentum-tooth bifid ; thorax truncatesubcordate, or broadest behind. •CALLISTUS Bon. Carabus p. Far. 1 sp. Car. lunatic F. Curt. 180.Outer lobe of maxilla; inarticulate ; mentum-tooth obtuse ; thorax cordate, truncate,convex.B 36 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.Subfamily 4. Carabines Wcstw. (Carabidm MacLeay.Grandipalpi, Abdominales Latr.)Division 1. Carabines West. (Carabidae Stephh.)Cyprus Fahr. Tenebrio p. Linn. 1 sp. T. rostratus Linn. Curt. 426.Head long, narrow ; palpi with the last joint large and spoon-shaped ; mandibleslong ; tridentate at the tip ; wings O.PROCRUSTES Bon. Carabus p. Linn. 1 sp. C. coriaceus Linn.Labrum trilobed ; mentum tooth bifid ; thorax sub quadrate. Stm. D. F. 3. pi. 54.CARABUS Linn. Tachypus Weber. 17 sp. C. violates Linn. Curt. 446.Labrum bilobed ; mentum-tooth entire ; thorax subcordate ; wings or rudimental; palpi with the last joint securiform.CALOSOMA Weber. Carabus p. Linn. 2 sp. Car. sycophants L. Curt. 330.Labrum bilobed ; thorax sub orbicular ; abdomen sub quadrate ; wings large ;palpi with the last joint ovate, inmate.Lists Frolic. Pogonophorus Latr. 8 sp. Car. spinibarbis Far.Maxillae with the base externally armed with long spines ; mandibles dilated atthe base, externally ; palpi elongated. Curt. 176.Division 2. Elaphridea West. (Elaphridoe Stephh.)NEBRIA Latr. Carabus p. Linn. 3 sp. Car. complaints Li. Curt. pi. 6.Depressed ; labrum sub quadrate, slightly emarginate ; palpi with the last jointslightly dilated, obliquely truncate ; wings two.Zenobia Leach. Nebria p. Latr. 6 sp. Car. brevicollis Far. Curt. 103.Depressed ; thorax transverse, cordate ; wings two ; labrum transverse.Alpheus Bon. Nebria p. Des. 1 sp. A. castanets Bon.Subdepressed ; thorax cordate ; wings O ; palpi with the last joints rounded.PELOPHILA Mann. Blethisa p. Bon. 1 sp. Car. borealis Pk. Curt. 302.Antennae short ; labrum transverse, subemarginate ; thorax cordate, truncate.BLETHISA Bon. Carabus p. Li?i7i. J sp. Car. multipunctatus'L. Curt. 326.Antennae short ; labrum subtrilobate ; thorax quadrate; palpi rather short.ELAPHRUS Far. Cicindela p. Linn. 5 sp. Cic. riparia Linn. Curt. 179.Antennae short ; eyes very prominent ; thorax convex ; labrum slightly trilobed ;palpi slender.NOTIOPHILUS Dunn. Elaphrus p. Far. 18 sp. Cic. aquatic Linn.Head as broad as the thorax ; eyes large ; thorax quadrate, flattened ; labrumlarge, rounded ; palpi robust. Curt. 1 90.Subfamily 5. Bembidiides West. (Subulipalpi Latr.)LYMN^UM Stephh. Carabus p. TV/ctrsA. 1 sp. Car. nigropiceusM.Linear, depressed ; third and fourth joints of the antennae equal ; fourth tarsaljoint with a spine. Stephh. 2. pi. 10. f. 1.CILLENUM Leach. Blends p. Des. 1 sp. Cill. lateral Lea. Curt. 200.Linear, depressed ; third antennal joint longer than the fourth ; fourth tarsaljoint simple ; labrum subemarginate.TACHYSZeigl. Bembidium Sturm. 8 sp. B. obtusu7n Stm. Stm.D.F. pi. 161. f. C.Ovate, sub convex ; thorax transverse ; hinder angles rounded, entire.Philoctetes 5'^epA. L,eia Meg. 6 sp. Be}7ib. 2-yuttatum Stm. Stm. 161. B.Ovate, sub convex ; thorax transverse ; hinder angles rounded and deeply notched.OCYS K. Carabus p. Pz. Car. tempestuous Pz. Stephh. 111. 2. pi. 10. f. 2.Ovate, sub convex ; thorax transverse ; hinder angles prominent, acute.COLEOPTERA CARABID^— DYTICID^. 7PERYPHUS Me^f. Elaphrus p. Z)2</i!s, 21 sp. Car. littoral is Ovid. Fz.35.6.Thorax truncate, cordate; hinder angles very acute; fifth antennal joint shorterthan the third and fourth.NOTAPHUS Me^erZe. Bembidium p. S'<m. 9 sp. Car. ustulatus L.'mn. Pz. 40. 7.Thorax truncate, cordate ; hinder angles acute ; third and fourth antennal jointsshorter than the fifth.Sopha Mess. CiciNnELA p. Linn. 14 sp. Cic. 4-maculata L. Pz. 38. f. 8.Thorax truncate, cordate, gibbose ; hinder angles deflexed ; eyes moderate.TACHYPUS Meg. Leap. Bej. 9 sp. Car. Andrea Far. Stephh. 111. pi. 10. f. 6.Thorax truncate, cordate, depressed, sessile; hinder angles deflexed; eyes moderate.BEMBIDIUM /?%. CiciNDELA p. ira. 4 sp. Cic. flavipes lain. Pz. 20. f. 2.Thorax truncate, cordate ; eyes extremely prominent ; elytra tubercled.Stir-ps 2. Hydradephaga MacL. (Hydrocanthari Za^r. )Family 1. Z> TT/CZZ?^ Leach. ( DytiscusZzrara. Dyticus Ceo )Subfamily 1. Haliplides West.Antennae 10-jointed ; posterior coxae dilated into a large shield covering the baseof the legs.HALIPLUS Clairvv. Cnemidotus III. 11 sp. Dgt. elevates Far.Max. palpi with the last joint very minute and subulate. Pz. F. I. G. 14. f. 9.CNEMIDOTUS Erichson. Haliplus p. Stephh. 1 sp. Dyt. casus * Dutch.Maxillary palpi with the last joint larger than the preceding, conical.Subfamily 2. Dyticides.Antennae 11-jointed; palpi filiform, or but slightly thickened; base of posteriorlegs not covered by the coxeb.Notes Clairvv. Haliplus p. Sch. 2 sp. Dyt. crassicornis Far. Curt. 236.Antennae fusiform ; scutellum inconspicuous ; posterior tarsal claws equal.LACCOPHILUS Leach. Dyiiscus p. Lii. 2 sp. Dyt. minutus Linn.Antennae setaceous; scutellum inconspicuous; posterior tarsal claws unequal.Pz. F. I. G. 26. f. 3.HYDROPORUS Clairvv. Hyphidrus p. Illig. 50 sp, Dyt. 12-pustulatus Fab.Body depressed; anterior tarsi 4-jointed; posterior tarsi slender with equalmoveable claws. Curt. 343.HYGROTUS Stephh. Hydrophobia p. Clairvv. 11 sp. Hyp. decorates Gyll.Body subglobose ; anterior tarsi 4-jointed ; posterior tarsi didactyle. Curt. 531.HYPHIDRUS niig. Hydrachna p. Fahr. 2 sp. Dyt. ovatus Linn.Body globose ; anterior tarsi 4-jointed ; posterior tarsi compressed, with onemoveable claw. Donov. 2. pi. 68.Polybius School. Hygrobia Clairvv. 1 sp. Dyt. Hermann Far.Body subglobose ; scutellum distinct ; legs sensorial ; claws didactyle. Donov.14. 501.COLYMBETESf Clairvv. Dyticus p. iiwjz. §-c. 40 sp. Dyt. fuscus 'Linn.Scutellum distinct ; legs senatorial ; labial palpi with the second joint longerthan the third ; anterior male tarsi slightly dilated ; claws of tarsi unequal.Curt. 207.Stephens gives this as synonymous with the impressus Far., but the two areconsidered by Erichson as belonging to different genera,f This genus has been subdivided into numerous sub generic groups by EschscholtzB 48 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.Polybius Erichs. CoLTMBETEs p. Stephh, 6 sp. Dyt. fenestratiis Fab.Labial palpi with the second and third joints subequal ; claws subequal ; scutellumdistinct; anterior male tarsi slightly dilated. Panz. F. I. G. 38. 16.AGABUS Leach. Agabus p. Erich. 1 sp. Dyt. serricoryiis Pay.Antennae $ with the terminal joints dilated ; maxillary palpi with the last jointsubulate ; anterior male tarsi slightly dilated. Ahrens, F. 5. f. 3.HYDATICUS Leach. Attics p. Fab. 4 sp. Dyt. Hijhneri Fab. Curt. 95.Antennae setaceous ; anterior $ tarsi castellated ; female with smooth elytra.Ohs, Hydaticus cinereous Fab. is the type of Eschscholtz's subgenus Graphoderus.Bacillus Leach. Dyticus p. Linn. 2 sp. Dyt. sulcatus Linn. Curt. 63.Anterior (J tarsi castellated ; claws didactyle ; female with furrowed elytra ;max. palpi with the second and third joints unequal.Cloister Cwr^js. Trogus ieacA. 1 sp. Dyt. sirens MvlW. ( Roeselii Fah.)Anterior ^ tarsi castellated ; posterior tibiae very short ; posterior ungues mono-tactile.Curt. 151.DYTICUS Geoff. Dytiscus p. Linn. 8 sp. Dist. marginal Linn. Curt. 99.Anterior $ tarsi castellated ; claws didactyle ; maxillary palpi with the secondand third joints equal.Family 2. GFRINIDjE Leach. {Gyrinus Linn.)Grins Geoff. Dytiscus Linn. olim. 8 sp. Gyr. narrator Linn. Curt. 79.Body depressed ; elytra glabrous ; maxillary internal palpi distinct.ORECTOCHEILUS Esch. Potamobius Leach, MSS. 1 sp. Gyr. villosus 111.Body sub convex ; elytra pubescent ; maxillary internal palpi obsolete.Subtribe 2. Rjjpophaga Stephens.Stirs. Philhydrida WacLeay. (Palpicornes and Clavicornes p. Latr.)Family 1. HE TEE Deride MacL,. ( Acanthopoda iafr.)HETEROCERUS Boscc. Dermestes p. Thun. 7 sp. Het. marginatus Fab.Body oval, subdepressed ; tibise spinose ; antennae with the seven terminal jointsforming a serrated club. Curt. 224.Family 2. PARNIDJE Mach. ( Macrodactyla Z,a<r.)Subfamily 1. ParwjVZes West. {'Parrndx Stephh.)Parus JFa&r. Drops Oliv. 5 sp. P. prolifericornis Fab. Curt. 80.Thorax with longitudinal fossulaj ; legs rather short ; antennae 9-jointed*, withthe second joint produced on the inside into a very large lobe, forming alateral shield, defending the terminal joints.Drops Oliv. 1 sp. D. Dumerilii Latr. And. and Br. 5. pi. 14.Thorax without impressed lines ; legs elongate ; antennae with the clava pectinate,the teeth being acute.(in Dejean's Catal. 2d edit. ), without any characters having been published by theformer author. Mr. Stephens (lUitstr. vol. v. Suppl.) has, however, supplied thisdeficiency. I have only adopted the two following subgenera described by Erich-sonand Leach. Eschscholtz's groups are — Cymatopterus ( C. fuscus, &c. ), Rants(C. agilis, adversus), Leiopterus (C. oblong).M. Dufour states that the antennae are in reality 10-jointed, the two terminalones not being distinguished by the serrated appearance of the preceding. I haveobserved the distinction between these two terminal joints very clearly on maceratingand slightly compressing the antennae.COLEOPTERA. PARNID^ — HYDROPHILID.E. 9Subfamily 2. Elniides West. (Limniidae Steph.),Elms Latreille. Linus linger. 11 sp. Elm. Maugetii Latr. Curt. 294.Antennae 1 1-jointed, as long as the thorax, slightly thickened at the tip ; bodyovate.STENELMIS Dufour. Limits p. Stephh. 1 sp. Elm. pnralMipipedus Illiger.Antenna; slender ; body narrow ; last ventral segment subemarginate. Dufour,Ann. Sci. Nat.GEORYSSUS Latr. Cathammistes Ulig. vol. vi. 1 sp. Amelia pygmma F.Subglobose ; antennae 9-jointed, very short ; club large, 3-jointed. Stephh. 111.2. pi. 13.Family 3. HE Loch OR ID jE MacL, (Helophoridea ZeacA.)HELOPHORUS Leach. Elophorus Far. 9 sp. Silph. aquatic Linn.Thorax transverse ; fore legs moderate ; last joint of max. palpi ovate ; antennae9-jointed ; last joint short ; eyes sessile. Curt. 466.Hydrocele Germar. Elophorus p. Fdbr. 3 sp. El. elongatus Far.Thorax quadrate ; fore legs long ; eyes very prominent ; body narrow ; last jointof max. palpi robust ; last joint of antennae long. Curt. 359.Nicodemus 5'<ep/j. HYDR^NA?^Ar. 3 sp. En. viridimnetis St.Max. palpi much shorter than the head, with the 5 terminal joints large ; labrumlarge, notched ; elytra broad, oval. Curt. 291.OCHTHEBIUS Leach. Hydra p. Latr. 12 sp. El. pygmcsus Far.Max. palpi not longer than the head, with the last joint short, slender, andpointed ; legs short ; thorax entire. Curt. 250.Amphibious Waterhhhh. 1 sp. A. atricapillus Waterhhhh.Max. palpi shorter than the thorax ; terminal joint short ; elytra larger than theabdomen.'RYJiB.M'^A. Kugell. Elophorus p. Gyll. 13 sp. H. riparia Rug.Max. palpi longer than the head and thorax ; last joint long, fusiform ; labrumnotched. Curt. 307.Speeches Far. Hydrophilus p. Marsh. 1 sp. Sp. emarginatus Fab.Body broad and very convex ; antennas 6-jointed, ovate ; max. lobe very longand slender ; tarsi 5-jointed, the last joint very long. Curt. 394.Family 4. Hyde OPHILIDJE MacLeay.LIMNEBIUS Leach. Hydrophilus p. Fab. 9 sp. Hydr. truncatellus F.Subdepressed ; apex of elytra truncate ; eyes not prominent ; sternum simple ;max. palpi much longer than the antennae. Stephh. 111. 2. pi. 14. f 4.Hydrocephalus Geo^fr.* Hydrous £iww. MSS. ieacA. 1 sp. Dyt. piceus'L.Sternum very elevated and pointed ; labrum entire ; elytra narrowed behind ; lastjoint of anterior male tarsi dilated ; mandibles very much toothed. Curt. 239.r Hydrophilus Leach. ~\Hydrochloric Latr. anhydrous BrulU. J ^ "?• ^y^""' <^<^raboides Linn.Monasterium keeled, not extending beyond the posterior trochanters ; labrumemarginate ; mandibles bifid at the apex, ciliated internally ; $ tarsi simple.Curt. 159.Geoffrey's typical species of this genus was the Dyt. piceus Linn., which oughtsurely to have been retained as the type, instead of assigning it to a MS. genus ofLinnaeus, and giving another species as the type of Geoffrey's genus. I have, therefore,followed Latreille in giving a new generic name of the Carabines ratherthan adopt BruUe's plan of reversing Leach's application of these names.10 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.Serous Leach. Hydrophilus Fab. 4 sp. Dyt. curious Linn. Curt. 240.Sternum simple ; labrum entire ; antenna 8-jointed ; the club 3-jointed, obtuse ;eyes rather prominent ; elytra very gibbous, much broader than the thorax.HYDROBIUS ieacA. Theophilus i^a&. 4 sp. Dyt. fascines "Lmn.Sternum simple ; labrum slightly emarginate ; antenna 9-jointed ; body more orless elongate ; elytra striated. Curt. 243.PHILYDRUS Solier. Hydrobius A. b. Sieph. 7 sp. Hydr. melanocephalus F.Maxillary palpi much longer than the antennae, with the last joint evidentlyshorter than the preceding ; body oblong ; elytra not striated. Herbst. 7.pi. 114. 4 D.LACCOBIUS Erichson. Limnebius BrulU. 10 sp. Hydr. hipunctatus Fab.Antennae 8-jointed ; terminal joints of max. palpi but slightly elongate, subequal ;body subglobose ; elytra punctate ; posterior tibise not ciliated ; tarsi slender,ciliated. Pz. 67, 14.CHjETARTHRIA Waterhh. Cyllidium Erichson. 1 sp. Hydr. seminulum Pk.Palpi short ; third joint short ; fourth joint large ; clava of antennae 3-jointed ;penultimate joint large ; body very gibbous, not punctate ; sternum simple.Herbst. 7. pi. 114. L.Family 5. SPHMB.IDIIDJE Leach.SPHiERIDIUM Fahr. Dermestes Linn. 7 sp. D. scarabceoides Fab.Mentum flat ; palpi slender; club of antennae slightly imbricated. Curt. 518.Coercion Leach. Sph^ridium Far. 61 sp. Scarab, quisquilius Linn.Mentum broad, flat ; palpi slender ; clubofantennee large. Herbst. Col. 4pl. 37. L.f COLOSTOMA Brullt. * "1CYCLONOTUM Erich i „ a, i. f 1 sp. Hydr. orbictdaris Fab.L Hydrobius Stephh. j f ^Mentum impressed in the centre ; palpi thick ; club of antennae slightly imbricated; antennae 9-jointed ; lobes of maxillas coriaceous. Pz, 76. 13.Family 6. AGATHWIID^ West. (Anisotomidx Steph.).PHALACRUS Paykk. Anisotoma p. Illig. 28 sp. Ph. corruscus Pk.Broadly ovate, very convex ; palpi short, filiform ; third tarsal joint bilobed ; antennaremote; clava 3-jointed. Sturm. D. F. 11. pi, 30.Epictetus West. Dermestes p. Marsh. 4 sp. Ber. Gyrinoides Marsh.Elongate, ovate, narrowed at each end ; antennae approximated at the base ; club3-jointed ; head exposed. Stephh. I. M. 2. pi. 15.ALEXIA Stephh. Tritoma p, Germar. 3 sp. Trit. pilfer Germ.Very convex; terminal joint of palpi thick, obtuse; club of antenna 3-jointed;head large, deflexed ; thorax short, emarginate.LEI ODES Latr. Anisotoma lUig. 33 sp. Te. cin7iamotnea Pz, Curt. 251.Ovate, head exposed, moderate ; legs spined ; antenna remote ; club 5-jointed,its second joint minute.AGATHIDIUM /ffi^,. Volvoxis p. Kuc/. 15 sp, Silpha semimdtun h.Body globose, hemispheric ; contractile into a ball ; head very broad ; club ofantenna 3-jointed, Sturm, D. F. 2pl. 26.Lambs Fisch. Ptihum Schiipp. 5 sp, Ernest. armadillo D. G.Body broadly ovate, depressed behind ; contractile into a ball ; head very broad ;club of antenna apparently 2-jointed ; tarsi 4 or 5-jointed. De Geer 4. pi. 8. 21.I should have adopted Brulle's name for this Genus, having the priority, butit has been long previously used by MacLeay, in the Anmdosa Javanica.COLEOPTERA. AGATHIDIIDJE — Sulphide. 11CORYLOPHUS Leach. Clypeaster Anderson. 1 sp. Derm, cassidoides Marsh.Ovate, subdepressed ; head small, hidden beneath the removal pronotum ; elytrarounded at the tips ; club of antenucB 3-jointed.ORTHOPERUS Stephh. Dermestes p. Marsh. 6 sp. Derm, punctum M.Subovate, sub convex ; club of antennae 2-jointed ; head small ; elytra subtruncateat the tip.SERICODERUS 5'<epA. Scaphidium p. MarsAA. 1 sp. Scape. dubium M •Subconvex, sericeous ; club of antennas 3-jointed ; head small, concealed ; elytradistinctly truncate behind.Stirps 2. Necrophaga Latr. MacL. ( Silpha and Dermestes Linn. )Family 1. SCATHIDIIDJE MacL. (Scaphidiles Latr.')SCAPHIDIUM Osier, &c. 1 sp. Scape. 4-macv latus OYiv. Curt. 379.Elytra truncate ; scutellum distinct ; club of antennae with the second joint largerthan the first.SCAPHISOMA Leach. Silpha p. Linn. 2 sp. Silph. agaricina Linn.Elytra truncate ; scutellum indistinct ; second joint of club of antennas smallerthan the rest. Panz. 1 2. 1 6.MYLiECHUS Latr. Catops p, Fays. 1 sp. Myl. brunneus Latr.Elytra oval ; posterior angles of thorax acute ; club of antennas with the secondjoint not smaller than the preceding. Latr. Gen. pi. 8. f. 11.PTOMAPHAGUS Illig. Cholera p. Spence. 7 sp. Ft. truncated 111.Elytra oval ; posterior angles of thorax acute ; eighth joint of antennae small ;elytra not striated. Pz. 73. 10. ?CATOPS Fays. Cholera p. Spence. 17 sp. Helps chrysomeloides Pz,Elytra oval ; posterior angles of thorax acute ; elytra striated ; eighth joint ofantennae small. Curt. 566.Cholera Latr. Ptomaphagus p. III. 3 sp. Ft. agilis 111. Panz. 18. f. 1.Elytra oval ; posterior angles of thorax obtuse ; elytra striated ; antennae moderatelylong.Family 2. SILFHIDM Leach. (Sulphates Latr.)Sprites Dutch. Serapis Fisch. 1 sp. Hister glabratus Fab.Body quadrate ; club of antennae solid, 4-jointed ; elytra truncate ; mandiblesbidentate ; maxilla with an internal horny tooth. Sturm. D. F. 1 . pi. 20.NECROPHORUS Fab. Oesophagus Leach. Oliv. 7 sp. Silpha Vespillo L.Body oblong ; elytra truncate ; club of antenna large, round, 4-jointed, per-foliage; maxillae unarmed. Curt. 71.Negroes Welkin. Silpha p. Linn. 1 sp. Silph. littoralis Linn. Curt. 334.Body oblong ; elytra truncate ; club of antennae gradually thickened ; maxillsewith a claw.OICEOPTOMA Z,eac7i. Peltis p. G?eq^. 3 sp. Silpha thoracic Linn.Body oval, depressed ; club of antennas abrupt, 4-articulate ; elytra ^ rounded.Donov. 3. pi. 63.THANATOPHILUS Leach. Oiceoptoma p. Stephh. 2 sp. Silphu situate Linn.Oval, depressed ; club of antennae abrupt, 4-jointed ; electra ^ notched near thetip. Donov. 15. 539.SILPHA Linn. &c. 8 sp. Silpha 4-punctata Linn. Donov. 2. pi. 86.Oval, slightly convex ; antennae gradually thickened ; club 4-jointed ; thoraxoften anteriorly truncate.12 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.PHOSPHUGA Leach. Peltis p. Mill. 2 sp. Silph. atrata Linn.Broadly ovate, margined ; antennae gradually thickened ; club 3-jointed ; thoraxentire in front. Stephh. 3. pi. 16. f. 3.Family 3. NITID ULWjE MacL. (Kitidularise Latr.)THYMALUS Latr. Peltis p. Paykk. 1 sp. Case, limbata Fab. Curt. 39.Body nearly hemispheric; elytra entire; thorax margined; maxillae with acorneous hook ; mandibles bifid at the tip ; tarsal third joint simple.NITIDULA Fah. SiLPHA p. Linn. 28 sp. Silph. grisea Linn. Curt. 675.Body oval, subdepressed ; thorax margined ; tibiae compressed ; tarsal fourthjoint bilobed ; third joint of antennae longer than the fourth.Strongly Herhst. Nitidula p. Latr. 4 sp. Nitid. striata Far.Body oval, sub convex ; sides of thorax not depressed ; terminal joint of antennaemanilla ; third joint of antennae longer than the fourth. Curt. 339.Capta Kirhy. Cychramds p. Kugell. 1 sp. Strong, lutes Host.Body nearly hemispherical, not margined, tomentose ; third joint of antennas notlarger than the fourth ; club large; tibiae dilated. Hbst. 4. pi. 43. f. 3.MELIGETHES Kirby. Laria Scopoli. 15 sp. Nitid. iridescent Fab.Body sub quadrate, metallic coloured ; elytra entire ; third joint of antenna aslong as fourth and fifth united ; tibiae spinulose. Pz. 83. 7.PRIA Kirhy. Silpha p. Marsh. 1 sp. Silph. truncated Marsh.Subdepressed ; elytra convex, subtruncate ; club of antennae 4-jointed, serrated,sixth and seventh joints with an external process.CARPOPHILUS Leach. Dermestes p. Linn. 2 sp. Derm, hemiptera Linn.Oblong, ovate, subdepressed ; elytra scarcely covering more than half the abdomen; antennae with the third joint short. Hbst. 5. 34. E.CATERETES Herhst. Cercus Latr. 12 sp. Ernest. hipvstulatus Paykk.Ovate, sub convex ; elytra truncate ; antennae rather long ; club slender. Panz.7. 5.ANISOCERUS Hewitt. 1 sp. Anis. Spirea How. Stephh.Ovate, sub convex ; elytra truncate ; two basal joints of antennae very large, especiallyin the males.BYTURUS Latr. Dermestes p. Fahr. 1 sp. Derm, momentous Fab.Oblong, ovate, sub convex ; tarsal third joint bilobed ; antennae gradually thickened ;Curt. 618.MICROPEPLUS Z,afr. Omnium p. GyZ?. 4 sp. Mice. paratus Vayli.Broad, oblong, depressed ; elytra truncate, ribbed ; club of antennae solid. Curt,204.Family 4. Engine MacLeay.Subfamily 1. Trogositides^esX.'^. (Trogositidae and EngineSteph.).Lips Herhst. Silpha p. Linn. 6. sp, Silph. 4-pustulata Linn. Curt. 306.Tarsi 5-jointed ; maxillae produced into a broad lobe ; body oblong, subdepressed;legs short ; tibife broad, serrated.NEMOSOMA Latr. Dermestes p. Linn. 1 sp. Derm., elongatus lane.Body very long, slender, cylindric ; head as large as thorax ; tarsi 4-jointed ;maxillffi produced into a single pilose lobe. Curt. 327.TROGOSITA Fahr. Tenebrio p. Linn. 1 sp. Tenir. mauritania Linn.Body oblong, ovate, depressed ; tarsi 5-jointed; basal joint minute; maxilla producedinto a single slender lobe. Sturm. D. F. and my Jig. 11. 14 — 21.COLEOPTERA. Engine — PAUSSID^. IRRHYZOPHAGUS Herbst. Lyctus p. Fob. 11 sp. Lyct. bipustulatus Fab.Body narrow, subdepressed ; head large ; tarsi heteromerous ; outer lobe ofmaxilla slender, articulated at the top. Curt. 579.Ceylon Latr. Lyctus p. Far. 4 sp. Lyct. histories Pz. Pz. 5. 16.Body oblong, ovate, depressed ; head broad ; maxillary palpi filiform ; the lastjoint rather attenuated and truncate.^ „ r Lyct. obsolete Spence.ANOMM Anus fTesmaeZ. Ceylon p. Scena. 1 sp. 1 / , • , ,,r'^ '^ ^ y An. temcola West.Sides of thorax somewhat dilated ; eyes entirely obsolete.COL,YDIJJM Herbst. Ips p. Oliv. 1 sp. Col. elongatumYab. Panz. 3. f. 12.Body linear, sub convex ; legs very short ; club of antennas 3-jointed ; tars4-jointed ; outer lobe of maxillffl large ; inner lobe slender.ENGIS Latr. Ips p. Herbst. 3 sp. Ips rufifrons Fab. Panz. 36. f. 19.Oblong, ovate, sub convex ; tarsi 5-jointed, fourth joint short ; maxillse bilobed ;club^of antennas short, broad, flattened, and 3-jointed.BITOMA Herbst. DiTOMA Latr. 1 sp. Bit. create Herbst. Curt. 283.Oblong, depressed ; tarsi 4-jointed ; club of antennae 2-jointed ; thorax carinated.Monotony Herbst. Certain p. Gyll. 3 sp. Mon. picipes Hbst.Oblong, ovate, depressed ; thorax narrower than the elytra, crenulated ; femorathickened ; antennas with the club large, 1-jointed, with a terminal appendage.Hbst. V. pi. 46. 2.Cones Curtis. Synchita p. Hellwwww. 1 sp. Syn. variegata Hellwwww. (^Carpi7ii C.)Oblong, ovate, sub convex ; tarsi 4-jointed ; club of antennas 1-jointed, large, orbicular;maxillae with two equal lobes. Curt. 149.LYCTUS Fab. Ips p. Oliv. 1 sp. Lyct. catialiculatus Fab. Hbst. C. 5 pi. 46.Elongate, subdepressed ; thorax sub quadrate, channelled, margins crenulated ; clubof antennae 2-jointed ; terminal joint acute.(XYLOTROGUS S'if. Lyctus p. Crew. 1 sp. Xyl. brunntins ^t. St. 3. pi. 18. 4.)LISSODEMA Curtis. 1 sp. Liss. Heijana Curt.Body elliptic, convex ; elytra very long ; club of antennae 3-jointed ; thorax withthe margins denticulated ; tarsi heteromerous.CRYPTOPHAGUS i7er6s^. Tps p. Oliv. 15 sp. Derm, cellars Fab.Body ovate, sub convex ; lateral margins of thorax denticulated ; tarsi in one sexheteromerous ; club of antennas 3-jointed ; mandibles bifid at the tips.Curt. 160.ANTHEROPHAGUS Affiirerfe. Crtptophagus GyZZ. 4 sp. Tenebr . pollens lAnn.Oblong,ovate ; club of antennae 3-jointed ; margins of thorax entire ; tarsi in onesex heteromerous ; tibias dilated at the tips. Curt. 546.Subfamily 2. Cucujides West. (Cucujipes Latr.).Cujus Far. Colydium p. Herbst. 9 sp. Cujus dermestoides Fab.Antennae short, moniliform or clavate ; the basal joint short. Curt. 510.ULEIOTA i-aireiVZe. Orontes p. Fa6r. 2 sp. Br. Jlavipes fahr. Panz. 95. 4.Antennae as long as the body, filiform ; basal joint longer than the head ; the maleof the last named insect is remarkable for the large and curious bent hook withwhich the mandibles are furnished.Family 5. PA USSW^E West.There is no British species of this family.14 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.Family 6. MFCS TOPHAGW^ Wester. CEngidse p. Stephh.)MYCETOPHAGUS J'aft. Boletaria Marsh. 6 sp. Chrism. 4.pustulata Linn.Body ovate, sub convex ; antennae with a slender 5-jointed club ; tarsi composed offour simple joints, except the anterior pair in <? which are 3-jointed. Curt.156. and my j?^'. 13. 1 — 9.TETRATOMA Herhst. Boletaria p. Marsh. 4 sp. Tetrao. fungous Herbst.Body oblong, convex ; tarsi heteromerous ; club of antenna 4-jointed ; mandiblesbifid at tip. Curt. 123.BIPHYLLUS Z)e/. Bitoma p. Gyll. 1 sp. Derm, lunafus 'Fab.Body ovate, sub convex ; club of antennas 2-jointed ; thorax with an elevated lateralline on each side. Stephh. 111. M. v. 3. pi. 17. 3.TRIPHYLLUS Meg. Mycetophagus p. Gyll. 2 sp. Ips punctata Fab.Body oblong, ovate, sub convex ; club of anteniiEe 3-jointed ; basal joint thickened ;tarsi 5-jointed. Stephh. 3. pi. 17. 2.PHLOIOPHILUS Waterhhhh. 3 sp. Phi. Edwards Waterhhhh.Body oblong, ovate, very convex ; two basal joints of antennae thickened, globose ;club 3-jointed; last joint of max. palpi thick, conical. Stephh, 3. pi. 18. f. 1.PSAMMjECHUS Boudier. Crypt Kirhy. 1 sp. Anthicus bipunctatus Fab.Basal joints of tarsi bilobed j palpi large, last joint securiform ; margins of thoraxanteriorly notched. This difficult genus seems incorrectly located. Panz.26. 9.TYPHCEA Kirhy. Pentaphllyus p. Des. 4 sp. Mycet. testaceous Fab.Oblong, ovate, depressed ; palpi short, sub filiform ; antennas with the basal jointlarge ; club 3-jointed ; tarsi pestiferous ; heteromerous in one sex.MY Cette A Kirby. Dermestes p. Z. 1 sp. Derm, fumatus L,. (M. hirta Curt.)Ovate convex, hirsute; max. palpi slender; labial short, thickened ; club of antennae3-jointed; tarsi 4-jointed; third joint minute. Stephh. 3. pi. 17. fig. 1.PARAMECOSOMA Curt. 1 sp. Par. bicolor Curt, Curt. 606.Elongate, ovate, slightly depressed ; club of antennae 3-jointed ; thorax transverse,quadrate ; tarsi pestiferous.ATOMARIA Kirby. Contraria p. Marsh. 20 sp. Derm, nigripennis Pk.Elongate, ovate, subdepressed ; antennae remote at the base ; basal joint of antennaelarge; second small ; club 3-jointed ; margins of thorax entire. Pz. 99. 13.ANISARTHRIA Waterhh. Dermestes p. Marsh. 9 sp. Derm. Melts. M.Broad, subovate, sub convex ; club of antennae 3-jointed ; tenth joint minute.TRICHOPTERYX ifn-fcy. Filius SchUpp. 7 sp. Dermestes atom arius Be G.Oblong, quadrate ; wings very narrow, margined with very long hairs. De G. 4.pi. 8.HOLOPARAMECUS Curt. 1 sp. Hoi. depressus Curt.Oblong, depressed; antennae 10-jointed*; club 2-jointed; thorax obcordate;tarsi 3-jointed. Curt. 614.SILVANUS Latr. Colydium p. Paykk. 1 sp. Derm. Surinamensis Linn.Elongate, narrow, depressed ; antennae 1 1-jointed ; club 3-jointed ; tarsi 4-jointed.Pz. 14. 11.Patricius ifer&s^ Contraria p. MarsAA. lisp. Tenebr. tartarus Des.Elongate, depressed ; elytra subovate ; thorax narrow, margined ; antennae11-jointed; club 3-jointed ; tarsi 4-jointed. Curt. 311.Curtis incorrectly described the antennae of this genus as 9-jointed, It isevidently an imported species. I have it from Sierra Leone.COLEOPTERA. MYCETOPHAGID^— STAPHYLINID^. 15Coptic ARIA Marsh. "Latrivivs p. Jfferbst. lisp. Latr. pubes cens lllig.Oblong, sub convex ; thorax subcordate, immarginate ; tarsi 4-jointed Hbst, 4.pi. 20. B.EUTHEIA Waterhh. 1 sp. Ruth. Scydmanoides Stephh.Oblong, ovate ; elytra plicate at base, truncate at tips ; antennae thick ; club3-jointed ; tarsi 5-jointed. Stephh. 3. pi. 1 8, f. 2.Family 7. DERMESTIDM Leach. (Dermestes Linn.)Demesnes iirew. §-c. 4sp. Derm, lurdarius lam.Oblong, ovate ; max. palpi shorter than the maxillae ; antennae short j club large,3-jointed. Curt. 682.TIRESIAS Stephhhh. Ctesias Stephhhh. olim. 1 sp. Derm. Serra Fab.Ovate, subdepressed ; club of antennae internally serrated, 3-jointed ; thorax lobedbehind. Curt. 244.MEGATOMA Herhst. Attagenus p. Latr. 1 sp. Derm, undaius Linn.Elongate, ovate, elytra parallel ; club of antenna perforate ; last joint of palpiovate, truncate. Panz. 75. 13.ATTAGENUS Za^r. Megatoma p. i?erfcsf. 2 sp. Derm. Pellio L.'mn. Curt. 247.Ovate ; terminal joint of antennae very long in $ , last joint of palpi, elongate ; basaljoint of posterior tarsi minute.ANTHRENUS Geoff. Pyrrhus p. Linn. 5 sp. Burr. Museum Linn.Broad, sub convex, squamose ; club of antenna solid, 3-jointed ; thorax lobedbehind, with lateral grooves beneath for the reception of the antenna. Sturm.D. F. 2. pi. 36.Stirps 3. Brachelytra Latr. (Neuroptera Grav.) Comprising thesingleFamily. STAPHYLINIDJE. (Staphylinus iiww.)Subfamily 1. Staphylinides Manner. ( Staphylinidae MacL.)Villeins Leach. Staph lin us p. Paykk. 1 sp. St. dilatatus Pk.Antenna serrated after the third joint ; thorax sub orbicular. Stephh. 5. pi. 26. f. 6.Theophilus Kirby. Staphylinus p. Linn. 2 sp. St. maxillosus Linn.Antenna short, subclavate ; head and thorax glabrous ; thorax semicircular.Donov. 3. pi. 96.EMUS Leach. Theophilus p. Kirby. 1 sp. Staph, hirtus Linn. Curt. 534.Antenna short, with the 6-terminal joints sub transverse ; head and thoraxpilose; thorax semicircular.TRICHODERMA 5<epA. Staphylinqs p. j^^ oKw. Ssp. Staph, marinus Linn.Body entirely pilose ; antenna with the last joint obliquely excised, the fourthand tenth joints nearly equal ; thorax sub quadrate ; posterior angles rounded.Panz. 66. 16.STAPHYLINUS Linn. Sj-c. 8 sp. St. erythopterus Linn.Body nearly glabrous ; antenna sub filiform, with the fourth and tenth joints subequal; thorax sub quadrate. Donov. 9. pi. 308.Genius Leach. Ocypus p. Kirby. 8 sp. Staph, opens Linn.Antenna rather long, filiform ; terminal joint oblique ^t the tip; head large;mandibles dissimilarly toothed. K. and S. Intr. 1. pi. 1. f. 2.OCYPUS Kirby. Staphylinus p. Oliv. 4 sp. St. similis Oliv.Mandibles long, slender, without teeth ; lateral palpi subclavate. Oliv, 3. pi. 5.f. 42.16 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.Cassius Leach. Astragalus p. Latr. 2 sp. Astr. recipes Latr, Curt. 438.Antennae filiform ; maxillary palpi short, last joint small, truncate ; labial palpisecuriform in one sex ; thorax punctured.ASTRAP^USp. Gmr. StaphyhnusOZijj. \s^. St. ulm 0\i\. Oliv. S. pi. 4. f. 37.All the palpi with the last joint securiform.OXYPORUS Fahr. Staphylinus Linn. 2 sp, St. rufus Linn. Curt. 418.Max. palpi filiform ; last joint of labial palpi lunate ; mandibles porrected entire.Queries Leach. Staphylinus Auct. 37 sp. Staph, impressus Grav.Narrow ; palpi long, slender ; mandibles short, irregularly subdentate ; head rathersmall, subovate ; anterior tarsi greatly dilated ; antennae short, slender.Panz. 36. f. 21.MICROSAURUS Zee;. Queries p. Stephh. and Curt. 1 sp. Staph, lateralis Grav.Broad ; antennae very short, stout ; terminal joints increasing in size ; palpi longand slender ; mandibles long, very curved, Curt. 638.PHILONTHUS Leach. Staphylinus Auct, 50 sp. Staph, polite Linn.Palpi short, filiform ; mandibles with a strong central tooth ; thorax quadrate ;anterior tarsi moderately dilated; antenna filiform. Curt. 610.RAPHIRUS Leach. Staphylinus Auct. 13 sp. St. attenuate Gr.Body attenuated at each end ; eyes very large ; abdomen conic ; antennae slender;anterior tarsi moderately dilated.BISNIUS Leach. Staphylinus Auct. 6 sp. St. cephalotes Grav.Depressed; eyes moderate; head rather large; last joint of antenna abruptlyacute ; abdomen broad.Caius ieac/j. Staphylinus ^Mc^ 2 sp. Staph. Xantholoma Grav. Curt. 322.Depressed ; eyes small ; head larger than the thorax ; abdomen oblong, broaderthan the thorax ; terminal joint of antennae entire, ovate ; anterior tarsidilated.Gabriel ieac/j. Staphylinus p. Auct. 13 sp. St, aterrimus Gr.Anterior tarsi simple ; abdomen rather slender ; last joint of max. palpisubulate.REMUS Holme. 1 sp. R. Serious Holme. Ent. Tr. 2. p. 1.Thorax closely punctate ; antennae not geniculate ; body depressed ; tibiae simple.Both I US ieacA. Antoninus p. Dahl. 11 sp. Staph, fulgidus Paykk.Linear, very long ; antennae filiform, not elbowed ; terminal joint of palpi conic.Panz. 27. 23.HETEROTHOPS iiTMy. Staphylinus p. Grav. 3 sp. St. binotatus Grav.Anterior tarsi simple ; antennae straight ; terminal joint of palpi very minute ;head small, suborbicular.GYROHYPNUS Kirhy. Antoninus p. Dahl. 21 sp. Staph, tricolor Pk.Tarsi simple ; antennae inserted between the eyes, geniculated ; terminal joint ofpalpi oblong, ovate. Oliv. 3. pi. 5. f. 50.ACHENIUM Leach. Lathrobium p. Grav. 1 sp. Lath, depressed Grav.Body depressed ; antennae long, filiform, straight ; last joint of palpi very small ;tarsi dilated. Curt. 115.LATHROBIUM Grav. P^ederus Fahr. 15 sp. Staph, elongated Linn.Very long, narrow, sub convex ; anterior tarsi dilated ; anteniiEe short, straight ;terminal joint of palpi minute. Curt. 650.CRYPTOBIUM Maw?i. Octhephilum S'fcjoA. olim, 1 sp. Peed, fracticornis Yah.Long, narrow, sub convex ; antennae elbowed ; last joint of max. palpi very minute ;first joint of tarsi longer than the following. Step. 5. pi. 27.COLEOPTERA. STAPHYLINID^. 17Subfamily 2. Strides Mann. (Longipalpi Latr., Stenidre MacLeay).Junius Leach. P^derus p. Far. 4 sp. Peed, melauocephalus Fab.Thorax sub quadrate, depressed, as large as the head ; eyes small ; tarsi simple ;tibiae entire. Oliv. 3. pi. 1. f. 4.Assents Des. Junius p. Leach, 5 sp. St. augustus Fab. Don. 16. 573.Thorax sub orbicular ; head large ; fourth tarsal joint bilobed ;Regius Leach. Stilicho Latr. 4 sp. Peed, orbicidatus Fab. Curt. 168.Head large, orbicular; thorax small, narrowed in front; tarsi entire ; labrumnotched.Menon aep^. 1 sp. Med. Ruddii Ste'^h. Stephh. 5. pi. 27. f. 2.Head large, sub quadrate ; thorax sub quadrate, as large as the head ; labrumnotched in the middle ; mandibles internally 4-dentate; tarsi entire.P.(EDERUS Far. Staphylinus p. Linn. 5 sp. St. riparius Linn. Curt. 108.Head large ; thorax obovate, convex, larger than the head ; eyes small ; fourthtarsal joint bilobed.Tenus Latr. P^derus p. Oliv. 66 sp. Staph, bipustulatus Linn. Curt. 164.Head and eyes very large; thorax elongate-ovate; labium elongate, retractile;abdomen simple.Dignus Leach. Tenus p. Latr. 1 sp. S. ccerulescens Gyll. Curt. 107.Eyes moderate ; anal seta; long ; labium not elongated.Subfamily 3. Oxytelides. (Stenidtep. Stephh., 'Denticrxxva. Latr.)SIAGONIUM Kirby. Prognathus Latr. 1 sp. Shag. 4-corne K. Curt. 23.Depressed ; tarsi distinctly 5-jointed ; labium deeply notched ; antennae notelbowed ; head (J cornuted.Alexius Leach. Oxytelus p. Grav. 3 sp. Staph, tricornis Pk. Curt. 143.Narrow, convex ; anterior t\hise toothed ; antenna; elbowed ; head and thoraxS cornuted.HESPEROPHILUS ^itejoA. Oxytelus p. Grav. 5 sp. Oxyt. fracticornis Gr.Narrow, sub convex ; antennae elbowed ; head and thorax S unarmed ; terminaljoint of palpi slender.PLATYSTETHUS Mani. Oxytelus p. Grav. 9 sp. Staph, corsicans Pk.Short, broad in front; head lobed; all the tibiae denticulato-pectinate ; thoraxconvex, channelled. Oliv. 3. pi. 5. 48.OXYTELUS Grav. Staphylinus p. Linn. 19 sp. Staph, piceus Linn.Elongate, sublinear ; head unarmed ; two posterior tibiro simple ; thorax depressed,channelled. Panz. 27. 14.APLODERUS Stephh. Staphylinus p. Marsh. 1 sp. St. brachypterus M.Thorax subdepressed, not channelled ; abdomen broadest behind ; head small,orbicular ; terminal joint of palpi minute ; elytra short.TROGOPHLjEUS Mani. Oxytelus p. Grav. 1 sp. Oxyt. corsicans Gray.Linear, depressed ; tibije unarmed, ciliated ; antennae elbowed ; last joint of palpi- minute.Capacious Kirby. Oxytelus p. Gyll. 9 sp. Ca. delineates K.Antennae straight'; thorax cordate-truncate, sculptured ; tibise simple ; tarsiindistinctly 3-jointed. Stephh. 5. 27. f. 4.T^NOSOMA Mann. Aleochara p. Gyll. 1 sp. Al. pusilla Grav.Linear, narrow ; tarsi 5-jointed, last joint long ; last joint of maxillary palpismall, subulate.CT8 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.PHLOEOCHAKIS Mann. 1 sp. P. siihtilissima Mann.Sublinear ; basal joints of 4 ant. tarsi dilated ; last joint of max. palpi acicular.(Ent. Mag. 24. 408.)COPROPHILUSia^r. Elohim Leach. 1 sp. Staph, striatiihis Fah.Linear, narrow, depressed ; tibia spinulose ; tarsi 5-jointed ; last joint of maxillarypalpi largest, conic, truncate.Subfamily 4. Omalides. ( Applauds hair., Omalida ilfaci.)EViESTHETUS Graven, Epithets Lam. 1 sp. Ev. saber Gr.Linear, subcylindric ; antenna clavate ; max. palpi long, 3-jointed; thorax coveted.Ahrens, 7. 13.SYNTOMIUM Curt. EvjEsthetus p. Kirhy, 1 sp. Sent. nigroceneum K.Broad, depressed ; antennae clavate ; labrum deeply notched ; margins of thoraxcrenulated. Curt. 228.PSEUDOPSIS Netvman. 1 sp. Pseud, sulcatus Newmm.Head narrow ; antenna? filiform, thickened at the tips ; terminal joint of max.palpi slender, acute, the preceding dilated ; thorax nearly circular, sulcated ;elytra wider than the thorax.MEGARTHRUS A7/-6y. Staphvlinus p. Oliv. 9 sp. St. depressus Vk.Broad, subdepressed ; antennae subclavate ; labrum transverse ; two basal joints ofantennae robust. Stephh. 5. 27. 5.PROTEIN US Xa^r. Caxebetes p. Sch. 3 sp. Derm.hrachypterus Pk.Oval ; antenna clavate ; club 3-jointed ; palpi subulate ; elytra more than halfthe length of abdomen. Pz. 4. 10.ANTHOBIUM ieacA. Silpha p. Mzrs/t. 24 sp. Silph. tor quota Marsh.Oval, subdepressed ; elytra nearly covering the abdomen ; thorax short, transverse.Panz. 24. 6.CORYPHIUM Kirhij. 1 sp. Cor. angusticolle K.Depressed oblong ; head broader than the thorax ; terminal joint of palpi incrassated.MICRALYMMA West. 1 sp. M. Johnston.Oblong, depressed ; elytra very minute ; thorax obcordate ; abdomen long, muchbroader than the thorax, margined ; labrum transverse, 3-lobed ; tarsi with verylong hairs. Mag. Zool. and Bot. vol. ii.Omnium Grav. Staphylinus Pk. 33 sp. St. planus Pk. Oliv. 3. pi. 3. 27.Oblong-ovate, depressed ; thorax short, transverse, or obcordate ; antennas short ;terminal joint of palpi acute.Acidity Kirby. Staphylinus p. Far. 2 sp. St. creates F.Oblong-ovate, sub convex ; antenna? long, sub filiform ; labrum and mandiblesentire ; thorax ovate, broadest behind. Stephh. 5. 27. f. 6.Lester Latr. Staphylinus p. Linn. 14 sp. St. carabines Linn.Thorax obcordate ; abdomen broad, depressed ; antennae filiform ; elytra long ;last joint of max. palpi subacuminate. Curt. 303.Subfamily 5. Tacliyporides. ( Tachyporidae Stephh.)Division 1. Tachinidea West. (Machines Mann.)MEGACRONUS ^<ep/i. Machines p. Great'. 8 sp. St.analis 0\u.Elongate, narrow ; thorax transverse, with rounded angles ; last joint of antennaelong ; palpi filiform ; last joint as long as the preceding. Stephh. 5. 26. 5. b.COLEOPTERA, STAPHYLINID^. 19MYCETOPORUS Mann. Ischnosoma Sfeph. 12 sp. Tach. splendid Gr.Slender, posteriorly attenuated ; thorax broadest behind ; last joint of max.palpi minute. Stephh. 5. 26. 5. a.BOLITOBI US ieac/i. Machines p. Grav. 18 sp. Staph, lunulattis harm.Elongate-ovate, attenuated behind ; head long ; palpi slender ; antenna; ratherlong. Don. 15. 532.TACHYPORUS Gray. Oxyporus p. Fa6r. 38 sp. Staph, chrysomelinus lAnn.Broad, posteriorly attenuated ; palpi subulate ; abdominal segments entire ; headsmall. Panz. 9. 14.TRICHOPHYA Mann. Tachyporus B. b. Stephh. 1 sp. Tach. nodicornis K.Short, rather broad ; antennae nodose, verticillate ; terminal joint of max. palpistout.HYPOCYPHTUS SchUpp. Cypha Kirby. 5 sp. Tach. ffranulum Gr.Globose, posteriorly attenuated ; abdomen almost retracted beneath the elytra ;club of antennae distinct, 3-jointed.Courts iSfep/i. Tachyporus p. Grav. 12 sp. Tach. bipustulatug Fah.Thorax transverse, broad behind ; abdomen conical ; last joint of max. palpiminute. Pz. 16. 21.Machines Grav. Staphylinus p. Linn. 26 sp. St. sulphide Linn.Broad, posteriorly attenuated ; palpi filiform ; abdominal segments emarginate.Panz. 18. 20.Division 2. Aleocharidea West. ( Aleochari des Mann. )ISCHNOPODA Stephhhh. Aleochaba A. Stephhhh. Cat. 7 sp. Aleoch. aterrima Grav.Thorax longer than broad ; tarsi long, especially in the hind legs.POLYSTOMA Stephhhh. Aleochara p. Stephhhh. Cat. 3 sp. Al. crassicornis KDensely pubescent ; abdomen linear, obtuse ; thorax broader than long ; antennasthick in the middle ; mouth prominent.DEINOPSIS Ma^/icm. 1 sp. B. fuscus M. Ent. Mag. 22. 193.Mandibles with two acute teeth, and broad internal denticulated lobe ; maxillaryinternal lobe denticulated at the tip ; labial palpi obsolete ; tarsi 3-jointed ;abdomen conical.CENTROGLOSSA Matthews. 6 sp. C. confides M.Mandibles simple, with an internal serrated lobe ; maxillary internal lobe long,sabre-shaped ; labial palpi obsolete ; labium with two long terminal processes.Ent. Mag. 22. 194.Gymnasia Hasten. Mtll^na p. Erichson.* 1 sp. Al.duhia Gr.Antenna; filiform, straight ; mouth rostrate ; palpi short, last joint subulate.DI GLOSS A Haliday. 1 sp. D. merse Hal. Ent. Mag. 4. p. 253.Antenna; with the second joint very long; maxillae with two very long lobes;labium with two long setaceous laciniae in the place of palpi.ZYRAS Stephh. Ai.eochaua p. Kirhy. 1 sp. Al. Haivorthii K.Elytra very short ; antennae rather long, subgeniculated ; last joint of palpi long,slender. Stephh. 5. 26. f. 3.(PHLOEOPORA Erichs. Aleochara p. Stephh. 1 sp. Al. cortical Grav.)Dr. Erichson gives Al. nubia as the type of his genus Myllaena, and the Aleoch.brevicollis Pk. (carnivora Grav. Stephh. 5. 433,) as the type of Gymnasia.C 220 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.BOLETOCHARA Mann. Aleochara Gill. 100 sp. Aleoch. collars Grav.Subdepressed posteriorly, sublinear ; thorax broader than the head ; antennaegenerated; thickened to the tips, basal joint of tarsi longest. Stephh. 5.26. 2.OLIGOTA 21/anw. Aleochara C. b. 2. Stephh. Cat. 6 sp. Al. pusillima Gr.Subdepressed, not attenuated ; tarsi slender, with equal joints ; five terminaljoints of antennae dilated ; legs pubescent.OXYPODA Mann. Aleochara D. Stephh. Cat. 17 sp. Aleoch. ruficornis Gr.Posteriorly attenuated ; antennas rather long, subincrassate at the tip ; basaljoint of tarsi rather longer than the second ; legs pubescent.GYROPHyENA Mash. Aleochara E. Stephh. Cat. 8 sp. St. manus Pk.Short, depressed ; thorax scarcely longer than the head, the latter rhomboid ;elytra transverse ; tarsal joints equal.ALEOCHARA Grav. Aleochara F. Stephh. Cat. 34 sp. St. hipunctata Gr.Elongate, robust; thorax convex, broad; elytra transverse; antennae thick, jointsof equal length. Oliv. 3. pi. 5. 44.r Aleochara G. Stephh. Cat. "iPELLA Stephh. -; ,, n ■ , ^ 5 sp. Staph, liynhatus Pk.^ \ Myrmidons p. Erichson. J . ,^^Thorax broad, posteriorly sub angulated on each side ; antennae thickened.HOMALOTA Mann. Aleochara p. Gyll. 1 sp. Al. plana Gyll.Linear, flat ; thorax breadth of head ; antennae moniliform ; last joint of tarsi long.HY'GRONOiVIA Erich. Hojialota Curt. 1 sp. H. timidity. Curt. 514.Linear, flat ; tarsi 4-jointed ; joints subequal.Bucephalus Kirhy. Gykophcena p. Er. 1 sp. Enc. complicate K.Very broad ; abdomen strongly' margined ; antennae short, thick at tip ; headsmall. Stephh. 5. 26. f. 4.Colliers Grav. Hojialota p. Erich. 2 sp. Cal. Spencii K. Curt. 443.Oblong, depressed ; last joint of antennae very long ; third joint of max. palpiswollen ; fourth very minute.(? Places Erich, "i Aleochara p. Stephh. 1 sp. Al. papilio Grav. ?)Still] S Dill: Drusilla ieacA. 1 sp. St. canaliculatus Fab. Pz. 27. 13.Narrow, depressed; abdomen broader than the thorax ; palpi filiform ; thorax oblong.Linaria Leach. Lomechusa p. Grav. 1 sp. Lorn. cantata Gr. Curt. 410,Broad ; posterior angles of thorax acutely produced ; terminal joint of antennaeelongate, conic ; penultimate joint of abdomen simple.Temples Dillww. GowioDEs Kirby. 2 sp. Lorn, paradox Gyll.Broad ; penultimate joint of abdomen emarginate, with lateral processes ; secondand third joints of antennae small. Guerin Ic. 10. f. 6.LOMECHUSA Grav. Staphylinus Fab. 1 sp. St. emarginatns F.Broad ; penultimate joint of abdomen emarginate and styliferous ; antennaefusiform. Oliv. 3. pi. 2. 12.Calder Mann. Aleochara p. Grav. 1 sp. Cato. nigra Mann.Head exserted, broader than the base of thorax ; thorax of equal breadth throughout; elytra entire at the base ; tarsal joints equal.Malaria jLcacA. Aleochara p. Grav. lisp. St. sulcatiis Vel. Curt. 429.Head large, exserted ; thorax broad at the apex ; base of elytra not plicate ;basal tarsal joint long.Italia Leach. Aleochara p. Grav. 6 sp. Al. impressa Grav.Head exserted, large ; thorax narrow at base ; base of elytra plicate ; tarsaljoints equal. Oliv. 3. pi. 5.41.COLEOPTERA. BYRRHID^. 21Subfamily 6. Pselaphides West. (Tsela^hideB Stephh.)EUPLECTUS Kirhij. Pselaphus p. Reich. 9 sp. Ps. signature Reich.Elongate, narrow, depressed ; last joint of palpi ovate, conic ; ditto of antenna;large. Denny, pi. 1.Premium Ache. Euplectus p. Denny. 1 sp. Peel. brevicornis Reich.Elongate, subcyllndric ; last joint of palpi securiform ; thorax ovate ; last jointof antennae very large. Denny, pi. 2. f. 4.BYTHINUS Leach. Pselaphus p. Reich. 4 sp. Ps. securiger Reich.Short, very convex ; last joint of palpi large, securiform ; thorax cordate ; secondjoint of antennas very large. Denny, pi. 3.Areopagus ZeacA. Pselaphus p. i?eicA. 4sp. Ps. bulbifer Reich. Curt. 422.Short, very convex ; thorax widest in front ; second joint of antennae moderate.Typhus Leach. Pselaphus p. Paykk. 1 sp. Ps. niger Pk. Denny, pi. 6.Body short, convex; terminal joint of palpi internally greatly dilated, securiform;fifth joint of antennae $ dilated ; thorax not impressed.XYRXJ^* Aunt. Bryaxis p. Z/cacA ? 1 sp. Peel. mucronatus Vz. Curt. 315. 1 — 5.Tarsi didactyle ; intermediate trochanters spinose ; thorax nearly spherical.BRYAXIS Knoch. Reichenbachia Leach. Z. J. 7 sp. Staph, impressus Pz.Short, sub convex ; last joint of palpi conical, externally somewhat dilated ; thoraxcordate, 3-foveated. Curt. 315.BATRISUS Ati,b£. Bryaxis p. Stephh. 1 sp. 2?;-. tiigriventris Denny.Subelongate, sub convex ; antennae inserted in a lateral fossula ; thorax with threelongitudinal sulci. Denny, pi. 7. f. 1.PSELAPHUS Herbst. Anthicus p. Pz. 4 sp. Ps. Herbstii Reich.Body somewhat elongate ; elytra and abdomen depressed j terminal joint ofpalpi long, clavate. Denny, pi. 9.Tribe 2. Chilognathomorpha MacLeay.Siibtribe 1. Cordylocerata West.Stirps 1. Clavicornes Stephens.Family 1. BYRRHIDJE Leach. (Byrrhus Linn')Pyrrhus ZiVm. Cistern p. Afors/j. 10 sp. B. pilulaYIvcm. Curt. J 35.Ovate-globose, convex, sericeous ; club of antennae 5-jointed, gradually thickenedto the tip. 'Rhododendron Latr. Byrrhus p. Panz. 1 sp. Sphmr. fasciculi e F.Hemispheric, ovate ; antennae with the third joint very long ; club large, 3-jointed ;elytra fasciculated. Curt. 246.SYNCALYPTA Dilhc. CniETOPHORA K. 3 sp. By. arenaria St.Hemispheric, ovate ; antennae with third joint small ; club 3-jointed ; elytrarigidly setose. Sturm, D. F. 2. pi. 35, e.Tripods A%. Anthrekus p. Fa. 1 sp. Anther. hirtus Vab. Pz. 11. 16.Ovate, sub convex, densely pilose ; legs slender ; club of antennae 3-jointed.ASPIDIPHORUS Z«y. NiTiDULA p. Gy;. I sy>. N. articulates G. Curt. 450. fSuborblculate ; elytra rounded at tip ; antennae 10-jointed; club long, 3-jointed.The type of this genus is the Pselaphus mucronatus of Panzor, jvhieh Stephensgives as synonymous with Bryaxis sanguineous, and Curtis figures the trochanters ofthis species with spines ; I have therefore introduced Aube's genus.f Mr. Curtis's figure giving this insect the habit of a Hister, with posteriorlytruncate elytra, is incorrect.C 322 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.SIMPLOCARIA Marsh. Byrrhus III. 2 sp. B. semistriatus 111. Curt. 335.Ovate, convex ; club of antennas 5-jointed ; last joint of palpi acuminate.OOMORPHUS Ch?-^ Byrrhus p. 5<?«-m. 1 sp. B. consoler St. Curt. 347.Broadly ovate ; third tarsal joint bilobed ; club of antenna; 5-jointed, eighth jointsmall.LIMNICHUS Zeigl. Byrrhus Duftseh. 1 sp. Limn, serious Dust.Ovate, convex ; antennae rather long ; two basal joints short, thicker than thefollowing ; club 4-jointed.Family 2. HIS TEB ID jE Leach. (Hister JLiMw.)PLATYSOMA Leach. Hololefta p. Des. 2 sp. Hist, depressus Fab.Flat ; four posterior tibia with a row of small teeth. Panz. 80. 6.Sister Li}m. Hitter p. Stephh. 21 sp. H. unicolor Linn. Curt. 470.Subdepressed ; four posterior tibia; with two rows of spines ; prosternum anteriorlylobed ; outer striae of elytra entire.DENDROPHILUS Leach. Hister p. Auct. 1 sp. Hist, punctatus Pk,Oval, or subglobose sub convex ; four posterior tibi broad, externally angulated,with one row of spines. Pk. 7. f. 5.FAHOMAhVS Erich. Dendrophilus p. ieac^. 7 sp. Hist. Jlavicornis Uhst.Oval, subdepressed ; tibiee narrow, subincurved ; prosternum lobed in front.Pk. t. 8. f. 6.Springs Erich. Hister p. Stephh. 12 sp. Hist, nitidulus Fab. Pk. pi. 5. f. 3.Short, subdepressed ; prosternum anteriorly produced, but not lobed ; outer striaeof elytra abbreviated.Theophilus Leach. Hister p. Auct. 2 sp. H. sidcatus Fab. Curt. 228.Elytra deeply slate.ABRiEUS Leach. Hister p. Auct. 2 sp. H. glohosus Fab. Pk. t. 8. f. 2.Subglobose ; elytra smooth ; tibial slender, entire ; prosternum short.Stirps 2. La7tiellicor7ies Latr.Race 1. Priocera Dumeril,' comprising the singleFamily LUCANIDJE Leach. (Lucan Linn")Lucius Scop, Platters Geoff. 1 sp. L. corvus. Curt. 490.Depressed ; mandibles <J very large ; club of antennae 4-jointed ; pectinated.Dorcas MacL, Platters Latr. 1 sp. L. parallelipipedus L.Depressed ; mandibles $ moderate ; club of antenna 4-jointed, subperfoliated ;anterior tibia; narrow, serrated. Donov. 8. 264.Platters MacL. Lucan p. Latr. 1 sp. L. carabines Linn.Depressed ; mandibles S moderate ; club of antennae 4-lamellate ; anterior tibiaeserrulate. Curt. 274.SINODENDRON MacL. Synodendron* Fab. 1 sp. Scar, cylindrical Linn.Cylindrical ; head and thorax $ cornuted; club of antennae 3-jointed. Curt. 478.Race 2. Petalocera Dumeril. ( Scarabaeus Linn, Scarabaeus Lat, )Surface 1. Sarcophagi MacL.Family 1. GEOTR UPID.E MacLeay.GEOTRUPES Latr, Scarabaeus Fah. 10 sp. Scar, stercorarius Linn.Ovate-orbicular; third joint of antenna; longer than second ; thorax and head J"varied. Curt. 266.This must evidently have been a misprint, the name being evidently derivedfrom him (noceo), and AtvJpov (arbor), and not Ivv (cum), and the latter word, aasuggested by Dumeril.COLEOPTERA. LAMELLICORNES. 23TYPHiEUS Leach. Ceratophyus Fisch. 1 sp. Scar. typh<EUS Linn.1 Ovate-orbicular; third joint of antennae longer than second; thorax $ cornuted.Sam. pi. 1. f. 1.BOLBOCERUS Kirby, Odontteus Koppe, 3 sp. Scar, mobilicornis Fab.Suborbiculate ; third joint of antennae short ; head and thorax ^ cornuted.Curt. 259.Family 2. SCARABJEIDJE MacLeay.COPRIS Geoff. Scarabaeus Linn. 1 sp. Sc. lunar Linn. Curt. 414.Ovate, convex ; last joint of labial palpi minute.Oesophagus Xa<r. Copris p. /%. 10 sp. S.vaccal^mn. Curt.Broadly ovate, depressed ; last joint of labial palpi evanescent.Family 3. AFHODIJDJE MacLeay.APHODIUS 7/%. Scarabaeus in. 58 sp. &. /ossor Linn. Curt. 27.Oblong ; palpi with the last joint slender ; maxillse with a fleshy lobe,PSAMMODIUS CyZ;. Aphodius p. 7%. 2 sp. Aph. sulcicoms \\\\%. Curt. 258.Palpi with the last joint ovate ; maxime with a horny lobe ; thorax sulcated.OXYOMUS £sc. Aphodius p. C2<r<. 4 sp. Aph. paratus Fab. Pz. 38. 13.Clypeus emarginate, smooth ; elytra deeply sulcated ; thorax smooth.Family 4. TR Gid MacLeay,.SGIALIA Latr. Aphodius Illig. 1 sp. Scar, c/lohosus Fans. Donov. 14. 470.Antennae 9-jointed ; body short, ovate, very gibbose ; thorax smooth.Trot Far. Scarabaeus Linn. 4 sp. Scar, subulosus Linn. Curt. 574.Antennae 10-jointed ; body subovate, convex ; thorax rugose.Family 5. Dynasties MacLeay.Oracles Illig. Geotrupes p. Fab. 1 sp. Sc. nasicoryiis lAnn.Maxillae unarmed. Sturm. D. F. 1. pi. 4. 5.DYNASTES MacLeay. Geotrupes p. Fab. 2 sp, Sc. inertia Martyn.Maxilla: toothed. Martyn, pi. 4. f. 35.Surface 2. Thalerophaga MacLeay.Family L (or 6.) R U TEL IBM. MacLeay.Family 2. (or 7. ) ANOPL O GNA THIDJE MacLeay.(There are no British species of either of these Families.)Family 3. (or 8.) MEL OL ONTHIDJE MacLeay.Erica MacLeay. Tenuicrusta Poet. 1 sp. Scar, brunneus Linn.Short, ovate; antennae 10-jointed ; claws bifid ; last joint of palpi subacute. Pz.95. 7.OMALOPLIA Koppe. Mei.olontha p. Far. 1 sp. Mel. rtiricola Fab.Short, convex ; antenna; 10-jointed ; claws bifid ; last joint of maxillary palpitruncate. Donov. 11. 378.RHISOTROGUS Latr. Zantheujiia Leach. 2 sp. Scar, solstitialus Linn.Antenna; 9-jointed; club 3-jointed ; claws equal, simple. Mart. 2. 17.MELOLONTIIA Far. Scarab^kl's p. Limi. 3 sp. 'Mel. vulgaris Fab.Antennas 10-jointed ; club 6-7-jointed ; claws equal, with a basal tooth. Curt. 406.PHYLLOPERTHA Kirby. Anomaly p. Koppe. 3 sp. Scar, horticola Linn.Antennae 9-jointed ; claws unequal ; clypeus not produced ; thorax narrow behind.Curt. 526.C 424 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.Anomaly Kiippe. Melolontha p. Far. 3 sp. Mel. Frisch Fab.Antennae 9-jointed ; claws unequal ; clypeus not produced ; thorax broad behind.Don. 11. 390.ANISOPLIA Meg. Scarabaeus p. Linn, 1 sp. Mel. austria* Herbst.Antennae 9-jointed ; claws unequal ; clypeus advanced, reflexed. Staph. 3.pi. 19. 1.HOPLIA Illig. Melolontha p. Oliv. 1 sp. Mel. argent Oliv.Antenna; 10-jointed ; claws simple, but unequal. Oliv. 1. pi. 3. f. 22 a.Family 4. (or 9.) GLAPHYRIDJE Ma.cl^Ay. ( Anthobii Xa^n )(There is no British species of this Family.)Family 5. (or 10.) CE TONIW^MacLQay. ( Melitophili io<r.)Trochus Far. Melolontha p. Herbst. 1 sp. Scar, fascinates Linn.Tomentose ; metasternura not produced ; anterior tibiae 2-dentate ; anus entire.Donov. 4. 140.ALEUROSTICTUS K. Zl. J. GNORiiwas St. Far. §• 5'. 2si5. Sc. variables L,.Glabrous ; monasterium not produced ; anterior tibiffi 2-dentate ; anus notched.Curt. 286.VALGUS Scribe. Acanthus Kirby. 1 sp. Scar, hemiptera Linn.Thorax with two longitudinal elevations ; anterior tibias 5-dentate ; abdomen $terminating in a slender point. Hbst. 3. pi. 27. 13.Catania Far. Scarabaeus p. Linn. 2 sp. Scar, aratus Linn. Curt. 374.Monasterium porrected ; epimera very large ; elytra sinuated at the sides.Subtribe 2. Priocerata West. (Territories Latr.')Stirps 1. Macrosterni West. (Sterno Latr.)Family 1. B Pre S TIB jE Leach. (Buprestis Xiww.)CHRYSOBOTRIS Esch. Buprestis A. a. Stephh. 2 sp. B. chrysostom Linn.Scutel distinct, sub triangular ; middle legs inserted close together ; prosternumdepressed ; fore thighs thick and toothed ; third joint of antennae as long asfourth. Pz. 68. 18.PCECILONOTA Esch. Latipalpis p. Solier. 11 sp. B. rutland Fab.Scutel distinct, transverse ; labrum rectangular ; third joint of antennae short ;tarsi not dilated, with the fourth joint scarcely smaller than third. Pz. 22. 8.DICERS A Esch. Latipalpis p. Sol. 1 sp. B. cenea Linn. Herbst. 150. 9.Scutel distinct, not transverse ; last segment of abdomen 3-dentate in one sex,bidentate in the other ; tarsi not dilated, fourth joint as large as third.ANCYLOCHIRA £«c/i. Buprestis p. Sol. 3 sp. B. rustica lain.Scutel distinct; menti transverse, truncate in front; last joint of max. palpias long as the preceding, slightly dilated at the tip ; tarsi slender ; anteriortibiae S bent and hooked. Pz. 68. 19.MELANOPHILA .B^c/j. Buprestis p. ^o?. lisp. B. tarda Vab.Scutel distinct, triangular ; thorax sinuated at the base ; mentum transverse ;anterior tibiae $ simple; tarsi slender. Pz. 68. 21.Anti Asia £scA. Buprestis B. b. Stephh. 4 sp. B. nitidula linn.Scutel distinct, triangular ; thorax and elytra truncate at the base ; antennaescarcely dilated ; posterior femora straight ; middle legs close together.Curt. pi. 31.This insect is incorrectly named Agricola by English Entomologists.COLEOPTERA. ELATERIDJi:. 25Proxima Serville. Arius p. Esch. 2 sp. Bupr. 9-mactilata hum.Scutel distinct, rounded ; thorax truncate at the base ; mentum with a longcentral tooth. Pz. 68. 17.AGRILV S Mer/erle. Arius A. Stephh. 4 sp. Bupr. viridis 'Linn. Curt, pl.67.Scutel distinct, triangular ; thorax sinuated at base ; tarsi with pulvilli beneaththe four basal joints ; tarsal claws toothed.APHANISTICUS Latr. Buprestis p. Fab. 1 sp. Aph. pusillus Gyll.Middle legs wide apart ; body linear ; head notched ; antenna with the fourterminal joints dilated. Curt, 262.Traces Fab. Buprestis Don. 3 sp. Bupr. minima Linn. Donov. 8. 256.Short, broad; antennae free, serrated towards the tips j scutel wanting; thoraxposteriorly trilobed.Family 2. E UCNEMIDJE West.Subfamily 1. Eumenides Latreille.Mensis Oliv. Elater p. Linn. 1 sp. El. bujwestoides Linn. Curt. 55.Antennae distant at base, lamellae in the S j body cylindric ; legs flattened.MICRORHAGUS Esch. Ennemis Stephh. 1 sp. Euc. pygmies Mann.Body narrow, depressed ; antenna quite close together at the base; antenna ^ramose; legs slender. Mann. Euc. pi. 2. f. 4, 5, 6.Subfamily 2. Ceropliytides Latreille.CEROPHYTUM Latr. Ceratophytum Lea. 1 sp. Cer. elateroides 'Latr.Body ovoid ; antennas $ strongly pectinated ; tarsal fourth joint bilobed. Guerin,Icon. Ins. pi. 12. f. 6.THROSCUS ia^r. Trixagus CyZZ. 2 sp. Eat. dermestoides Linn. Curt. 163.Elliptic, depressed ; antennas terminated by a 3-jointed perfoliated club ; palpiclavate ; fourth tarsal joint triangular.Family 3. ELA TEBIDjE Leach. (Elater Linn. )ADRASTUS Esch. Cataphagus A. p. Stephh. 2 sp. El. hiatus Fab.Plates at the base of the hind legs gradually dilated within ; the sides of thethorax acutely marginal in the middle ; body nearly linear ; ungues denticulated.Herbst. Col. pi. 165. f. II.DALOPIUS Esch. Cataphagus A. p. Stephh, 1 sp. El. marginatus Linn.Basal plates abruptly dilated within ; sides of thorax acutely margined in themiddle; antennae serrate; body more robust. Oliv. 31. pi. 8. f. 83.AGRIOTES Esch. Cataphagus A. Stephh. 4 sp. El. spectator Linn.Antenna; submoniliform, second joint long ; sides of thorax not acutely marginedin the middle; forehead and thorax very convex ; body oblong. Pz. 93. 13.SERICOSOMUS Serv. Serious Esch. 4 sp. El. brunneus Linn.Antennae short, serrate, second and third joints short ; basal plates broad, equal jbody more or less cylindric ; thorax short, convex. Herbst. 112. 27. b,Echinus Esch. Elater A. a. p. Stephh. 1 sp. El. aterrimus* Linn.Antennae elongate ; basal plates rather broader within ; body very convex ; fourthEschscholtz gives the Elater aterrimus Fab. as the type of his Echinus, butDejean and Latreille place the Terminus Li7in. in this genus, giving the formerinsect, which is distinct, and is the Niger of Linn., in the genus Athos. Mr. Stephenshas also adopted this arrangement.26 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.antennal joint longer than the fifth, the eleventh short and broad. Herbst.pi. 161. f. 11.LIMONIUS Esch. Elate A. b. c. Steps. 7 sp. El. Ruder Fab. Pz. 34. 13.Frontal carina distinct ; basal joint of tarsus rather shorter than second ; secondand third antennal joints very minute ; body oblong, subeylindric ; thoraxelongate, convex.ELATER Linn., Esch., Latr., Stephh. (p.) 9 sp. El. sanguineous Linn.Basal plates suddenly dilated within, and toothed in the middle ; tarsi setose, thejoints gradually smaller; frontal carina distinct; body depressed; sides ofthorax not dilated. Don. pi. 508. f. 2.Posterior Latr. Elater B. 2.* Stephh. 1 sp. El. holosericem Fab.Body suboval, subdepressed, very pubescent ; thorax dilated at the sides ; antenna?with the second and third joints not dilated, and smaller than the fourth; clawssimple. Herbst. Col. 161. f. 9.AGRYPNUS Esch. Elater B. 2.** Steps. 3 sp. El. marinus Linn.Body suboval, subdepressed, very pubescent ; thorax dilated at the sides ; antennaewith the second joint dilated, the first large ; tarsi without soles ; posteriormargin of thorax with a central tubercle. Herbst. 161. f. 8.HYPNOIDUS Dull. St. | Htpolithus Esch. 1 g ^l. riparius Fab.xiij.a.-iv^ ^ Cryptohtpnus £;scft. J ^ 'Frontal carina distinct ; palpi broad, securiform ; scutellum broad ; antennasthick, subperfoliate, with the second and third joints almost as large as the others.Pz. 34. 12.Draperies £sc/j. Selatosomus p. Stephh. 1 sp. El. 2-macidatus Fah.Palpi acumhiate ; tibiae externally, with long ciliae; posterior trochanters suddenlydilated within ; frontal carina distinct. Pz. 76. 9.MELANOTUS Esch. Perineum St. 1 sp. El. fulvipes Hbst. Hbst. 46. 162. 2.Antennae serrated, with the second and third joints short, the eleventh long,slender ; body attenuated behind ; posterior thoracic angles large ; tarsi slender,simple ; claws serrated.Lucius Latr. Steatoderus Esch. 1 sp. El. ferruginous Linn. Don. 356. 1.Antennae strongly serrated ; the second and third joints very small, eleventhabruptly attenuated at the tip ; posterior trochanters spined within.CTENICERUS Latr. Combines Latr. ann.) 7 sp. El. pectinicornis Linn.Antennae ^ often strongly pectinated, with the second joint minute ; labrumtransverse ; posterior trochanters narrow, lanceolate ; frontal carina wanting.Donov. 356. 9.SELATOSOMUS Stephh. Di acanthus ia^r. (^mw.) 2 sp. El. census Linn.Body broad, glabrous ; antennae short, serrated, with laconic joints, the third aslarge as the following ; tarsi simple, without soles ; thorax gibbous. Donov.535. f. 1, 2.CARDIOPHORUS Esch. Caloderus Stephh. 3 sp. El. thoracic Fab.Scutellum cordate ; posterior femora thicker than the others ; tarsi slender,simple ; thorax immarginate, very gibbous ; third joint of antenna; as large asthe fourth. Pz. 6. 12.Athos Esch. Anathrotus Stephh. lO sp. El. vitalis Fab. Don. 518. 2.Frontal cai-ina distinct ; basal joint of tarsi as long as the two following, united,the third joint triangularly dilated, spongy ; labrum narrow, transverse ; palpishort, slender.COLEOPTERA. ELATERID^— MELYRIDJi:. 27CTENONYCHUS Stephhhh. Des. Melanotusp. ? Esch. 1 sp. Ct. hirsutus Stephhhh.Claws toothed ; third tarsal joint bilobed, spongy beneath, the two basal jointsdilated ; antennae not compressed, second joint small ; elytra with long hairs.APLOTARSUS Stephh. Careiophorus p. ? Esch. 4 sp. El. rufipes Fab.Claws simple"; palpi filiform ; thorax elongate, sub convex ; tarsi simple, fourthjoint not minute ; antennae subserrated, second joint very minute, third joint aslarge as fourth. Panz. 93. 14.CAMPYLIS Fisch. Exopthalmus Latr. olim. 1 sp. El. linearis Linn.Eyes very large, prominent ; head exserted ; body linear ; antennas long ; tarsisimple; claws simple ; prosternum not advanced over the mouth. Pz. 8. 11.Stirps 2. Aprosterni West. (Malacodermi Latr.')Family 1. CEBRIONIDJE Leach.Atop Paykk. Bacillus Latr. 1 sp. Chrism. serving Linn. Curt. pi. 272.Body oval ; antennas simple ; basal tarsal joints cordate ; pulvilli wanting.Family 2. CYPHONIDJE Stephens.Spires Villager. Attica p. Panz. 2 sp. Chrys. hemispherical Linn.Body hemispheric ; posterior femora thickened, formed forbearing. Pz. 96. 7.Syphon Paykk. Eludes Latr. 16 sp. Cyph. pallidus Fab. Curt. 602.Body oval ; fourth tarsal joint bilobed ; hind legs simple.EUBRIA Zeigl. Syphon p. Germ. 1 sp. C. palustris Germ. My f. 25. 18.Body hemispheric ; hind legs simple ; tarsi filiform.Family 3. LAMP FRIDJE Leash. (Lampyris £/«/«.)LAMPYRIS Linn, and all authors. 1 sp. L. noctiluca Sam. Comp. pi. 3. f. 1, 2.Head not rostrated, covered by thorax ; females apterous ; mandibles entire.Drills Oliv. CocHLEOCTONus Metz. $ 1 sp. Dr. flavescens 0\.Head not rostrated, exserted ; females apterous ; mandibles bidentate. Oliv. 2. 4.pi. 1. f. 1.DICTYOPTERA Latr. Lacus Stephh. 1 sp. L. minutus Fab. Curt. 263.Head short ; females winged ; mandibles entire.Family 4. TELEPHORID^ leach. (Cantharis p. Z/wn.)Telephone ite Geese Canthhharis p. £«««. 34 sp. Canthh. fusca'Linn.Elytra covering the abdomen ; thorax entire. Curt. 215.Sills Megerle. Telephone p. Stephh. 1 sp. Canthh. ruficollis Fab.Elytra covering the abdomen ; thorax with the posterior margins notched, thesides straight. Carpet. Horse Ent.PODABRUS Fisch. Telephone p. Stephh. 1 sp. Canthh. albinus.Elytra covering the abdomen ; thorax entire, rounded at the sides, emarginate infront ; claws notched.(RAGONYCHA jBsc/j. (Bull. Mosc.) esp. (claws notched). Caeca. ?neZan?/n<s, ^-c.)Malthus Z,air. Necydalis p. Geoff. 19sp. Canthh. higuttata linn.Elytra shorter than the abdomen. Oliv. 2. pi. 1. f. 6. *Family 5. MELVRIDyE Leach.Malachi i^afc. Canthhharis p. JLiwra. 17 sp. Canthh. bipustiUata 'Linn.Palpi filiform, narrowed at tip ; thorax and abdomen with vesicles. Curt. 167.28 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.Tastes Paykk. Dermestes p. Linn. 6 sp. D. careless Fab.Body narrow ; antennae as long as the head and thou-ax ; palpi thickened at thetips. Panz. F. I. G. 96. 10.Episcopus Stephh. Dasytes p. Auct. 1 sp. Dermestes hirtus Linn.Anterior and posterior tarsi with a long curved basal horn ; posterior tibiae curved.Oliv. 2. 9. pi. 2.DOLICHOSOMA 5'^cpA. Dasytes p. ^?/.c<. 1 sp. Tellus fiUformis Fab.Body very slender and elongate ; elytra acute, squamose. Stephh. 8. pi. 19. f. 5.APLOCNEMUS Stephh* Elicopis Lesser. 2 sp. Hispa. 4-pustul. Fab.Antennae short, internally serrated ; body obtuse, oblong ; legs short. Oliv.2. 10. pi. 1.Family 6. CLE R WjE West. ( Tillidse ZeacA.) :Tills Oliv. Chrysomei-a p. Linn. 2 sp. Chrt/s. elongata Linn.Antennae sub filiform, serrated; thorax cylindric. Oliv. 11. 4. pi. 1. f. 1.TILLOIDEA Laporte. Tellus p. Stephh. 1 sp. Till, unifasciatus Oliv.Antennae subfilifonri, serrated ; thorax obcordate ; elytra convex. Curt. pi. 267.Pills Latr. I ^^:^°^^*^ ^''■- "1 2 sp. Attel. mollis Linn. Curt. pi. 270.All the palpi terminated by a hatchet-shaped joint ; antennae clavate.Athanasius Zair. Clerks Zee;. 1 sp. Attel. formularies lAnn.Antennae gradually clavate ; max. palpi small ; labial palpi terminated by a largehatchet-shaped joint ; basal tarsal joint small. Curt. pi. 398.Clerks Geoff. Trichodes Fab. 2 sp. Attel. aquarius Hbst. Curt. 44.Tarsi with the basal joint scarcely visible ; labial palpi terminated by a largehatched-shaped joint ; terminal joint of antenuce produced acutely within.Stephh. And. vol. iii. pi. 19. f. 5.Necrosis Oliv. Coronets p. Des. 4 sp. Cor. riificoUis Fab.Antennae with the last joint the largest, square, internally obtuse ; palpi sub-cylindrical; ungues entire. Curt. pi. 350.Coronets Park. Dermestes p. Linn. 1 sp. Dei-m. violates Linn.Antennae with the last three joints equal, the last internally acuminate ; palpi withthe last joint thickened, laconic ; tarsal claws with a small basal tooth. Curt,pi. 351.Family 7. PTINID^ Leach. (Ptinus Linn.)Subfamily 1. Ptinides West.Antennae moderately long ; three terminal joints similar to the preceding.Pinus Linn, and all authors. 8 sp. Pt. fur. Linn. Curt. 646.AntenutB long, slender, and simple, inserted close together ; eyes rather prominent ;elytra separated ; body oblong.Medium Leach. Ptinus p. Marsh. 1 sp. Ptinus sulcatus Fab. Curt. 232.Antennas sub compressed ; elytra subglobose, polished ; wings ; thorax withlongitudinal furrows.Gibbous Kitgell. Scotia Czemsp. 1 sp. Pfmus Scotia Fab. Curt. 342.Antennae sub compressed ; elytra subglobose, polished ; wings ; thorax smooth.Mr. Stephens has introduced into this genus a third species under the name ofAploc ?) floral Oliv.? upon the authority of an insect captured by me nearWentworth, which, however, I have ascertained to be Dasytes niger Linn.COLEOPTERA. PTINID.E BOSTRICHIDiE. 29Paulinus Fab. Anobium p. Illiger. 2 sp. Pain. pectinicornis Linn.Body cylindric ; antennae ^ strongly pectinated. Don. pl.320.XYLETINUS Latr. Erroneous Kuc/. 2 sp. Ptilin. pectinalus Fab.Body broadly ovate ; antennae in both sexes strongly serrated ; elytra striated ;palpi with the last joint securiform. Curt. 375.China Zeigl. Crioceris p. Marsh. 1 sp. Crioc. Ptinoides Marsh.Antennae slightly serrated ; elytra soft, smooth, subovate ; palpi simple.LASIODERMA .y^epA. 111.5.417. 1 sp. Las. testaceous Stephh.Antennae with the basal joint large, robust, the third to the tenth serrated ; headbroad ; thorax broad, semicircular ; elytra soft, smooth, broad, oblong.Subfamily 2. Anchises West.Antennae with the last three joints distinctly larger than the preceding.DORCATOMA Herbst. Erroneous p. Rug. 3 sp. D. Dresdensis Hbst.Antennae with the last three joints triangular and flattened ; body short, butglobose ; palpi securiform. Hbst. pi. 39. f. 8.ANOBIUM Fab. Ptinus p. Linn. 11 sp. Pt. pertinax Linn. Curt. 387.Body oblong-ovate ; antennae with the ninth and tenth joints sub conical, andmuch thicker than the preceding ; terminal joint ovate ; palpi simple.Theophilus Chevrolat. Stephh. III. 5. 418. 1 sp. Dr. anobioides Cheer.Body subcylindric ; antennae <J with the three terminal joints very lomondslender; eyes prominent. Guer. Mag. Zool. Ins. pi. 3.Family 8. LFMEXFLONW^ Stephh. (Xylotrogi Latr.)LYMEXYLON Fab. Pteeophorus Herbst. 1 sp. Cantharis canals Linn.Body long, linear, depressed ; head vertical ; elytra nearly covering the abdomen •antennae simple. Curt. pi. 382.HYLECCETUS Latr. Canthhharis p. Linn. 1 sp. Canthh. dermestoides L.Antennffi compressed, serrated ; thorax square ; body sub convex ; elytra coveringsabdomen. Curt. 654.Family 9. BOSTRICHIDJE West.Ostriches Geoff, nee Erichs. Abate Fab. 1 sp. Derm, capuchins Linn.Elytra entire, rounded at the apex; antenna with the second joint short, sub-elevate; terminal joints not laminae nor transverse. Curt. 271.Abate Fab. Ostriches p. Oliv. 1 sp. Ap. situate Fab.Elytra posteriorly retuse ; antenna with the second joint elongate, cylindric •terminal joints forming a perfoliated club. Stephh. 111. 3. pi. 1 9. f. 6.(SINOXYLON Duf. Ostriches p. Oliv. ] sp. B. spinosa Oliv.Elytra posteriorly retuse and spinose ; antenna with the terminal joints sub-laminated; tibia simple. Oliv. 4. pi. 4. f. 1.)Diodorus Stephh. Abate p. Paykk. 1 sp. Ap. substratum Pk. ?Elytra posteriorly retuse ; antennae with the second joint subglobose ; the terminaljoints perfoliated ; tibia denticulated.RHYZOPERTHA aepA. Ptinus p. MarsAA. 2 sp. Pt. piceus M.Elytra elongate, posteriorly rounded ; antenna with flie terminal joints sub-laminated; tibia serrated.CIS Latr. Ptinus p. Marsh. 13 sp. Anobium Boleti Fab. Curt. 402.Cylindric, ovate ; thorax rounded at the sides, dilated in front ; tarsi 4-jointed ;three basal joints very short; antenna 10-jointed, with the last three joints30 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.forming a club ; head in the males often tubercular ; mandibles bidentate ;maxillary palpi with the last joint large and oval.Family 10. SCYDMMNIDJE Stephh. ^ ■SCYDM^NUS Latr. Anthicus p, Fah. 16 sp. Sc. Helhvigu Latr.Elytra separated ; antennae thickened at the tips ; the basal joints but littlethicker and longer than the rest. Denny, Mong. pi. 11.Sect. II. Heteromera Latreille.Tribe 1 . Trachea West.Family 1. N OT Oxide Ste^h.Notus ///. Melos p. Linn, 2 sp. Not. monoceros Linn.Thorax produced over the head into a horn ; neck distinct. Stephh. pi. 25. f. 5.Antics J'aft. MELOEp. Iii«w. 8 sp. A. anther ins lAnn, Panz. II. 14.Thorax not cornuted in front ; neck distinct.Family 2. Vii OCHROID^ Leach.PYROCHROA Fab. Cantharis p. Linn. 2 sp. Ca. coccinea Linn. Curt. 590.Antenna rather longer than the head and thorax, pectinated in ^ ; eyes ^ distant.Family 3. LAG RIWJE West. (Agrarian ia^r.)LAGRIA Fab. Chrtsomela p. Linn. 1 sp. Ch, hirta Linn. Curt. 598.Thorax cylindric, much narrower than the elytra; ^ antennae with the last joint long.Family 4. HORIIDJE West. (Morales Latr.)There is no British species of this family.Family 5. MORDELLIDJE Leach. (Mordella Liwm.).MORDELLA Linn. 9 sp. M. aculeata Linn. Curt. 483.Abdomen styliferous ; scutellum distinct ; tarsi simple.ANASPIS Geq^. Mordella p. iiww. 18 sp. M. frontalis lAnn. Pz. 13. 13.Abdomen not styliferous ; scutellum distinct ; penultimate joint of anteriortarsi bilobed.RIPIPHORUS Fab. Mordeli,a p. Linn. 1 sp. M. paradoxes Linn.Scutellum hidden ; antennae $ pectinated. Curt. 1 9.Family 6. Cantharides Leach. {Meloe Linn.)CANTHARIS Geoff. Lytta Fah. 1 sp. Md. vesicatoria Linn. Curt. 658.Narrow ; wings two ; elytra elongate ; last joint of max. palpi subovate.SY'BARIS Stephhhhhh. 1 sp. Sib. immunity Stephhhhhh. Stephhhhhh. 5. pi. 25. f. 4.Narrow ; elytra elongate ; thorax broadest behind ; last joint of max. palpisecuriform.Stalls Latr. Necydalis p. Fah. 1 sp. Nee. numerals Fab. Curt. 340.Elytra attenuated, not lapping over each other ; wings two ; antennae simple,Melos Linn. <^c. Proscarab^eus Stephh. 9 sp. Mel. proscarahcBus Linn.Wings ; elytra short, lapping over each other within ; antennae various.Curt. 279.Family 7. SALPINGIDJE Leach.SALPINGUS 7?Z. Rhinosimus Z.a<r. 4 sp. Cur. ruficollis Lmn. Pz. 24. 19.Oblong-ovate, depressed j rostrum elongate ; club of antennae 5-jointed ; headdepressed.COLEOPTERA. SALPINGIDiE — Mii^LANDRYIDiE. 31SPH^RIESTES A»%. Salpingus p. cy. 7 sp. Sale. ater GyW Curt, 662.Oblong-ovate/glabrous ; rostrum short ; club of antenna; 5-jointed ; head sub-convex.Icterus Clairvv. Rhinomacer p. Far. 1 sp. Myct. griseus Civ.Ovate, sericeous ; rostrum elongate; antenna; filiform. Stephh. 4. pi. 21. f. 4.Family 8. (EDEMERIDM Leach.CEDEMERA Oliv. Necydalis p. Z/iww. esp. Nee, ccerulealAnn. Don. 558.Elytra subulate ; posterior femora ^ incrassated.ONCOMERA Stephh. Q^demera p. Aitct. ? 1 sp. Nee. pod agra rim lAnn.'Elytra not subulate ; posterior femora $ incrassated ; thorax oblong. Oliv. 3.10. pi. 1.ISCHNOMERA Stephh. Q^demera p. Aunt. 5 sp. Nee. cerulean Linn.Elongate ; elytra not subulate ; posterior femora simple. Curt. fig. 390.Notus Zeigl. Osphya lUig. 2 sp. N. clavipes Illig. Curt. 538.Thorax articulate, depressed, margined ; hind femora $ incrassated.CONOPALPUS Gyll. Montis Curt. 2 sp. Mel. testacea Oliv. Curt. 112.Antenna; 10-jointed; thorax transverse, orbicular; last joint of palpi large, secureEngines JFestw. Xylophilus p. Boil. 1 sp. Anti, oculatus Pk.Antennae $ very long ; eyes $ very large ; palpi securiform ; penult, tarsal jointminute. Curt. pi. 299.Adverbs JFestw. Xylophilus p. Boni. 1 sp. Lytta Boleti Marsh. *Ovate; antennas 11-jointed, moderately long, second and third joints minute;eyes moderate, entire. Stephh. pi. 25. 6.Family 9. MELANDEVIDJE Leach.MELANDRYA Fab. Serropalpus p. Illig. 2 sp. Chrys. carabines Linn.Elongate-ovate, subdepressed, narrowed in front ; max. palpi large, 4-jointed,serrated, last joint large, ovate, fleshy on the inner margin. Curt. 155.PHLOIOTRYA Stephh. Xylita p. MacL. 1 sp. Sen: recipes Gyll.Oblong, convex, orbicular in front, sinuated behind ; maxilla elongate, deflexed.Stephh. pi. 24. f. 4,DIRC^A Fab. Serropalpus p. Latr. 1 sp. D. variegata Fab.Oblong, convex ; antennae slightly thickened at the tips ; last joint of max. palpisecuriform. Act. N. H. Par. 1. pi. 10.Populus Pay. Serropalpus p. Illig. 1 sp. H. quirinus Pk.Elongate, sub convex ; antennae sub filiform ; thorax elongate, narrowed behind,Stephh. pi. 24. f. 5.ABDERA Stephh. Populus p. Curt. 3 sp. Mord. bifaseiata Marsh.Elongate, ovate; antennae rather thicker at the tips; thorax broadest behind.Curt. fig. 255.Scraps A I-afr. Dirc^a p. &/«. 2 sp. Sc. fuscaluatr. Stephh. pi. 24. f. 3.Thorax sub orbicular ; labial palpi with the last joint originate ; antennaefiliform.The Xylophilus populous of Curtis is certainly identical with this insect. Thepygmccus of Degeer is also identical with the oculatus.32 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.Allotments Hellww. Dirc^a Fah. 3 sp. H. flexuosns Pk. Curt. 474.Oblong-ovate, subdepressed ; thorax broad behind ; last joint of labial palpi minute; tarsi entire.Orchis A. Lath; Allotments p. Pk. 3 sp. Orch. micans'LAir. Curt. 197.Elongate-ovate, convex ; posterior bite with two long spurs j antennae clavate.Tribe 2. Atrachelia West.Subtribe. 1. Variolous West.Family 1. C IS Tell jE Leach. (Xystropides S'oZ/er.)ERYX Stephh. Prionvchus Solier. 1 sp. Pyrochr. nigra De Geer. Pz. 50.3.Broadly ovate ; mandibles bifid; max. palpi obliquely truncate; tarsi pulvillate.MYCETOCHARUS Latr. Mycetophila G^jll. 1 sp. M. scapulars Gyl).Narrow, linear, elongate; tarsi not pulvillate; mandibles bifid; max. palpistrongly securiform. Pz. 25. 14.CISTELx\ Full. Chrysomela p. Linn. 6 sp. Ch. ceraniboides Linn.Ovate ; thorax semicircular ; mandibles bifid ; max. palpi subsecuriform. Curt. 594.OMOPHLUS 71%. CisTELA Fah. 1 sp. Om. America Curt, Curt. 622.Thorax broadest in front ; mandibles acute at the tips ; max. palpi clavate, scarcelysecuriform ; elytra elliptical.ME GISCHI A S'oZiVr. Cistern p. Stephh. 1 sp. Cist, survives Des.Palpi filiform, terminal joint scarcely enlarged ; mandibles entire.CTENIOPUS 5'o?j«-. ALLECVI.A Stephh. 1 sp. Chr. sulphurealAnn. Pz. 106. 8.Thorax sub quadrate, narrowed slightly behind ; mandibles entire ; eyes prominent.Family 2. iJ^I- OP/Z)^ Stephens.Helps Fah. Tenebrio p. Linn. 4 sp. H. carabines Pz. Curt. 298. ;Oblong-ovate; antenna sub filiform ; thorax sub quadrate, or subcordate.Family 3. DIAPERIDJE Stephens.Drapers Gcq^. Chrysomela p. hum. 1 sp. Chr. Boleti lam. Curt. 358.Subrotundate, convex ; antennae with the fourth and following joints lenticular ;palpi filiform.PLATYDEMA Lap. and Br. Draperies p. Stephh. 4 sp. D. violate Fab.Ovate, sub convex ; fourth and following joints of antennae conical ; max. palpiwith the last joint enlarged. Panz. 94. 9.PHALERIA Latr. Tenebrio p. Fah. 1 sp. Ten. clavering Fab.Ovate ; antenna; perfoliated ; tibiae triangular, spinose ; max. palpi with the lastjoint obtrigouate. Sturm. D. F. 2. 47. A.ALPHITOPHAGUS Sffp/f. Phylithus iV%er/e? 1 sp. Ralph. 4-ptistulat us St.Oval, convex; antenna; slightly clavate; tibiae simple; last joint of palpi subin-cras sated. Stephh. 24. f. 1.BOLITOPHAGUS Fab. Eldon Latr. 1 sp. Bol. agricola F., Curt. 586.Obtuse, ovate, convex ; thorax crenated; antennae clubbed and serrated.HYPOPHLiEUS Fab. Ips p. Oliv. 3 sp. H. bicolor Fab. Curt. 430.Elongate, subdepressed; elytra linear; antennas short, gradually thickened andserrated.TRACHYSCELIS Latr. 1 sp. Tr. aphodioides Latr.Broadly ovate ; tibia; dilated, spinose, the anterior serrated ; club of antennas6-jointed. Guerin. Icon. R. An.COLEOPTERA. TENEBRIONID^— BRUCHID^, 33Subtribe 2. Melasomata Latreille.Family 4 (or !.)• Tenet RIONID.E Leach. (Tenebrio Linn. )TENEBRIO Zm?j., §-c. 4 sp. T. monitor lAnn. Curt. 331.Narrow, elongate ; thorax quadrate ; antennae filiform.ULOMA Meg. Ulosa Meg. 2 sp. Trogos. cornua Fab. Latr. Gen. pi. 10.Oblong-ovate, depressed; antennae clavate, third joint as large as the fourth;mandibles $ large.ALPHITOBIUS SfejoA, Uloma p. Cart. 2 sp. Ten. Fagi Van. Curt. 363.Oblong-ovate ; antennae clavate, third joint much longer than fourth.Scene Kirby. Tenebrio p. Oliv. 1 sp. Ten. ferruginous Ol.Elongate, depressed; antennae clavate, third joint short. Oliv. 3. 18. pi. 2.SARROTRIUM IlUg. Orthocerus Latr. 1 sp. His. nautical Linn. Curt. 314.Elongate, sub convex ; antennae thick and very pilose.Spatium jpa6. SiLPHA Z,j>m. 2 sp. Silpha sabulosa lAnn. Curt. 319.Oblong-ovate, sub convex ; antennae thickened at the tips ; wings two.Heliopolis Des. Tenebrio p. Marsh. 2 sp. Ten. obsolete Marsh.Ovate, sub convex ; antenna; thickened at the tips ; elytra connate ; wings 0.Stephh. pi. 24.Tedious ia^r. Slaps p Fab. 1 sp. BI. femoral rab. Panz. 39. 5. 6.Ovate ; antennae filiform, terminal joints longer than broad ; wings 0.PHYLAN Meg. Tenebrio p, Marsh. 1 sp. Opatr. gihbum Fab.Ovate ; antennae filiform ; terminal joints broader than long ; wings 0. Herbst.7. 112. 3.CRYPTICUS Latr. Slaps p. Fab. 1 sp. Bl. glaber Fab. Panz. 36. 1.Ovate ; antennae filiform ; elytra not connate ; wings two.Family 5 (or 2.). BLAFSIDM Stephens.Slaps Fab. Tenebrio p. Linn. 3 sp. T. mortis aga Linn. Curt. 148.Oblong-ovate, flat above ; margins of elytra inflexed ; wings 0.Family 6 (or 3.). PIMELIIDJE.(There is no British species of this family.)Sect. III. Pseudotetramera We&iw. (Tetramera Latr.)Stivps 1 . Rhyncophora Latr.Family 1. BRUCHIDjE Leach. (Brutus Zzwn.)Subfamily 1. Bruchides West.BPtUCHUS Lmw. Mylabris Geoffrr. 7 sp. Br. gr anuria L. Pz. 66. 11.Antennas filiform, or slightly and gradually thickened to the tips, often serrated ;elytra oblong-quadrate.Subfamily 2. Anthribides West.BRACHYTARSUS Sch. Paroles Meg. 2 sp. Anther. scabrosus F.Short, ovate ; eyes entire ; antennae abruptly clavate. f z. 15. f. 1 5.PHLOEOBIUS Sch, Anthribds p. Fab. 1 sp. An. griseus Fab.Ovate; eyes emarginate ; antennae slender, elongated. Stephh. pi. 21. f. 2.Broidered ^A. Macrocephalus p. O/Zc. 2 sp. An. albirostris ¥.Oblong; eyes entire ; two basal joints of antennae elongated. Pz. 15. 13.D34 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.Playthings Civ. Macrocephalus'p. Oliv. 1 sp. Cure, latirostris Bons.Oblong ; eyes entire ; two basal joints of antennae short ; club abrupt. Don.348. 1.ANTHRIBUS Fah. Macrocephalus p. Oliv. 1 sp. Ciirc. albinus Linn.Oblong ; eyes emarginate ; antennae S elongated ; club narrow. Don. 348. 3.RHINOMACER i^«&. Anthribus p. 0/«j;. 1 sp. Bh. attelaboides ¥.Rostrum elongate, dilated at the tip ; club of antennae slender. Stephh. 21. f. 3.CHORAGUS Kirbi/. Anthkibus Robert. 2 sp. Ch. Sheppard K.Senatorial, short, ovate ; antennae long ; club 3-jointed ; head scarcely rostrated.Kirby, L. T. 12. 22. 14.Family 2. A TTELABIDxE West.Subfamily 1. Breathes Weslw.(There is no British species of this subfamily.)Subfamily 2. Attelabides West. (Attelabusp. Linn.)APODERUS Oliv. Attelabus p. Fab. 1 sp. Att. avellana Linn.Antennae 12-jointed; head narrowed behind into a neck; thorax narrowed infront. Civ. 1. pi. 15.ATTELABUS Linn. Cyprus Tliunb. 1 sp. Att. cnrcnlionoides Linn.Broad; elytra sub quadrate ; antennae 11-jointed ; head not narrowed behind theeyes. Curtis 710.RHYNCHITES //er?)s<. Rhinomacer p. Geoff. 21 sp. Cure. BaceJius 'Linn.Antenna; II-jointed ; head with a thick neck; rostrum dilated at the tip;thorax conic-cylindric. Curtis 642.Decorous Leach, RuTNCHitES p. Sch. I sp. Att. BetulcB Linn.Rostrum short, dilated at the tip; basal joints of antenna; short, robust ; posteriorfemora (J thickened. Panz. 20. 15-Campus C&, RYNCH.ENUS p. CyZ. 1 sp. Rh. flavicomis C\v.Rostrum elongate, filiform and incurved ; antennae short ; hind legs formed forleaping. Civ. 1. pi. 12.OXYSTOMA Dean. Apion p. Kirby. 3 sp. Ap. ulicis K.Oblong, convex, very pubescent ; rostrum elongated, deflexed ; antenna; basal.Linn. Tr. 9. pi. 1. f. 1.AVIO^ Herbst. Avis Bill. 93 sp. Cure, frumentarius L. Curt. 211.Pear-shaped ; rostrum porrect ; antennas basal or medial.Family 3. CURCVLIONIDJE * Leach. (Curculio Linn.Gonatoceri Sckonh.)Legion 1. Braehyrhynclii Sch.Division 4. Brachyderides Sch.^TROVnOSOMUS Billberg. Brasses Jlfe^?. 16 sp. Cure. Coryli Vab.Apterous; rostrum short, thick ; eyes very prominent; third joint of antennae longerthan the second. Panz. 19. 12.Obs. — In the Synopsis of the genera of this family I have adopted the distributionof Sehonherr's breastwork, omitting those divisions (Brachycerides, Entities,&c. ) of which there are no British representatives, but retaining the numbers ofSehonherr's divisions.COLEOPTERA. CURCULIONIDiE. 35Corvinus Sch. Philemon Sch. ol. 4 sp. Cure, paratus Marsh.Rostrum very short, thick ; elytra very convex, rounded ; tibias unarmed ; thirdjoint of antennae short. Donov. 414. 2.SCIAPHILUS Sch. Thylacites p. Germ. 3 sp. Cure, muricatus Fab.Short, ovate, winged ; eyes moderate ; femora dentate ; tibiae unarmed at the tip.Hbst. 6. 87. 9.(BRACHYDERES Sei. Naupactus Mess. 1 sp. Cure, infants Linn.Rostrum very short, stout ; elytra subovate ; femora unarmed ; antennae12-jointed. )(RHYTIRHINUS 5c/j. Brothers S'^e;?^. 1 sp. Cure, paratus Marsh.Antennae scarcely elbowed ; basal joint slightly elongate ; elytra abruptlyretuse. )(CHLOROPH ANUS Z)aZm. Chlorine Z)e/. 1 sp. Cure, viridis lAnn.Elytra large, ovate ; legs elongate ; rostrum short ; antennae not geniculatedbasal joint elongate. Panz. 107. 3.)TANYMECUS Germ. Curculio p. Fah. 2 sp. Cure. jmlUatus Fab.Elongate, ovate ; elytra acuminated ; fourth to eighth joints of antennae sub-turbinated.Panz. 19. 5.SITONA Germ. Curculio Linn. 24 sp. Cure, linnaeus L. Donov. 389. 2.Oblong, winged ; rostrum short ; antennas with the third joint shorter than thesecond.POLYDRUSUS Germ. Nemoicus Dillww. 12 sp. Cure, means Fab.Oblong, squamose ; antennae, with the second and third joints subequal ; rostrinnshort. Curt. 278.NEMOICUS Dilhv. Curculio p. Linn. 1 sp. Cure, obloiigus Linn.Elongate, pilose ; antennae with the second and third joints subequal ; wings two.Panz. 19. 15.Division 5. Leonidas Sch.Cleans Sch. Lixus p. lUig. 4 sp. Cure, sulcirostris Linn. Don. 509. 1.Elongate, convex ; rostrum short, thick ; antennae apical j second joint of antennaelonger than the third.BOTHYNODERES .ScA. Lixus p. OZiy. 1 sp. Cure, albinus Fah. Panz. 19. 7.Elongate; rostrum longer than the head, carinated ; second and third joints ofantennae nearly equal.Troops Sei. Bagous p. Germ. 1 sp. Cure, lunatic Fab.Elytra rostrated ; thorax deeply emarginate in front ; tibiae straight. Stephh.111. 21. f. 1.LIOPHLEUS Germ. Gastrodus Meg. 2 sp. Cure, nobilis Fab.Apterous, ovate, pubescent ; rostrum as long as the head; elytra not emarginatein front. Panz. 106. 5.ME RI ONUS Meg. Barynotus p. Sch. 2 sp. Cure, ohseurus Fab.Oblong ; rostrum and thorax canaliculate ; elytra emarginate in front. Hbst. 7.100. 3.BARYNOTUS Germ. Curculio p. Fab. 1 sp. Cure, mercurial Fab.Ovate, apterous ; rostrum and thorax carinate ; elytra emarginate in front.Hbst. 6. 77. 3.Adolphus Sch. Lepers Germ. 3 sp. Cure, triguttatus Fab.Oblong ; rostrum twice as long as the head, thick : bite not hooked. Donov.414. 1.D 236 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.Division 6. Multitudes Sch.TANYSPHYRUS Germ. Rhynch^nus Fab. 1 sp. Rh. LomicB Fab.Oblong-ovate, winged ; second joint of antennae short, thick ; tfbiae with a strongapical hook. Panz. 17. 10.HYLOBIUS Germ. Curculio p. Liii. 2 sp. Citric. abietis 'Linn. Donov. 529.Oblong-ovate, winged ; rostrum much longer than the head ; second antennaljoint elongate.Milites Sch. Lazarus OUv. 2 sp. Cure, aiiglicanus Mart. Don. 34. 2.Broad, ovate, glabrous; tibae with a strong apical hook; scutellum minute,wingless.LEIOSOMA Kirby. Milites p. Sch. 1 sp. Cure, punctatus Marsh.Broad, ovate, apterous ; elytra punctate, striate ; scutellum minute ; tibiae hooked.PL I NTH US Germ. Lixus p. Far. 1 sp. Cure, caliginosus Fab. Don. 570.Elongate, apterous; scutellum none; tibiae hooked ; rostrum subcylindric.HYPERA Germ. Phytonomus Sch. 29 sp. Lynch. fasciculus Gyll.Oblong or ovate, squamose ; tibise not hooked ; rostrum deflexed, subcylindric.Curt. 116.PROCAS Stephh. Curculio p. Marsh. 2 sp. Cure, pieces M.Oblong, not squamose ; rostrum long, subclavate ; legs and antennae slender.Division 8. Phyllobides Sch.PHYLLOBIUS &/*. Curculio p. Zion. 12 sp. Ctirc. Pyri Jane.Oblong-ovate, squamose ; tibiae rounded ; rostrum short ; second and third jointsof antenna; elongate. Panz. 107. 4.Division 9. Cyclades Sch.TRACHYPHE^US Germ. Curculio p. Linn. 7 sp. C. scabriculus Linn.Short, ovate, setose or hispid; femora unarmed; tibice hooked; rostrum as longas the head, deflexed. Hbst. 6. 87. 10.BRACHYSOMUS S'c/i. Curculio p. Fa. 1 sp. Cur. hirsutulus Fah.Ovate, wingless; elytra subglobose ; rostrum very short; antennae 12-jointed.Pz. 7. 7.Division 10. Otiorhynchides Sch.OTIORHYNCHUS Germ. Pachygaster Germ. ol. 22 sp. Cur. sulcatus Fab.Apterous, ovate, glabrous ; rostrum laterally dilated rally spined.LAMIA Serv. Cerambyx p. Linn. 1 sp. Cer. sexton Linn. Panz. 19. 1.Thorax cylindric, sub quadrate, spined at the sides; antennae naked; legs robust,equal in both sexes.Family 3. LEPTURIDjE Leach. (Leptura Linn.)RHAGIUM Fab. Hahgium Leach. 3 sp. Lept. inquisitor Linn. Pz. 82. 4.Broad, depressed ; thorax spined on each side ; antennae short.Toots Meg. Leptura p. Linn. 2 sp. Cer. meridians Linn. Don. 435.Elongate ; thorax tubercled at the sides ; antennae long.Strong ALIA Serv. Leptura T^.Auct. 2 sp. Lept. elongata De G. Don. 84.Thorax unarmed, narrowed in front, nearly flat above ; body very narrow, nearlypointed behind ; eyes globular ; front of head produced.Lecture Zinc. Serv. lisp. Leapt. 4-fasciata lAnn. Curt. 362.Thorax unarmed, sub convex ; eyes moderate ; elytra attenuated.GRAMMOPTERA Serv. Leptura B. Stephh. Cat. 7 sp. Lept. fausta Fab.Thorax unarmed, sub convex ; elytra not attenuated ; body linear. Panz. 34. 17.Pacha Meg. Leptura p. Curt. 4 sp. Lept. 8-macidata Fab. Don. 353.Robust ; thorax sub conical, with a slight obtuse tubercle on each side ; elytrashort, nearly parallel ; humeral angles not prominent.Stirps 3. Phytophaga Kirby.Race 1. Parameca West. comprising the singleFamily CRIOCERIDJE Leach.Dacia Fab. Leptura p. Linn. 21 sp. Don. crassipes Fab. Curt. 494.Antenna with the fourth and following joints elongated ; elytra entire at thetips.MACROPLEA i/q^. H je^iovi a Latr. 2 sp. Don. Foster Fab.Antennas with the fourth and following joints elongated ; elytra mucronated.Curt. 318.ORSODACNA Latr. Crioceris p. Fab. 3 sp. Ors. chlorosis Latr.Palpi thickened at the tips ; thorax not tubercled ; joints of antennae short.Guer. Ic. R. A. 47.42 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.CRIOCERIS Geoff. Lema p. Fab. 7 sp. Chr. mercier Linn. Curt. S23.Palpi filiform ; joints of antenna short ; elytra broad.ZEUGOPHORA Ktmz. Lema p. Gyll. 2 sp. L. subspi?iosa Pz. Pz. 83. 10.Palpi thickened ; joints of antennae short ; thorax tubercled.Race 2, CycUca Latr.Family 1. CASSIDIDJE. (Cassia and Hispa Linn. CassiaLeach. )Cassia Linn. §-c. 19 sp. Case. murrcBci Linn. Curt. 127.Suborbicular, flat beneath ; mouth concealed by the prosternum ; thorax coveringthe head.HISPA Linn. Cuioceris p. Geoff. 1 sp. H. atra Linn. Stephh. 111. pi. 23 f. 5.Elongate-ovate, spinose ; mouth exposed ; head exserted.Family 2. Gale UCIDM Stephh.Subfamily 1. Galerucides ( Ambulatory. )AUCHENIA Stephh. Crioceris p. Panz. 1 sp. Chrys. 4-maculata Linn.Antennae shorter than the body, with elongate joints, the second much shorterthan the third. Curt. 366.Ammonia Schrank. Chrysomela p. Linn. 2 sp. Ch, halensis Linn.Antenna with the second and third joints equal, short; labrum emarginate.Panz. 91. 9.GALERUCA Geoff. Crioceris p. Marsh. 13 sp. Chrys. Tanaeeti Linn.Antennae shorter than the body, with short joints, the second much shorter thanthe third. Curt. 371.Calamitous Dillww. Uterus p. Curt. 1 sp. Cr. circumfusa Marli.Antennae long with the second and third joints equal, short ; labrum entire.Panz. 21. 18.Lepers Geoff. Crioceris p. Fab, 2 sp. Chrys. flavipes Linn.Antennae very long ; the second and third joints short, equal. Curt. 370, details.Subfamily 2. Altitudes. (Salvator. )H Attica Illig. Chrysomela p. Linn. 44 sp. Chrys. decorum Linn.Oblong-ovate ; thorax narrower than the elytra ; posterior tarsi short, apical.Curt. 630.Thames .^e/jA. LoNGiTARsus ia<;-. 38 sp. Halt. 4-pustulata Il. Pz.88. 2.Posterior tarsi elongate, apical ; posterior tibias not dentate.Mantua Stephh. Haltica p. Illic. 6 sp. Chrys. rustica Linn.Oblong-ovate ; thorax as broad as the elytra ; posterior tarsi short, apical.Cardinals Curtis. 1 sp. C. Matthews Curt. Curt. 435.Subcylindrical ; thorax as broad as the elytra ; posterior tarsi short, apical.MACROCNEMA Stephh. Psylliodes Latr. 18 sp. Chrys. hyoscyami Linn.Posterior tarsi elongate, inserted before the apex of the tibia; which are nottoothed. Curt. 486.SPHiERODERMA Stephh. Haltica p. Illic. 6 sp. Halt, cjlobosa Pz,Hemispherical ; antennae with simple joints ; posterior tarsi short, apical. Panz.25. 13.CHjETOCNEMA Stephh. Haltica p. Aucf. 6 sp. //. concinna Marsh.Posterior tibice externally dentate; head corrected. Ent. Hef. 3. f. 1.COLEOPTERA. GALERUCID.E — COCCINELLID.E. 43Diabolic Latr. Haltica p. yliict. 2 sp. H. Cynoglossi Ent. H.Posterior tibise externally spined, with a long bifid spur ; head retracted. Ent.H. 1. f. 2.MNIOPHILA Stephh. Haltica p. Aunt. 1 sp. H. muscorum Ent. H.Hemispherical ; eighth joint of antennae very small ; posterior tarsi short, apical.Ent, H. 2. f. 12.Family 3. CHRYSOMELIDJE Leach. (Chrysomela p. Linn.)EUMOLPUS Far. Chrysomela p. Linn. 4 sp. Chrys. obscura Linn.Head vertical ; antennae as long as the body, thickened at the tip. Stephh.pi. 23. f. 3.Hydrocephalus G?eq^. Chrysomela p. iiww. 22 sp. Ch. service lAnn.Head vertical ; antennas as long as the body, filiform. Curt. 3,5.Elytra Laicharting. Chrysomela p. Linn, 5? sp. Chr. 4-punctata Ij'mn.Head vertical; antenna short, serrated. Curt. 582.Heroes Paykk. Procures Latr. 2 sp. Chr. Phellandrii Linn. Curt. 506.Oblong ; thorax quadrate ; head exserted ; wings two.MELASOMA Dillww. Lena Meg. 5 sp. Chrys. populi Linn. Albin. pi. 63.Head exserted ; palpi filiform, truncate ; thorax transverse ; wings two.TIMARCHA Meg. Tenebrio p. Linn. 2 sp. Ten. Imvigatus Linn. Don. 276.Apterous ; head exserted ; elytra soldered together.CHRYSOMELA Xi/m. §-c. 27 sp. Chr. pallida Lhm. Curt. 111.Winged ; palpi subsecuriform ; thorax transverse ; head exserted.PHiEDON Meg. Chrysomela p. Linn. 14 sp. Chrys. armorica Linn.Winged ; head exserted ; thorax transverse ; palpi filiform, obtuse, or acute, nottruncate. Pz. 44. 15.Sect. III. Pseudotrimera Jrestw. (Trimera Latr.)Family 1. EROTYLIDJE (Clavipalpi hair.)TRITOMA Fab. Dermestes p. Marsh. 1 sp. Tr. bipustulatum Fab.Body nearly hemispherical. Curt. 498.Triplet Paykk. Silpha p. Linn. 6 sp. Silph. russia Linn. Curt. 706Body oblong. Stephh M. pi. 17. fig. 4—6.Family 2. E ND OMFCHIDjE Leach. (FimgicoliB Latr.)ENDOMYCHUS Paykk. Chrysomela p. Linn, 1 sp. Chrys. coccinea Linn.Thorax broadest behind ; club of antennas distinct, 3-jointed. Curt. 570.LYCOPERDINA Latr. Endomychus p. Far. 1 sp. E7id, Vista Pk,Thorax subcordate, truncate ; club of antenna; indistinct. Curt. 355.Family 3. COCCINELLID.E Leach. (Coccinella Linn.Aphidiphagi Latr.)CHILOCORUS Leach. Coccinella Auct. 4 sp. Cock. bipustulata Linn.Elytra with a dilated margin ; thorax lunate, hinder margins rounded. Martyn,13. f. 21.Cochineal Z,in«. 34 sp. Cock. l-p^unctata lAnn. Curt. 208.Body glabrous, hemispherical ; posterior angles of thorax acute.SPH^ROSOMA Leach. Sph. quern Leach.Spherical, pilose ; antenna; with an abrupt club.Somnus Herbst. Nitidula p. Far. ISsp. Seem. 7iigrinus Hbst.Hemispherical, pubescent ; antennae short, abruptly clavate. Panz. 24. 12.44 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.RHYZOBIUS Stejih. NiTiDULA p. Far. 1 sp. Nit. Litera Fab. Pz. 35. 5.Elytra convex, pubescent ; antenna moderate, subclavate.Caligula Meg. Cacijjula Des. 2 sp. Ch7-i/s. scutellum Fab. Curt. 144.Elytra oval, sub convex, punctate-striate ; antennae moderate.Order IT. EUPLEXOPTERA West. (Dermaptera Leach, nee Retzius,De Geer), containing the singleFamily FORFICULID^ Stephens.FORFICULA Linn. Forficula a. Gene. 4sp. F. aurictilaria Curt. 560.Antennas 14-jointed; tegmina and wings perfect.APTERYGIDA* West. Chelidura Stephh. nee Latr. 1 sp. F. pedestris Bon.Antennas 12-jointed ; tegmina perfect ; wings wanting.LABIA Leach. Forficula p. Latr. 1 sp. F. minor Linn. Sam. pi. 4. 16.Antenna 10 — 12-jointed; tegmina and wings perfect.FORFICESILA t I,a<r. Labidura I,eac/j. 1 sp. F. gigantic Fah.Antennae with about 25 joints ; tegmina and wings perfect. K. & S. pi. 1. f.7.Order III. ORTHOPTERA Olivier. (Hemiptera Retzius, nee Be Geer,Hemiptera p.Linn.ySect. I. CuRSORiA, containing the singleFamily 1. BL J TTIDyE Stephens. (Order Dictyoptera ieac/i.)ECTOBIA JVestw. Blatta Serv. 8 sp. Bl. japonica Fahr. Curt. 556.Tarsi with the three basal joints gradually diminishing in length ; the basal jointno so long as the four others united ; fourth sub-bilobed ; anal styles not prominent.(BLATTA Linn. \ „ ' „. ', j- 3 sp. Bl. orientalis Linn. Pz. 90. 12.)^ | Steleopyga Fiscli. J ' ■'Sect. II. Astoria (Fam. 2. Mantidce).Sect. III. Ambulatory (Fam. 3. PItasmida).(There are no British species of these two sections.)Sect. IV. Salvator. *•Family 4. ACHETIDjE Leach. {GryMides Latreille.)GRYLLOTALPA Bay. Gryllus (Acheta) p. Linn. 1 sp, G. vulgaris Latr.Forelegs palmate ; ovipositor not exserted. Curt. 456.ACHETA Far. Gryllus (Acheta) Linn. 3 sp. A. domestica. Curt. 293.Forelegs simple ; ovipositor long, exserted.If the genera Chelidura and Labia be retained, it will be equally correct to formthe species discovered by me at Ashford, Kent, and described by Stephens, underthe name of Chelidura albipcnnis, into a separate genus.f I have employed Latreille's name, that of Laboured having been given to theentire group by Dumeril and L. Diifour.ORTHOPTERA.— Hymenoptera. 45Family 5. GiJFZZ/Z)^ Leach. ( Locustarise Za^r.)EPHIPPIGER Latr. Barbitistes Chap. 1 sp. E. virencens Stephh.Tegmina very short, ocellated in ^ ; very minute, rugose in ^ ; wings ; vertexsubacuminate ; ovipositor broad, short, incurved.MICROPTERYX Stephh. Anisoptera Serv. 3 sp. G. hrachyptera Linn.Tegmina nearly as long as abdomen, ocellated in (J ; front broad, obtuse, rounded ;wings none, or rudimental. De Geer, 3. pi. 22. f. 2, 3.XIPHIDION Za<r. Locusts p. Fa. 2 sp. L. fusca Vab. Panz. 33. f. 2.Tegmina more or less elongated, ocellated in $ ; wings unfit for flight ; headacuminate in front ; eyes exserted.MECONEMA Serv. Locusta p. Latr. 1 sp. L. varia Fab. Donov. 3. pi. 79.Slender ; tegmina long, not ocellated in J ; wings ample ; front acuminate ; abdomenS terminated by two long incurved processes.PHASGONURA Westiv. Locusta Serv. 1 sp. G. viridissimus Linn,Tegmina and wings long, ocellated in $ ; front acuminate ; apex of abdomen withfour short styles; ovipositor long, straight. Donov. 4. pi. 130.DECTICUS Serv. Acrid p. Curt. 3 sp. Gr. verrucivorus Linn. Curt. 82.Tegmina and wings long, ocellated in ^ ; front obtuse ; eyes sessile ; ovipositorlong, more or less incurved.Family 6. LOCUS Tide Leach. ( Acrid Latr. )Locusts Leach. CEdipoda Latr.* 22 sp. G.flavipes Gmel. Curt. 608.Prothorax not scutelliform ; antennae simple ; wings and tegmina ample.Podesta Lair. Gryllus p. Linn. I sp. G.pedestris Linn. Panz. 30. 8.Tegmina and wings very short, unfit for flight ; antenna simple.GOMPHOCERUS Zeac/j. Gomphoceros r/j«rei. 8 sp. G. rufus lAnn.• Antenna; clavate. Stephh. 6. pi. 28. f. 6.TETRIX Latr. Acrydium Fah. 3 sp. G. suhidatus Linn. Curt. 439.Prothorax produced behind over the abdomen ; tegmina very minute ; wingsample.Order IV. Hymenoptera Malay.Note. — The following is an abstract of the arrangement of these insects given byMr. Haliday in the 15th Number of the Entomological Magazine.Stirps and Family 1. Tubulifera. Antennae 8-jointed; no borer in the female.Gen. 1. Phlceothrips.Sect. A. Ocelli and wings 0. 1 sp. P. pedicularia.Sect. aa. Ocelli 3 ; wings complete or abbreviated.Subs. B. Sides of head parallel. 5 sp. P. aculeata Fab.Subs. BB. Sides of head converging in front. 2 sp. P. coriacea.Latreille gives the name of CEdipoda to those locusts which are destitute of apaternal point, calling the larger species which have a strong point Acrydium. Asthe migratory locust belongs to the former group, it is proper that it should retainthe name of Locusta, whilst the rejection of the name of Acrydium, for the reasonsgiven in the body of my work, has rendered the adoption of another name necessaryfor the larger species, and which I have elsewhere named Rutidoderes.46 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.Stirps 2. Terebhantia. Antenna typically 9-jointed ; females with a 4-valvedborer.Fam. 2. Stenelytra. Borer curved downwards ; elytra narrow, with longitudinalnerves alone.Gen. 2. Heliothrips. Body reticulated ; wings nearly capillary. 1 sp.H. adonidum.Gen. 3. Sericothrips, Body smooth ; abdomen tomentose ; wings abbreviated.1 sp. 5. Staphylinus.Gen. 4. Thrips. Body smooth, glabrous.Subg. 1. Chirothrips. Ocelli 3 ; prothorax produced in front, narrowed.1 sp. Th. manicata.Subg. 2. Limothrips. Ocelli 3 ; prothorax of equal breadth ; lastsegment armed with two dorsal spines in ^ . 2 sp. Th. Cere'alium.Subg. 3 Aptinothrips. Ocelli and wings ; prothorax of equalbreadth. 2 sp. Th. rufa Gmel.Subg. 4. Thrips proper. Last segment unarmed ; style shorterthan sixth joint of antenna. 23 sp. T. physapus.Subg. 5. Belothrips. Last segment unarmed ; style of antennaelonger than sixth joint. 1 sp. Th. acuminata.Fam. 3. CoLEOPTRATA. Borer recurved ; elytra broad, with longitudinal andtransverse nerves.Gen. 5. Melanthrips. Antennas distinctly 9-jointed ; fore-wings withthree transverse nerves. 1 sp. Mel. ohesa.Gen. 6. JEolothrips. Antennae apparently 5-jointed ; the four terminaljoints very minute and soldered into a compact mass.Subg. 1. Colcothrips. Subdepressed; fore-wings with four transversenerves. 2 sp. Thrips fasciata Linn.Subg. 2. JEolothrips proper. Cylindrical ; wings regimental. 1 sp.JE. albicincta.Order V. NEUROPTERA Linn.Sect. I. BioMORPHOTicA West.Family 1. TERMITWJE Leach.(There is no British species of this family.)Family 2. FSOCIBJE Leach. (Psoqiiilii Latreille.)Pocus Latr. Hemerobius p. Linn. 43 sp. H. hipunctatus Linn. Pz. 94, 21.Head broad ; posterior margin of fore wings with four cells.CiECILIUS Cwr^ 4 sp. C. penetrates CwV. Curtis 64S.Tarsi 2-jointed ; posterior margin of fore wings with three cells.Atropos J.eacA. Termes |t. Xmw. 1 sp. T.pxdsatorium lAnn. Wood, pi. 75.Apterous ; tarsi 3-jointed ; posterior femora thickened ; abdomen oblong-ovate,depressed ; head oblong.NEUROPTERA. PSOCIDiE — Libelling. 47LACHESILLA West. Atropos p. Leach. 1 sp. T. fatidicum Linn.Head transverse ; tarsi 2-jointed ; wings in <4 j 2 short in $ ; legs slender.My fig. 59. 16.Family 3. PE RL IB jE Leach. ( Perlarise p. Za<r. )Per A Geoff. Semblis p. Far. 4 sp. Phryg. bicaudata Linn. Curt. 190.Abdomen robust ; bisetigerous ; wings ^ abbreviated.ISOGENUS Newmmmm. 1 sp. /. nubecula Newmmmm. Stephh. 6. pi. 31. f. 2.Abdomen robust, bisetigerous ; wings alike in both sexes.Chlorophyll A^ewm. Perla p. Latr. 6'sp. P. liitea Latr.Abdomen slender ; wings alike in both sexes ; nerves fewer than in Isogenus.Remora Latr. Semblis p. Far. 14 sp. P. nebulous Linn.Abdomen not setigerous ; antennae slender, setigerous. Stephh. 6. pi. 31. f. 3.LEUCTRA Stephhhh. Nemoura p. Stephhhh. 3 sp. L. geniculata St. St. 6. pi. 31. f. 4.Abdomen not setigerous ; antenna more robust, subraoniliform ; wings elongatedacuminated.Family 4. E PHE ME RW^ Leach. (Ephemera; ifl^r.)EPHEMERA Linn. Ephemera A. Stephh. 6 sp. E. vulgata Linn. Curt. 708.Wings four ; three anal filaments ; head of larva cornuted.LEPTOPHLEBIA ^es^w. Ephemera B. S'^epA. 10 sp. E. vcspertinaTi& G.Wings four; three anal filaments; head of larva unarmed. (2. pi, 17. f. 15.)BAETIS Leach. Ephemera p. Linn. 23 sp. Eph. bioculata Linn.Wings four ; abdomen with two terminal filaments. St. 6. pi. 29. f. 2.BRACHYCERCUS Curt. Ephemera p. Far. 5 sp. Eph. brevi cauda Fab.Wings two ; abdomen with three filaments scarcely longer than the body. Harris,Exp. pi. 6. f 3.Cenis Stephh. 2 sp. C. madura. St. 6. pi. 29. f. 1.Wings two ; abdomen with three filaments several times longer than the body.Cleon Leach. Ephemera p. Linn. 10 sp. Ej)h. litera Linn.Wings two; posterior pair obsolete; abdomen with two setae. St. 6. pi. 29. f. 3.Family 5. LIBELLULWuE West. (Libellulina Mzci.)Subfamily 1. Libellulides West. (LibellulidEe Zeac/i. )Anal Leach. Libellula p. V. L. 1 sp. An. formosa V. L.Ocelli in a row ; eyes contiguous ; wings acuminated ; anal angle of posterior pairrounded.iESHNA Far. Libellula p. Limi. 7 sp. L. grandis Linn. Donov. 337. f. 2.Ocelli in a row ; eyes contiguous ; wings obtuse ; anal angles of posterior pairmore or less angulated in $ .CORDULEGASTER Leach. Libellula p. Linn. 1 sp. JE. annular Latr.Ocelli in a low ; abdomen clavate ; anal angle of posterior wings strongly angulated.Donov. 4. 30.Pompous iecfc/^. Libellula p. iLi«ra. 2 sp. L.vidgatissima\Aw\\. Donov. 423.Ocelli in a line ; eyes remote in both sexes ; abdomen clavate.Cornelia Leach. Libellula p. Linn. 3 sp. L, ane Linn. Curt. 616.Ocelli in a triangle, metallic coloured ; anal angle of posterior wings angulatedin $.48 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.Libeller !.?««. 15 sp. L. depressa linn. Curtis 712.Ocelli in a triangle, generally broad and depressed ; anal angle of posterior wingsrounded in both sexes.[Platetrum Newmm., L. depressa. Leptetrum Netvm., L. 4-maculata. OrthetrumNewmm., L. cancellaria, Sympetrum Neivm., L. scotia.]Subfamily 2. Agrionides West. (Agrionidfe Leach.)AGRION Fab. Libellula p. Linn. 13 sp. L. puella Linn. Stephh. 6. pi. 29. f. 4.Wings membranous ; stigma rhomboidal ; areolets mostly quadrangular.Lester Leach. Agrion p. Fob. 3 sp. L. viridis V. L.Wings membranous ; stigma large, oblong-quadrate ; areolets mostly pentagonal.CALEPTERYX Linn. Agrion p. Fab. 4 sp. L. virgo Linn. Donov. 36. f. \.Wings coriaceo-membranous ; stigma obsolete ; areolets extremely numerous.Sect. II. SuB>fECROMORPHOTICA West.Family 6. MYRMELIOIS IBM Leach.(There is no British species of this family.)Family 7. HEMEROB IIDjF. We%tw. ( Hemerobid* ieacA.)OSMYLUS Latr. Hemerobius p. Far. 1 sp. O. macula? Fab. Sam. pi. 7. f. 4.Ocelli three ; placed in a triangle on the forehead.DREPANEPTERYX jLeacA. Hemerobius p. Z/i«w. 1 sp. H. phalcBnoideslAnn.Ocelli ; anterior wings very broad ; posterior margin suffocate.CH RYSOPA-leach. Hemerobius p-lin. 13 sp. H. perla lAnn. Curt. 520.Ocelli ; wings entire ; antennae cylindrical ; labrum notched.HEMEROBIUS Linn. p. — 32 sp. H. hirtus Linn. Curt. 202.Ocelli 0; wings entire; antennae submoniliform ; labrum entire.CONIOPTERYX Curt. { ^^Zl^.Twlrn. ] ^ ^P" ^- ^^^'^ sill.Tarsi 5-jointed ; wings covered with white powder ; with few nerves, the nervesdisposed nearly alike in all the wings ; labial palpi terminated by a large ovatejoint. Curt. 528.Family 8. SIALIDjE Leach.Salis Leach. Semblis p. Fab. 1 sp. Hem, darius Linn. Pictet, Ann. Sc. Nat.Ocelli 0; wings deflexed ; tarsi 5-jointed, fourth joint bifid. (N. S. 5. pi. 3.)Family 9. PANORPIDJE Leach. (Panorama; Latr.)Pandora Linn. 5 sp. P. communis Linn. Curt. 696.Wings four, large ; mandibles bidentate ; abdomen £ long, recurved, armed witha forceps.Boreas Latr. Panorpa p. Linn. 1 sp. P.hyemalis Linn. Curt. 118.Wings in $ rudimental, in ^ obsolete ; mandibles multidentate ; abdomen $short, unarmed.Family 10. RAPHWIIDJE Leach. (Raphidini Latr.)RAPHIDIA Linn. 5 sp. R. ophiopsis Linn. Curt. 37.Prothorax long; ovipositor J long and exserted.Family 11. MANTISPID^EWesiw.(There is no British species of this family.)TRICHOPTERA. PPIRYGANEID^. 49Order VI. TRICHOPTERA Kirhy.Family PHRYGANEIDJE West.Subfamily 1. Phryganeides West. (Phryganldae Stephens.)AGRYPNIA Curtis. 1 sp. A. Pageant Curt. Curt. 540.Tibise spinulose ; head and body very broad, depressed ; nerves of wings as inAnabolia.LIMNEPHILUS Zeac/j. Phrygaxea p. Oliv. 50 sp. P. grisealAnn. Curt. 488.Body not depressed ; wings narrow, obliquely truncated at tip ; max. palpi withthe last point short ; 5-jointed in both sexes.GLYPHOT^LIUS ae;;/*. LiMNEPHiLusp. C^<r^ 1 sex Ph. pellucida Ovid.Anterior wings with the hinder margin cut out.H ALESUS Stephh. Phryganea p. Schr. 7 sp. P. digitated Schr. Pictet, pi. 6. f. 1 , 2. ?Anterior wings broad, dilated at the tip, and rounded ; max. palpi with the lastjoint short, subelliptic.ANABOLIA Stephh. Limnephilus p. Lea. 2 sp. A. nervous l^ca.Wings narrow, rounded at the tip ; body sub compressed ; last joint of max. palpishort, sub elliptic. Same. pi. 7. f. 3.Druses Stephh. Phryganea p. Ginel. 5 sp. Pii. testacea Gm. St. 6. pi. 34. f. 3.Anterior wings rather broad, short, somewhat dilated in the inner margin, notsetose ; palpi long, pilose.CH^TOPTERYX 5^ Phryganea p. Pjc/. esp. P. vilhsaVab. Pict. 7. f. 4Body not depressed ; wings very broad, granulated ; with erect rigid setae.PHRYGANEA Zn«w. §-c. 5 sp. P. grandis lAnxi. Curt. 592.Tibias spinulose; wings pilose; palpi (J 4-jointed, 5-jointed in ^ > last jointof max. palpi short, subelliptic.Pneumonia Lea. Phryganea p. Linn. ? 1 sp. P. fusca L. ? Stephh. 6. 34. f. 2.Tibia; not spinulose ; wings transparent ; antennae short, stout.Subfamily 2. Hydropsychides W. ( Hydropsychida; Stephh.)Hippopotamus ieacA. 3 sp. P. rotulorum Lea.Anterior tibise 2-spurred ; antennae longer than the wings ; posterior wings small,unfolded ; anterior with a transverse oblique nerve about the middle of thecosta. Donov. pi. 548. f. 1.PLECTROCNEMIA Stephh. Hydropsyche p. Pict. 3 sp. P. consensus Curt.Anterior tibia; 3-spurred ; wings shorter than the antennae, with but few transversenerves. Pictet, pi. 19. f. 1 .Cyrus 5'fe/3/i. Hydropsyche p. Picirf. 4 sp. C. uranus. Pictet, pi. 19. f. 13.Anterior wings with various transverse nerves, with a transparent diseoidal spot ;anterior tibise 3-spurred; antennae shorter than the wings.POLYCENTROPUS Curtis. Amateur Stephh. G. 9 sp. P. prioratus C.Antennae shorter than the wings, the latter with but few transverse nerves ;anterior tibise 3-spurred ; four posterior with four spurs. Curt. 544.DIPLECTRONA JFesiw. Avhki.ocheika Stephh. 2 sp. P. Jlavo-maculata Fact.Anterior bite 2-spurred; antennae shorter than the wings, which are broad,without any transverse subcostal nerve. Stephh. 6. pi. 32. f. 3.HYDROPSYCHE Pirf. Fhii^ototathius p. Stephh. Cat. esp. H. instability C.Anterior tibiae 2-spurred ; antennae longer than the wings ; posterior wings ample,folded, with a trifid central nervure. Curt. Gone50 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.Subfamily 3. Leptocerides W. (Leptocerida; Leach, Sterile.)LEPTOCERUS Zmc/i. Mystacida ia<r. 28 sp. P. «?yr Linn. Curt. 57.Posterior bite 2 spurred ; basal joint of max. palpi short ; terminal joint sometimesvery long ; antenna; exceedingly long.Heraclea Lea. Phbvganea p. Latr. 1 sp. P. nervosa. Coq. tab. S. f. 1.Posterior tibiae 2-spurred ; two basal joints of max. palpi short; antenna; very long ;wings transparent.Johanna Cm;-;. Amblypteryx 5;ep/i. Caf. 2 sp. M. angnstata Cxxxt.Posterior tibise 4-spurred ; antennae robust, not denticulated in ^ ; shorter thanthe wings, which are long and narrow. B. E. rig.ODONTOCERUS Leach. PHavcANEA p. Scopol. 2 sp. P. albicornis Scop.Posterior tibia 4-spurred ; antennae slender, denticulated in <? ; second pair oflegs in larva longer than the posterior pair. Stephh. 6. pi. 34. f. 1.Subfamily 4. Sericostomides W. (Sericostomidae Stephh.)POTAMARIA Leach. Phryganeap- Fab. 1 sp. P. anaJis F. Stephh. 6. pi. 34. f. 4.Anterior tibia destitute of spurs j antennae stout, shorter than the wings.SERICOSTOMA ia<r. Prosoponia iea. 1 sp. S. Spencii VL. St. 6. 33. f. 2.Anterior and intermediate tibia? 2-spurred ; maxillary palpi $ mask-like.NOTIDOBIA Stephh. Sericostoma p. Pict. 1 sp. P. atrata F.Anterior tibias 2-spurred, intermediate 4-spurred ; basal joint of antennas short,incrassated, approximated ; anterior wings with a subovate discoidal cell.Pictet, pi. 14. f. 5. a, c.SILO Curtis. Phryganea p. Fab. 1 sp. P. allies Fab.Maxillary palpi ^ divaricating ; basal joint of antenna; very long, naked ; anteriortiblse 2-spurred, intermediate 4-spurred.GOER A Hoff. Phryganea p. Far. 5 sp. P. jnlosa Fab.Maxillary palpi J short, recurved ; basal joint of antennae long, naked ; anteriortibiffi 2-spurred, intermediate 4-spurred ; wings silky.Mormons Curt. Phryganea p. Fab. 5 sp. N. nigro-macidata.Basal joint of antenna elongate, very hirsute ; anterior tibias 2-spurred, intermediate4-spurred ; palpi short. Stephh. 6. pi. 32. f. 2.BRACHYCENTRUS Curt. Mere Stephh. G. 3 sp. B. siibmdnlus Curt.Anterior tiblas 2-spurred, Intermediate 4-spurred; spurs very short; antenna?remote ; palpi short.Subfamily 5. Psychomyiides ? W. ( Psychomidas ? Stephh.)Chimaera Zeac/i. Phyganea p. Linn. 1 sp. P. marginal T,. Curt. 561.Palpi very long ; second and third joints long ; wings destitute of transversenerves ; anterior tibia; without spurs.Subfamily 6. Phyacojjhilides W. (Rhyacophlllda; Stephh.)BERiEA Stephh. Thy Curt. 4 sp. P. pygmcca F. Pictet, pi. 16. 21. ? 23. ?Anterior tlbise 2 spurred ; discoidal cell wanting ; basal joint of antenna; large ;palpi robust, hairy.GLOSSOSOMA Curt. 2 sp. G. Bolton Curt. Stephh. 6. 32. f. 1.Anterior tibias 2-spurred ; all the wings with a discoidal cell ; anterior with acallous basal spot In ^ .TI NODES Leac/j. Phryganea p. Jan 9 sp. P. pusiUns ¥.Anterior wings with two discoidal cells ; posterior without a discoidal cell ; anteriortibia; 2-spurred.HYMENOPTERA. TENTHREDINIDiE. 51ANTICYRA Cm)-/. Rhyacophila p. ? Pic. 4sp. A.phaopaSiQ. Pict. pi. IG. g. ?Anterior tibia; 2-spurred ; discoidal cell wanting ; wings long, narrow ; basaljoint of antenna' small.AGAPETUS Cii?-^. Rhtacophila p. Pjcf. 6 sp. A. fuscipcs Cwxt.Wings short, rounded ; basal joint of antennae small ; discoidal cell wanting ; <Jwith a ventral spine. Pictet, pi. 16, 17. ig. &c.RHYACOPHILA Pict. Hippopotamus p. Curt. 4 sp. R. indiana Pict.Anterior tibia; 3-spurred ; max. palpi rather long, slender ; larva; with externalgills.Subfamily?. Hijdroj)tilides "W . (Hydroptilida; 5'^e/)A.)Marcia Ste. 1 sp. A^. elegans Stephh. 111. 6. pi. 32. f. 4.Antenna; pectinated j wings clothed with scale-like hairs.AGRAYLEA Cwr^ 2 sp. A. 6-mamlata Curt.Antenna; simple; interred. tibiee 1-spurred in the middle; wings long, narrow,pubescent.HYDROPTILA Dalm. 6 sp, H. Tineoides Dalm. An. Ent. t. 3.Antenna; simple ; interred. tibia; 2-spurred in the middle ; fore wings narrow,very pilose.Order VII. HYMENOPTERA Linnet' (Piezata Fab.)Sect. I. Terebrantia Latr. (H. aherrantia West. //. ditrochaHartig. )Subject. 1 . PhytipJiaga West. ( Sessiliventres St. Far. Hal. )Tribe 1. Serrifera St. Far. Hal. ; consisting of the singleFamily TENTHREDINID^ Leach.Subfamily 1. Cimbicides West.Cimex OZiy. Crabko Geoffrr. 8 sp. T. femorata Lhm. Curt. 41.Antennae with five joints preceding the club, which consists of two joints solderedtogether ; spurs obtuse ; anterior tarsi ^ spined beneath ; labrum narrow.TRICHIOSOMA ieac/i. Cimbex p. OZ«y. 9 sp. T. Liicoru7n 'L'mn. Curt. 49.Antenna; with five joints preceding the club, which is 3-jointed; body hairy ;labrum broad ; base of abdomen not membranous.Cancellaria Lam. Cisibex p. Oliv. 2 sp. T. America Linn. Curt. 93.Antennae with four joints preceding the inarticulate club ; spurs obtuse ; base ofabdomen not membranous ; joints of palpi short.Z Are A Z,eac/j. Cimbex p. Oliv. 1 sp. T. fasciata Jane. Curt. 97.Antennae with four joints preceding the 2-jointed club ; joints of max. palpi longand irregular ; spurs obtuse.A BI A ieacA, Cimbex p. Oliv. esp. T. service lAnn. Curt. 89.Antennae with four joints preceding the 3-jointed club ; labrum broad ; spursobtuse ; body metallic ; $ with a dorsal silken patch.I regret that I did not receive Mr. Haliday's talented ' HymenopterorumSynopsis,' initial too late to make use of it in my text ; I have however added hisgroups in this Synopsis, as synonyms, hither than entirely omit them. His primarydivisions of the order are Sessiliventres and Petioliventres, which the identical structureof the ovipositor of Urocerus and Ichneumon appears to me to oppose,E 252 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.Amass Ze«c/(. Cimbex p. Oliv. esp. T. obscuraV&h. Pz. 84. 13.Antenna? with four joints before the inarticulate club ; spurs of four posteriortibia acute.Subfamily 2. Ht/lotomides West.HYLOTOMA i^a6. A&gk Schr. 14 sp. T. enodis 'L'mn. Curt. 65.Antennae elongate, subclavate, and nearly glabrous in ^ ; simple and pilose in $ ;marginal cell appendiculated.PTILIA St, Far. Hylotoma A. Stephh. 1 sp. U. piliconiis Leach.Antennae short, nearly filiform and pilose ^ ; third submarginal cell produced atthe tip.SCHIZOCERUS ia<r. Hylotoma p. A'%. 2 sp. H. furcata Yell. Curt. 58.Antennae (? furcate ; ^ long and simple ; marginal cell not appendiculated.Subfamily 3. Tenthredinides West.Hath ALIA i^eflc/i. Allantus p. Klug. 10 sp. T. Bosco lAnn. Curt. 617.Antennae 9 or 10-jointed; third joint long; terminal joints subclavate; twomarginal and four submarginal cells.SCIAPTERYX 5'<ep/j. Tenth red p. Fast. 1 sp. T. costa7«s Fab.Antennae 9-jointed, short, stout ; joints irregular; wings thick and broad;marginal cells divided by a curved vein.SELANDRIA Leach.* Hylotoma p. Fair. 40 sp. Hill serve Far.Antenna; short, 9-jointed ; terminal joints simple ; body short and broad ; twomarginal and four submarginal cells ; wings thin. Pz. 69.17.HEMICHROA .%ep/i. Diner (Lepioce;-ca Hartig). 3 sp. T. Alan Linn.Antenna; 9-jointed ; long, slender ; two marginal, four submarginal cells, thesecond receiving two recurrent nerves; body as in Selandria. Stephh.pi. 38. f. 2.DI Near A Z>a/tZ&. Tenthredo p. aep/(. 1 sp. T. De Geeri K\.Two marginal, four submarginal cells, the second receiving'two recurrent nerves ;antennae 9-jointed; body as in Nematus. De G. 2. pi. 38. f. 8 — 10.(? MESONEURA Haitig. Selandria p. Stephh. 1 sp ? T. verna Klug? )A Plants Panzer. TENTHREno p. Klug. 47 sp. (St.) T. Scrophu^ariaslAnn.Two marginal, four submarginal cells ; antennae subclavate or setaceous ; thirdjoint longer than the fourth; abdomen elongate; hind legs long; clypeusdeeply notched. Sam. pi. 8. f. 2.Ohs. Hartig restricts this group (as a subgenus) to T. scrophulariae, and itsimmediate allies (Stephens's first eight species).Ohs. Hartig has divided Selandria (which he considers only a subgenus of Ten-theretoA7. ) into four sections, named from peculiarities of the larva, as noticed inmy Vol. II. p. 100, 101. : — 1. lilennocampa (subdivided into three named tribes:1. Blcnnocampa ; 2. Monophadnus ; and 3. Phymatoccra Dhlhom.^ ; 2. Hoplo-campa ; 3. Eriocampa ; and 4. Selandria proper. The following are British typesof these groups : Phymatocera not being indigenous.1. Blennocampa. 1. Blennocampa proper. Selandria Ephippium. Pz. 52. 5.T. fuliginosa Sch. T. Betuleti Kl. T. ^thiops Fub.2. Monophadnus. T. Spinola Kl. T. luteiventris Kl.T. allies Gmel. Tenth. melanocephalus Fab., Stephh.2- Iloplocampa. T. chrysorrha^a Kl. A^ewm. T. ferruginea Fab. Fi. 90. 9.T. testudinea Kl. §-c.3. Eriocapam. T. adumbrata Kl. T. cinxia Kl. T. varies Kl. Sc.4. Selandria proper. H. serve Fab. T. Moro Fab. Pz. 69. 17.HYMENOPTERA. TENTHREDINID/E. 53TENTHREDO* ieacA. 28 sp. {Steph.) T. tiassata Im.Two marginal, four submarginal cells ; antenna; rather long and slender ; thirdand fourth joints equal ; abdomen rather long, depressed ; legs moderate ;clypeus scarcely notched. Pz. 65. 2. <? .MACROPHYAZ)A/6. AhhASTVs -p. Stephh. 9 sp. T. rust ices linn. Pz. 64. 10.Antennas 9-jointed; body moderately long ; posterior coxae very large; each ofsecond and third submarginal cells receiving a recurrent nerve (T. bland Fab.Pz. 65. 9. T. punctum F. Pz. 26. 21. ; and the species above mentioned arethe types of Dahlbom's three sections of the genus. )PACHYPROTASIS Earthy. Tenthredo A. Stephh. 4 sp. . T. RapcB Linn.Antenna; longer than the abdomen, slenderer than in Tenthredo ; posterior coxjbvery large. (Hartig makes this a section of Macrophya.) Schiiff. Ic. 179. 1.Attica Newmm. Ent. Mag. vol. iv. 261.; v. 484. 1 sp. A. lathe.Antennae short, slender, 9-jointed ; second joint twice the length of the first ;third twice the length of the second ; fourth scarcely shorter than the third ;the remainder gradually shorter ; stigma distinct, membranous ; two marginaland three or four submarginal cells ; the second and third receiving a recurrentnerve.Ohs. This description is drawn from Mr. Newman's typical specimen, whichhe has been so kind as to lend me ; and of which the fore wings are unlike,the transverse nerve separating the first two submarginal cells beingobliterated in one of them : thus the genus is closely allied to Tenthredoproper, rather than to Fenusa.DOSYTHEUS ZeacA. Dolerus p. ^ar%. 14 sp. T. Eglanteria Y.AntennEB 9-jointed ; body moderately long ; two marginal and three submarginalcells, the first very short ; third joint of antennae longer than the fourth.Panz. 82. 11.Doers Leach. Dolerus p. Hartig. 9 sp. T. nigra Linn. Pz. 52. II.Differs from Dosytheus in the third and fourth joints of antennae being of equallength.TEjMVUYTU^ Leach., Hartig. 24 sp. T. cuncta lain. Curt. 436.Antennae 9-jointed ; third and fourth joints of eqvial length ; two marginal andthree submarginal cells ; the first as long as the second ; hind wings with nomiddle cell.(Augments /rar%. (Sect, of Emphytus.) 1 sp. Emph. coronatusK.\.,St.Body short, oval ; hind wings with two middle cells. )(? HARPIPHORUSiyarf!;^'. Selandria p. Stephen I sp. Sd. scapulars St.(lepidus Kl, ? ).06s. Hartig regards this as a subgenus of the genus Tenthredo (which also 'includes Selandria, Athalia, Macrophya, and Allantus, as subgenera), and dividesit into six named sections : —1. Saxons Meg., which includes the following British species: T. agilis Kl, ;T. nitidus Kl. ; T. bicolor A7.2. Strongylogaster H, : Br. sp. T. cingulata Fah. Curt. 692.3. PcBcilostoma H. : Br. sp. T. impressa Kl., Stephh. (Emphytus).4. Perineum H. : Br. sp. T. Rubs Panz., Stephh. III.5. Tenthredo : Br. sp. T. nassau Linn. ; T. Coquebertii Kl. ; T. timidity KL ;T. aucupariae Kl. ; T. mandibularis Kl. ; and many other species placed byStephens both in Allantus and Tenthredo ; and6. Sgnairema H. (T. delicately KL, not British.)E 354 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.MELICERTA Stephh. 1 sp. M. ochrokitcus St.Antennae 9-jointed ; third joint longer than the fourth ; two marginal, three submarginalcells, the first not shorter than the second.HETERARTHRUS Stephh. Phyllotoma* Fall. 1 sp. T. ochropoda Kl.Antennae 11 to 15-jointed, third joint twice as long as the fourth; two marginaland four submarginal cells ; the veins between the basal ones interrupted.FENELLA IFestio. 1 sp. F. nigritaWestw.fAntennae 11-jointed, slender; two marginal, three equal-sized submarginal cells;first and second receiving a recurrent nerve.FENUSA ieacA. Emphytus (F.) ifar%. 3 sp. T. pumila Kl.Antennae 9-jolnted, slightly clavate ; two marginal and three equal-sized submarginalcells ; the first and second receiving one recurrent nerve ; body short, stout.Druids Newmmton. Ent. Mag. vol. iv. 261. ; v. 484. 1 sp. D. parviceps Newmm.Antennae filiform, 10-jointed; first and second joints minute, third long, fourthrather shorter, remainder gradually decreasing ; two marginal, three submarginalcells ; first and second receiving a recurrent nerve.Mess Leach. Fenusa p. Hartig. 1 sp. T. hortulana Kl.Antennae 9-jointed ; first and second joints short, third elongate, remainderdecreasing ; one marginal, and four submarginal cells.Meatus Leac/j. Tenthredo p. imw. 40sp. (5^.) T. Caprem "Pah.Antenna; 9-jointed ; one marginal, four submarginal cells ; the second receivingtwo recurrent nerves ; tarsi simple. Panz. 65. 8.CR.3iSUS Leach. Nematus p. Jur. 3 sp. T, septentrionalis Linn. Curt. 17.Antennas 9-jointed ; one marginal, four submarginal cells, the second receivingtwo recurrent nerves ; basal joints of posterior tarsi greatly dilated.EUURA A^ejt'm. PaisxiPHORAf-j- 5"^ i^ar^. Cry ^tocam^us Hartig (1?) P. atraJur. tab. 6.Antenna; 9-jointed, simple ; one marginal, three submarginal cells ; first verysmall ; second very long, receiving two recurrent nerves.PRISTIPIIORA ia<r. Phosphorus Z>/i/?). ? 6 s]>. T. Myosotidis V&h.Antenna; 9-jointt'd, simple ; one marginal, three submarginal cells ; the first large,receiving two recurrent nerves; the second small. Pz. 98. 13.TRICHIOCAMPUS i/ar%. 'i^nMAiivs -p. Stephh., St. Far. (5?) N. grandisSt. Far. Stephh. pi. 38. f. 1.Antennae 9-jointed ; $ with the base of the third joint dilated, pilose ; one marginaland three submarginal cells of nearly equal size ; the first and secondreceiving a recurrent nerve.Claudius Leach. Pteronus p. Jur. 1 sp. CI. difform'ts Leach. Pz. 62. 10.Antennae 9-jointed, pectinated in $ ; one marginal, three nearly equal submarginalcells ; first and second receiving a recurrent nerve.Subfamily 4. Lycidas West.Zephyrus Latr. Pteronus Jur. 3 sp. T. Pini Linn. Curt. 54.I have not adopted this name in the restricted sense in which it is used byDahlbom and Hartig, having been employed by Fallen for all the short-bodiedTenthredinides with short antenna; ; the species of Athalia being its types.(Fall. Mon. Entire. Sue. p. 27.) The species which Dahlbom gives were evendoubtingly considered by Fallen to belong to the genus. I had generically namedthe only British species, Decatria, which Mr. Stephens has changed.•(■ Nigra, decorum apiece, tibiis tarsisque obscure lutes, alis niisricantibus. (Lo?>g.1 liii. E.rp. Alar. 3 lin.)HYMENOPTERA. TENTHREDINIDiE — CYNIPIDyE. 55Antennae multiai-ticulate, with two rows of pectinations in ^ ; upper wings withone marginal cell.?MONOCTENUSZ)A/6. I^ovhyuvs StcpL 1 sp. T. Juniper i Linn. Pz. 7G. 11.Antenna; niultiarticulate, with one row of pectinations in ^ ; upper wings withone marginal cell.Tarda Far. Megalodontes Latr. esp. T. Cepkalotes Fab. Pz. 62. 7, 8.Antennae 15-to 18-jointed ; upper wings with two marginal and four submarginalcells.Lydia Fab. Pamphlets Latr. 22 sp- T. sylvatica Linn. Curt. 381.Antennae 19-to 36-jointed, slender, setaceous ; two marginal, and four submarginalcells ; four hind tibiae with three spurs.Subfamily 5. Chides West., (^CephidcB Hal.)CEPHUS Latr, Status K"/. 11 sp. Sirexx pygirueus Linn. Panz, 73. 17.Antennae subclavate, about 21-jointed; abdomen compressed.3 Pi.Yi\JS Stephhhens. Cephus p. Curt. 2 sp. J. C07mectens St. Stephh. pi, 36. f. 1.AntenucB filiform ; abdomen shorter than in Cephus, cylindric and subclavate.PHYLLCECUS Newmmmm. 1 sp. P.Faimus Newmmmm.Antennae slightly thickened beyond the middle, 27-jointed ; abdomen compressed.Subfamily 6. Eyelids West. (^Xyelidce Hal.)XYELA Dawn. Pinicola Latr. 1 sp. K. pusilla Dalm. Curt. 30.Antenna with the third joint greatly elongated ; ovipositor exserted, nearly aslong as the abdomen.Tribe 2. TerebelUfera St. Far. Urocerata Latr., Hal. ; consisting of the singleFamily UROCERIDJE LeAch. (Siricid® Curtis.)XIPHYDRIA Xa<r. Hyboxotus ii7(<^. 2 sp. Sirexx dromedaries lAnn.Prothorax elongated into a neck ; two marginal, and four submarginal cells ; max.palpi long, 5-jointed. My fig. 72. 4.Grocers Geoff. Silex Linn. 7 sp. 5'. <7J^as Linn. Curt. 253.Prothorax not forming a neck ; two marginal, and four submarginal cells ; max.palpi exceedingly short ; ovipositor forming a long exserted borer.(Subfamily? Oryssides West. OryssidcB Hal.)Crassus Latr. Sphex p. Scop. I sp. O, coronets Latr. Curt. 460.Cylindrical; antennas S 11-jointed, ^ 10-jointed; max. palpi long, 5-jointed;ovipositor spiral, capillary. (My fig. 73. 1.)Subsect. 2. Entomophaga West. ( Pupivora Z-air. TerebelUfera* Hal.)Tribe 1. Spicidifera West. (TerebelUfera & Canalifera St. Far.)Family 1. CYNIPIDJE West. ( Diplolepida ZeacA. Gallicola;Latr., Hal.)I BALI A Latr. Salaries Pz. 1 sp. lb. Cultivator Latr. Curt. 22.Abdomen knife-shape ; antennae (J 15-, ^ 13-jointed.Mr. Haliday divides the petiolated terebrant Hymenoptera into five tribes :1. jBwtomo/(//a (IchneumonidcE, Stephanida3, Evaniadfe). 2. Oxy!<ra ( Proctotrupida;,Pelecinidse, Diapriadae, Scelionidae, Ceraphronida). 3. Gallican (Cyniphida;).4. //"a/<2co/»?e?-a (Leucospidee, Chalcidida?, Mymaridie). 5. Tubidifera (^ChrysiAiAx).E 456 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.Cynics Lieu. 33 sp. (Curt.) C. quercus folii. Linn. My fig. 73. 12.Abdomen obovate ; antennae $ 15-, $ 14-jointed ; wings large, with a small distincttriangular submarginal cell enclosed by nerves of equal thickness.BIORHIZA Weslw. CvNirs p. Fab. 1 sp. C. aptera Fab. Coquet. tab. 1. f. 11.Abdomen obovate ; antennas $ 14-jointed; wings obsolete.Figures Latr. EucHARis p. Panz, 12 sp. F. scutellaris Rossi.Antennae <? long, filiform, 14-jointed, ^ shorter, thickened to the tips, 13-jointed ;second submarginal cell triangular, with its basal nerve almost obsolete ; scutellumlarge, with two basal excavations obtuse at the tip. Guerin, Icon R.An. t. Lxvii. fig. 3.ONYCHIA Hal. 1 sp. Cynips hiusta sp. dined.Abdomen with the third segment very large concealing the posterior ones, petiolevery short ; scutellum channelled throughout ; antennae filiform, 1 4-joints <J ,13 ^ ; cubital areolets three, subcostal nerve not continued to join the rib.*' N. B. Cynips disaster Pz. does not belong to this group, but probablyto Figites." Haliday MSS.EUCOILA Westiv, 5 sp. E. crassiiierva West.Antennae ^ 15-jointed, $ 13-jointed, short, gradually incrassated ; second submarginalcell obliterated ; scutellum with three excavations. Mag. N. H.vol. viii. p. 174.KLEIDOTOMA IFestw. 3 sp. A7. Psiloides, West.Antennae $ 13-jointed, short, three terminal joints suddenly thick ; second submarginalcell obliterated ; scutellum at the base with a broad excavation, withthe apex tubercular, and 1-excavated.ANACHARIS JDalm. 5 sp. An Eucharioides Dalm.Antenna; ^ 14-jointed, $ 13-jointed, long, filiform ; second submarginal cellobliterated ; scutellum with two rudiinental excavations ; abdominal pedunclelong. Stephh. pi. 47. f. 1.CEGILIPS Hal. Anachabis B. West. 4 sp. Cynips nitidula Dalm.Abdomen globose-ovate ; petiole short, cylindric, rugose ; scutellum pyramidal,acute; antenna; filiform, 1 4-joints $, 13 ^ > cubital areolets two, indistinct,the anastomosis forming a callous dot." Haliday MSS.ALLOTRIA West. 1 sp. Al. victrix, West.Antennae ^ 13-jointed, filiform, longer than the body ; abdomen subsessile ; secondsubmarginal cell obliterated; scutellum transversely depressed at the base.MELANIPS Hal. 2 sp. Cynips article Kirby.Abdomen somewhat acute in ^ , petiole very short ; annular, second and thirdsegments equal ; scutellum rugose, the base bifoveolate ; antenna filiform,(J 14, $ 13-joints; cubital areolets three." Haliday MSS.Family 2. EFANIW^E West. CEyaniada: Leach, Hal.)EVANIA Fab. Sphex p. Linn. 1 sp. Sp. appendigaster Linn. My fig. 74. i.Abdomen minute, petiolated ; fore wings with distinct discoidal cells ; ovipositornot exserted.BRACHYGASTER ZeacA. Evania p. Curtis. 2 sip. E. 7ninuta Oliv. Curt. 257.Abdomen minute, petiolated ; fore wings without discoidal cells ; ovipositor notexserted.FCENUS Fab. Gasteruptron Latr. olim. 2 sp. Ichn. Calculator Linn. Curt. 423,Abdomen long, gradually clavate ; ovipositor long, exserted.HYMENOPTERA. ICHNEUMONID^. 57Family 3. ICHNE UMONIDuE Leach. (Hal. Entomotilla Dum.)Subfamily 1. Ichneumonides West. (Ichneumon genuiniGrav. )ICHNEUMON Linn., Grav. 224 sp. /. imitator Linn.Abdomen oblong-ovate, basal segment rough ; ovipositor not exserted; scutellumflat; antennae simple; outer cell complete; areolet distinct, 5-sided. Curtis 728.Silenus Grav. 5 sp. S. agates Gr. Curtis, 388.Outer ceil incomplete ; areolet distinct, 5-sided; abdomen ovate, depressed, veryshining, basal segment linear ; ovipositor not exserted ; scutellum flat ; antennaesimple.Isthmus Grav. • 3 sp. /. correctors Fab.Abdomen sub cylindrical, smooth ; petiole linear; antennae simple ; areolet 5-sided;ovipositor very short ; scutellum flat.BRACHYPTERUS Gr. 1 sp. B. means Gr. Stephh. pi. 40. f. 2.Wings very short ; areolet wanting; abdomen oblong-^ ovate ; antennae simpleovipositor scarcely exserted.Micrometer Gr. 1 sp. M. splendidly Gr. St. pi. 40. f. 3.Head subglobose ; areolet wanting ; abdomen robust, petiolated ; legs and antennasthickened ; ovipostor not exserted.ACRODACTYLA Hal. Barytes Hal. MSS., Curt. Guide., 2d ed. 2 sp. B.deeper Hal.Abdomen attenuated at the base, intermediate segments obsoletely compressed ;anus $ slit ; ovipositor exserted, short ; areolet wanting ; tarsi thick at tip ;ungues lobed beneath.MESOLEPTUS Grav. Ichneumon p. Fab. 62 sp. M.7iarrator Gr. Curt., 644.Abdomen smooth, shining, with a long petiole ; ovipositor not exserted, areoletwanting or very small, legs and antennae slender.Gryphon Fallen. Ichneumon p. Linn. 99 sp. T. rutilator, Linn, Curt. 399.Posterior tarsi slender ; face flat ; abdomen oblong, subsessile ; ovipositor not exserted; scutellum flat ; areolet sub obsolete, triangular or sub orbicular ; antenna.slender or moderate ; legs moderate.CTENISCUS Hal. MSS., Curt. Guide, 2d ed. 3 sp. C Curtisiiii Hal.Characters of Tryphon, but with the fore tibiae one-spurred, intermediate one-spurred,and posterior without spurs.Epochs Gr. Hvpsicera Latr. R. An. 19 sp. E. antiques Gr.Face with a frontal tubercle, abdomen subsessile, oblong-cylindrical ; areolet obsolete,or small and triangular ; ovipositor not exserted; scutellum flat; legsshort and thick.PERI OPE Hal. ^ I sp, P. auscultation Hal.Abdomen subpetiolated, compressed at tip, elongate, fusiform ; ovipositor concealed; thorax and antenna very short ; face protuberant ; legs short ; spurs1. 2. 1. ; ungues denticulated; areolet minute, subtriangular.SCOLOBATES Gr. 1 sp. S. crassitarsus Gr.Posterior tarsi thickened ; face flat ; abdomen subsessile ; basal segment graduallynarrowed ; ovipositor not exserted ; scutellum flat ; areolet wanting.SPHECOPHAGA festa. Anomalon p. Curt, nee Jur. Grav. 1 sp. A. vcsparwnHind legs robust ; abdomen sessile, broadly ovate ; ovipositor not exserted ; areoletwanting. Curt, 198.58 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.Trois Panzer. Ichneumon Curt. 8 sp. Tr. alhoguttatus Gr. Curt. 2.'54.Scutellum elevated ; head transverse ; ovipositor not exserted ; areolet .'3- or 5-sided ; abdomen petiolated, convex.ALOMYA Panzer. Ichneumon p. Linn. 3 sp. A. orator. Curt. 120.Head globose ; areolet triangular ; abdomen long, petiolated, depressed ; antenna;short ^ .HOPLISMENUS Gr. 5 sp. H. cestus Gr.Head transverse ; metathorax acutely spined ; legs and antenna; slender andsimple ; areolet pentagonal ; abdomen oblong, petiolated ; basal segment withtwo elevated lines ; ovipositor short ; scutellum flat.Crypt Fab. Ichneumon Linn. 51 sp. C. viduatorius F. Curtis, 668.Ovipositor long ; metathorax unarmed ; legs and antennae slender and simple ;areolet 4- or 5-sided ; abdomen petiolated, ovate, convex ; head transverse.PHYGADEUON Cr. Ichneumon p. 5'c/»-. 25 sp. Ph. claimants Gv.Legs and antenna; somewhat thickened and simple ; areolet pentagonal, small ;abdomen petiolated ; ovipositor exserted, moderately long.MESOSTENUS Gr. 2 sp. M. transfuse Gr.Areolet minute, quadrate ; antenna simple ; abdomen petiolated ; ovipositor exserted,long, or moderate ; scutellum flat.HEMITELES Gr. 13 sp. H. testator Gr. Pz. 94. 14.Ai-colet small, incomplete, pentagonal, or obsolete ; antenna; simple ; abdomenpetiolated ; ovipositor exserted, long ; scutellum flat.AGRIOTYPUS J/aZ^. — 1 sp. A. urmatus\N\k. Curtis, 389.Scutellum with a long acute spine; abdominal peduncle long, slender, curved;abdomen thick, oval ; second and third segments coalescing; areolet wanting;oviiDOsitor not exserted.PEZOMACIIUS Gr. Gelid Thun. 21 sp. P. aherrans Gr. Curtis, 536.Abdomen petiolated ; ovipositor exserted, short, or moderate ; wings rudimental,not fitted for flight.PHYTODIETUS Gr. 3 sp. P. astute Gr.Abdomen subsessile, or subpetiolated ; inferior nerve of the inner cell angulated;ovipositor exserted ; scutellum flat ; areolet obsolete, or triangular.Obs. Stephens introduces Gravenhorst's Ischnocerus into his table of thisfamily ; but the British species are not yet indicated.MESOCHORUS Gr. 10 sp. M. Tipu'arius Gr. Curtis, 464.Areolet large, rhomboidal ; antenna; simple; abdomen petiolated, oblong; ovipositorexserted, short ; scutellum flat ; head transverse ; anus g often appendPLECTISCUS Gr. 3 sp. P. imperator Gr.Abdomen subsessile, or subpetiolated ; inferior nerve of the inner cell straight ;wings fitted for flight ; ovipositor exserted ; scutellum flat ; areolet obsolete oroblique.HELICTES Hal. MSS., Cure. G. 2d ed. 5 sp. P. erytlirostoma Gm.Abdomen petiolated; first segment attenuated; ovipositor concealed or sub-exerted;antennae slender, convoluted; areolet wanting; legs slender, posteriorpair rather long.GLYPTA Gr. 6 sp. G. sculpture Gr.Areolet wanting ; abdomen shining ; intermediate segments of abdomen with twooblique lines, deeply incised or tubercle ; abdomen sessile, convex; ovipositorexserted, long.HYMENOPTERA. ICHNEUMONID/E. 59LAMPRONOTA C?<r<. Lissonota Grow. 19 sp. I. sensus Fourcc. Curt. 407.Thorax smooth ; abdomen shining, with smooth segments ; terminal ventralsegments entire ^' ; scutellum triangular ; areolet obsolete or triangular; ovipositorlong.Obs. Stephens (Tab. Ichneumonida?, vol. vii. p. 126.) has indicated a genusnext to Lampronota, which he names Stilbonota, having the antenna notcrenulated ; whereas he characterises Lampronota by crenulate antenna;.The species of the former are not yet indicated.POLYSPHINCTA Gr. 4 sp. P. theresa Gr.Abdomen shining, sessile, with transverse impressions, ?j? with the apex slit beneath; legs rather slender ; areolet wanting ; thorax smooth ; ovipositor exserted,short, or moderate.SCHIZOPYGA Car. 2 sp. S. imdagrica Gi:Abdomen shining, sessile, convex ; segments with transverse impressions, the twoterminal ventral ones slit in '^ ; legs thickened ; thorax smooth ; areoletwanting ; ovipositor exserted ; very short.CLISTOPYGA Gr. 1 sp. C. imitator Fab.Abdomen shining, sessile, convex ; segments tubercled ; apex entire beneath^ ; thorax smooth ; areolet wanting ; ovipositor exserted, moderate ; legsmoderate.Pimple Fab. Ichneumon, p. Linn. 16 sp. P. flavian F., Curtis, 214.Abdomen sessile, convex, shining; segments tubercled, the intermediate transverse; areolet distinct, triangular ; thorax smooth ; ovipositor exserted, moderate,or long.EPHIALTES Gr. 7 sp. /. manifestation Linn. Pz. 19. 21.Abdomen sessile, convex, shining ; segments tubercled, the intermediate elongated; areolet distinct, triangular ; thorax smooth ; ovipositor long.RHYSSA Gr. 1 sp. R. persuasoria L. Pz. 19. 19.Abdomen long, sessile, convex, shining, terminal ventral segments slit 2 ;thorax transversely rugulose ; ovipositor very long ; areolet triangular.Obs. Stephens (Tab. Ichneumonidae, vol. vii. p. 1 26. ) introduces Graven-horse'sTraehyderma in this place ; but as the British species are not yetindicated, I cannot give an example.PELTASTES IlUger. Methodius Gr. 3 sp. P. dissectorius. Pz. Curtis, 4.Abdomen sessile, depressed, rough ; scutellum transverse, quadrangular, apicalangles acute ; ovipositor not exserted.Basses Fab. S. P. Grav. (nee Curt.) 12 sp. B. Icctatorhis Fab.Abdomen sessile, depressed ; the basal joint equilateral, flat ; antenuce simple ;legs rather slender ; areolet obsolete or triangular ; ovipositor scarcely exserted.Pz. 19. 19.ORTHOCENTRUS Gr. 7 sp, O. anomalous Gr.Abdomen sessile, depressed ; basal joint equilateral, flat ; antennas simple ; legsthickened ; areolet generally 5-sided ; ovipositor scarcely exserted.Eusebius West. EucEROs Grav. 3 sp. E. crassicornis Gr. Curt. 660.Antennae dilated in the middle ; areolet wanting ; segments of abdomen constricted.Bacchus Fab. Ichneumon p. Linn. 5 sp. B. senator Fab. Curtis, 588.Abdomen sessile, compressed ; areolet distinct, large, square ; inferior outer nerveof the inner cell sugarcane ; ovipositor concealed.CO GENERIC SYNOPSIS.EXETASTES C;-. 6 sp. E. fornicator Fui.'Abdomen subpetiolated, compressed ; areolet distinct, large, square ; inferiorouter nerve of the inner cell angulated or triangular ; ovipositor short.COLEOCENTRUS Gr. I sp. C. excitation Pz.? Pz. 92. 5.Areolet distinct, small, triangular ; abdomen compressed at the tip, subsessile, ^with a plough-shaped anal valve ; ovipositor long.AROTES Gr. 1 sp. A. albicinctus Gr.Areolet wanting ; hind legs thick ; abdomen compressed at the apex ; subpetio-lated; females with a plough-shaped anal valve ; ovipositor long.CAMPOPLEX Gr. 1 sp. C. difformis Gr. Pz. 100. 15.Areolet triangular or wanting ; abdomen petiolated, sub compressed ; inner cellwith one recurrent nerve ; radial cell narrow, sub lanceolate ; femora and tarsislender ; ovipositor short or moderate.Priscus Schrank Grav. 4 sp. /. virtus Tour. Pz., Sch. 82. 3.Abdomen quite compressed, petiolated, basal segment conical; areolet triangular;inner cell with one recurrent nerve; radial cell narrow, sub lanceolate; legsand antennae rather slender ; ovipositor short.Thereon C?<ri. Anomalon Gr. 10 sp. /. ewecafor Ross. Pz., Sch. 225. 4.?Posterior tarsi thickened ; femora simple ; abdomen compressed, petiolated ;areolet wanting ; ovipositor short.Option Fall. Anomalon Jur. 5 sp. /. lutes L. Curtis, 600.Thorax smooth ; inner cell with two recurrent nerves ; radial cell narrow, lanceolate; tarsi and femora slender ; abdomen very compressed, sickle-shaped ;areolet wanting ; ovipositor scarcely exserted.Ohs. Stephens (Tab. Ichneumonida?, vol. vii. p. 126.) indicates a genus nextto Ophion, which he names Enicospilus, differing from Ophion in havingthe first submarginal cell spotted. His pi. 40. fig. 4. is evidently intendedfor a species of this genius, of which the species are not yet indicated.TRACHYNOTUS Gr. 1 sp. T. foliated F.Thorax rough ; inner cell with two recurrent nerves ; radial cell narrow, lanceolate; tarsi and femora simple ; abdomen petiolated, long, compressed at thetip ; areolet wanting ; ovipositor short.PACHYMERUS Gr. 1 sp. P. calculator G. Curtis, 624.Hind femora thickened, not spined ; abdomen compressed, petiolated ; areoletwanting ; ovipositor long ; stigma long.Prisoners Curt. 1 sp. P. generator Pz. Curtis, 624.Hind femora thickened and spined ; abdomen compressed, petiolated ; areoletwanting ; ovipositor moderate ; stigma large.CREMASTUS Gr. 3 sp. C. spectator Gr.Areolet wanting ; abdomen very compressed and petiolated ; inner cell with onerecurrent nerve ; radial cell narrow, sub lanceolate ; tarsi and femora simple ;antennae and legs slender ; ovipositor moderate.Horizon Fall 7 sp. P. nutrition F.Radial cell very large and triangular ; femora and tarsi simple ; abdomen compressed,petiolated ; stigma large; areolet wanting; ovipositor curved.ATRACTODES Gr. 12 sp. A. bicolor Gr.Areolet pentagonal ; abdomen sub compressed, petiolated ; inner cell with one recurrentnerve ; radial cell narrow ; femora and tarsi simple ; areolet 5-sidcd ;ovipositor scarcely exserted.HYMENOPTERA. ICPINEUMONIDiE. 61Aconite Latr. 1 sp. A. duhitator F, Pz. 78. 14.Hind legs long and thick ; scutellum flat ; head transverse ; abdomen subsessile.XYLONOMUS Grav. Ichneumon p. Fab. 4 sp. A', pilicornis Gr. Curt. 353.Face quadrate ; areolet wanting ; femora simple ; head globose ; abdomen sessile,depressed, rough, and lineated at the base ; ovipositor moderate or long.Tories Latr. ■ 5 sp. A', nitens Gr.Face narrowed towards the mouth ; areolet wanting j femora simple ; head globose; abdomen subsessile ; ovipositor long.Clericus iJaZ. 4 sp. ? Cryptus praetor Hal.Abdomen peduncled ; first segment tubercled ; clypeus compressed at the base,semicircular ; antennas and legs slender ; areolet wanting ; ovipositor exserted.ODONTOMERUS Gr. 2 sp. O. deities Gr.Hind femora very thick and toothed ; areolet wanting ; head globose ; abdomenpetiolated, clavate ; ovipositor long.ECTHRUSCr. 1 sp. I. reluctance L. Pz. 71. 13.Areolet pentagonal or wanting ; femora simple ; head globose j abdomen sub-violated; ovipositor long.Subfamily 2. Braconides West. (Ichneumon AdscitiEsenb.*)Division 1. Polymorphi West,Opium Wesm. Bracon p. Nees. 50 sp. Bracon carhonarius Nees.Clypeus remote from the mandibles or lower wings with a disco-recurrent nerveor stigma elongate attenuate ; three cubital areolets, second oblong. Wesm. t. 2.f. 5—12.GNAMPTODON ita?. Diraphus Wesm. 1 sp. Bracon pujnilio lees.Clypeus remote from the mandibles ; borer short, inflected ; three cubital creoles,second transverse.Meteors Hal. i „ n *■ ' }- 22 sp. Ichneumon pendidalor Latr.Abdomen petiolate ; borer^exserted ; three cubital areolets. Curt. BE. 415.MICROCTONUS ^esm. Perilitus p. iTaZ. 3 sp. Per. italics Hal.Abdomen petiolate ; borer exserted ; antennae straight ; two cubital areolets ;mesothoracic scutum legate. Wesm. t. 1. f. 6.Perilous Nees. Mickoctonus p. Wesm. 8 sp. Per. riitilits Nees.Abdomen petiolate; borer exserted; antennae straight; two cubital areolets;parapsides of mesothorax distinct. Wesm. t. 1. f. 7 8.ROPALOPHORUS, Nag. Hal. Microctonus p. Wesm. 1 sp. Mice. clavi-cornsWesm. Brae. Belg. pi. 3. f. M.Abdomen petiolate ; borer exserted ; two cubital areolets ; antennae sublimate,slightly geniculate ; scape cylindric, shorter than the head.STREBLOCERA Jfes^jr. 1 sp. Sir. fulviceps Wes,t\v.Abdomen petiolate ; borer exserted ; two cubital areolets ; antenna; geniculate jscape elongate, toothed below.The value of the Generic Synopsis of the Ichneumon Adsciti will be dulyappreciated when the reader is informed that it has been kindly communicated to meby A. H. Haliday, Esq., whose memoirs upon this tribe, published in the Entomological,afford so good an example of descriptive entomology.62 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.EUPHORUS Nees. Leiophron BE. 11 sp. L. palaces Curt. BE. 476.Abdomen petiolate ; borer concealed ; two cubital areolets ; radial areolet very-short,semilunar.CENTISTES i/a?. Leiophron p. Wesm. 4 sp. Braconlucidator trees.Abdomen subsessile ; borer short, inflected ; two cubital areolets ; mesothoracicscutum legate. Wesm. t. 2. f. 2.LEIOPHRON Nees, Actus Hal. 5 sp. L. ater Nees.Abdomen subsessile ; borer short, incurved ; two cubital areolets ; sutures ofparapsides distinct.Pig Solus i^aZ. Blacus p. Wesm. 2 sp. Crispus sticticits F.Abdomen subsessile, the apex obtuse and gaping ; borer deflected ; two cubitalareolets.GANYCHORUS Hal. Blacus p. Wesm. 7 sp. Bacon rujicornis Nees.Abdomen subpetiolate ; borer exserted ; head subglobose ; two cubital areolets ;ungues of anterior feet appendiculate. Berl. Mag. v. tab. 1. f. 3.Blacks Nees. Bracon p. Nees olim. 8 sp. Bracon humility Nees.Abdomen subsessile, compressed ; borer exserted ; head subglobose ; two cubitalareolets; ungues simple. Berl. Mag. v. tab. 1. f.4. a, b, c.EUBADIZON Nees. 3 sp. Euh. pectoralis Nees. Wesm, t. 2. f. 3.Abdomen subsessile, with distinct segments ; borer elongate ; head transverse ;occiput truncated ; two cubital areolets.Eucalyptus Hal. Bbachistes Wesm 4 sp. Euhazus macrocephalus Nees.Abdomen subsessile, with three segments only apparent ; borer elongate ; twocubital areolets. Wesm. t. 2. f. 4,Orgies Hal. IscHius Wesm. 1 sp. Microdus obturator Nees.Abdomen subsessile ; borer exserted ; occiput concave ; hind legs stout-with largespurs; two cubital areolets, radial narrow, cuneate. Berl. Mag. 6. tab. 4. f. 1.Distills Hal. Taph^eus Wesm. 2 sp. Diosp. speculator Hal.Abdomen subsessile ; borer exserted ; three cubital areolets, second transverse orsub quadrate, prKdiscoidal areolet contiguous ; clypeus obtuse. Wesm. tab. 2.f. 18.Antigonus Wesm. Bracon p. Nees. 1 sp. Asp. diversicornis Wesm.Abdomen subsessile ; borer exserted ; three cubital areolets, second sub quadrate ;prrediscoidal areolet contiguous ; clypeus angulated. Wesm. t. 2. f. 16. t. 3. f. 0.Helicon Nees. Pimping p. F. 1 sp. Helicon narrator Nees.Abdomen subsessile ; borer elongate ; front mucronated ; hind legs elongate,with incrassate thighs; three cubital areolets. Nees, Berl, Mag. 6. tab. 4.f. 6.MACROCENTRUS Curt. Rogas Wesm. 7 sp. Cryptus abdominal F.Abdomen subsessile ; borer elongate ; head transversely compressed ; three cubitalareolets ; divisions of mesothoracic scutum protuberant. Nees, Berl. Mag.v. t. 1. f. 1.PHYLAX Wesm. Zele p. Curt. 4 sp. Zele testamento Curt.Abdomen subsessile, falcate ; borer short ; three cubital areolets, second oblong.Bee. 415. f. 1—6. Wesm. t. 2. f. 13.DYSCOLETES, N, G. Dyscolus Hal. (g. Coleopt.) 1 sp. D. lucifer, sp. dined.Abdomen subsessile ; borer elongate ; three cubital areolets, second trapezoid,receiving the recurrent nerve.CENOCOJLIUS, Nag. 1 sp. Cew. /«ot;/Vo??.s, sp. dined.HYMENOPTERA. ICHNEUMONIDyE. 63Abdomen subsessile ; three cubital areolets ; prajcliscoidal areolet distinct from thecosta ; clypeus obtusely angled.ICHNEUTES Nees. 1 sp. S. reunite Nees.Abdomen subsessile, speculate ; borer concealed ; three cubital areolets, secondattenuate at the apex ; radial triangular ; radius of lower wings obliterated.Berl. Mag. vol. vii. tab. 7. f. 3.PROTEROPS JFesm. Bracon p. C«»-<. 1 sp. Pr. 7ngri]}en7i{s\Ycsm. Bee. 69.Abdomen subsessile, obovate ; borer concealed ; antennas close to the vertex ;three cubital areolets, second short ; radial triangular, rounded.F AXYLL,OM A Bubisson f ^'■'■'^cvs Curt. "lisp. P. lucca Br.Hybrizon I'aUen. J 'One long marginal cell, two submarginal cells, the second lanceolate, pointed atbase ; abdomen with a long 2-jointed peduncle ; basal joint of posterior tarsidilated. My fig. 74. is.Division 2. Cryptogastri Wesm.SIGALPHUS Nees. Triassic Hal. 6 sp, Sig. semirugosus Nees.Three cubital areolets ; borer exserted. Berl. Mag. vol, vii. t. 7. f. 1 2.CHELONUS Ji/r. Sigalphus p. Latr. 7 sp. Cynips inanity lAwn.Three cubital areolets, first incomplete ; eyes hairy ; segments of abdomen completelycoalite. BE. 672.ASCOGASTER Wesm. Chelonus p. Nees. 7 sp. Sigdlphus riifipes J^aXr.Three cubital areolets, second nearly triangular ; eyes glabrous ; segments ofabdomen coalite. Nees, Berl. Mag. vol. vii. t. 7. f. 2.PHANEROTOMA JFfism. Chelonus p. Pz. 1 sp. Ch. cristatus Vz. 88.141.Abdomen subdepressed, 3-jointed, with crenulated sutures ; middle tibias sinuated;three cubital cells.RHITIG ASTER, Wesm. Sigalphus p. Latr. 1 sp. Ichn. irrorator F.Three cubital areolets, second oblong; abdomen clavate ; segments three, connate.Wesm. tab. 2. f.Division 3. Areolar Wesm.Agatha Latr. Bracon p. F. 6 sp. Ag. malvacearum Latr.Eyes glabrous ; maxillas and labium elongate ; three cubital areolets, second veryminute. Nees, Berl. Mag. vol. vi. tab. 4.MICRODUS Nees. Bassus p. F. 5 sp. Basis calculator Panz. BE. 73.Eyes glabrous; mouth short; three cubital areolets, first incomplete; secondvery minute, triangular.Marinus, Wes77i. / Microdus p. jyees. \ ^ Basis gloriatorius Fz. WO. 17.Bassus p. Curt. j "^ ^Eyes glabrous ; mouth short ; three cubital areolets, first complete, second veryminute, quadrangular.Micrometer Lar. Vipio JaZZ. 60 sp. Ichneumon glo7nerat7is lava.Eyes pilose ; antennae 18-jointed ; cubital area contracted in the middle; areoletstwo or three, the intermediate being very minute ; radial triangular, faintlytraced. Curt. BE. 321.Alius Hal. Adeline Wes7n. 1 sp. Ac. suhfasciatus Hal.Eyes pilose ; antennae 20-jointed ; three first segments of abdomen coalite ; radialareolet incomplete. Wesm. tab. 3. f. 7.64 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.MIR AX Hal 1 sp. M. Sparta.Antennae 14-jointed; segments of abdomen distinct ; radial areolet incomplete.Division 4. Cyclostomi Wesm.Bracon Far. Vipio Lath: SO sp. Bracon deserter F. Panz. 79. 10.Second and third abdominal segments divided by a furrow; ventral valve acuminate;three cubital areolets; brachial areolets conterminous ; lower wings withbrachial areolet very minute ; front even ; third joint of antennae longer thansecond.COELOIDES Wesm. Bracon p. Nees. 1 sp. Brae, initiator Fab.Front excavated ; second and third joints of antennae equal; basal joint of hindtarsi shorter than the following united ; three cubital areolets ; ovipositor long.ROGAS Nees. \ ^^^'^^^^^ „,^^'"' J- 8 sp. Bracon assertor Jur. Curt. 512.| Pleiades fiesm. J 'Three anterior segments of abdomen nearly equal ; second and third divided by afurrow, the rest very small; borer very short; three cubital areolets; Brachialareolet surpassing the anterior; lower wings with the vestige of a disco-recurrentnerve.Demon IfaZ. f Rogas p. iVees. lisp. Bog. descrescens ^ee^.Opium p. Wesm. 3. 148. J ' ^Second and third abdominal segments divided by a furrow ; borer very short ;three cubital areolets ; radial slightly incomplete ; stigma very narrow. Berl.Mag. vol. V. t. 2. fig. 10.CLINOCENTRUS Hal. Exothecus p. Wesm. 4 sp. CI. mirabilis Hal.Abdomen with the three anterior segments large ; second and third nearlycoalite, the rest very short ; borer shorter than the abdomen ; three cubitalareolets ; anal nerve posterior.Classes Hal. Exothecus p. Wesm. 9 sp. Col. hraconiiis Hal.Abdomen with the segments nearly equal or gradually decreasing; second andthird nearly coalite ; borer shorter than abdomen ; three cubital areolets ; analnerve posterior.RHYSSALUS Hal. Exothecus p. Wesm. 2 sp. Bh. vavasor Hal.Abdomen sub-sessile; borer longer than abdomen ; head transverse ; three cubitalareolets.DORY'CTES Hal, Ischiogonus Wesm. 5 sp. Bracon striatellus Nees.Abdomen subsessile ; second and third segments nearly coalite ; head cubic ;three cubital areolets.Hecatombs 5& Anisopelma Jfesm. 1 sp. H. sulcatus BY Curt. 507.Abdomen subsessile ; borer elongate ; head cubic; two cubital areolets ; lowerwings of (J with a stigma.Hermits Nees. Sect. 1. 1 sp. H. motriliatus Nees.Abdomen subsessile ; antennae of more than twelve joints ; cubital areolets three ;1 nerve interstitial. Berl. Mag. vol. v. t. 2. fig. 11.CHREMYLUS Hal. i ^^ at ' r 1 sp. Horus ruhiqinosus Nees.L Horus p. Nees. j ^Abdomen subsessile ; antennae 1 2-jointed ; cubital areolets three; anal nerve interstitial.Spahis Nees. Cryptus p. F. 2 sp. Cryptus cravats Panz. Panz. 102. 16.Abdomen petiolate ; head cubic ; three cubital areolets.HYMENOPTERA. ICHNEUMONIDiE — CHALCIDID^. 66Division 5. Exodontes Wesm.Alicia Zfl^r. Bassus A'ees^ olim. 60 sp. CryjJtus indicator Panz. Curt. 141.Three cubital areolets.CHASMODON Hal. Alysia p. Nees. 1 sp. Al. aptcra Nees.No wings; thorax narrow.Oenone Hal. Sigalphus Nees, Sect. 2. 3 sp. Sig. mandihularis Nees.Two cubital areolets ; abdomen ovate, rugose, with the segments connate orcoalite.DACNUSA Hal. Alysia Nees, Sect. 5. 25 sp. Al. petiolata Nees.Two cubital areolets ; stigma elongate, attenuate ; eyes glabrous; abdomen smooth,except at the base; head transverse, Berl. Mag. vol. v. t. 1. fig. 5.Chorus Hal. Perilitus p. Nees. 4 sp. Cor. nereidum Hal.Two cubital areolets ; stigma elongate ; eyes pilose ; head transverse.CHvENUSA Hal. (Hym. Brit. Alas. ) Perilitus p. Nees. P. corijungens Nees,Two cubital areolets ; stigma short ; eyes villose ; abdomen obovate, spatulate,subglabrous. Berl. Mag. vol. v. t. 2. fig. 7.CCELINIUS Nees. Chignon B. E. 8 sp. Chignon anceps B. E. Curt. 289.Two cubital areolets ; stigma short; head cubic; abdomen elongate, compressedin $.Division 6. Flexiliventres West. (Fam. ApMdiadce Stephh. Subfam.AphidiadcB UaViday pisa. Polymorphi p. lFesm.~)PRAON Hal. Blacus p. Nees. 5 sp. Pr. dorsalis Hal.Pra^discoidal areolet complete ; cubital open to the exterior margin. Wesm. Br.Belg. tab. 1. fig. 14.E PH E D RUS i7aZ. Classes Wesm. 4 sp. Bracoti gladiator "Nees.Pra?discoidal areolet complete ; cubital three ; antennffi 11-jointed. Wesm. tab. 1.fig. 12.Towards, N. G. Trionyx Hal. (g. of Reptiles.) 1 sp. Tr. deliver Hal.Praediscoidal areolet complete ; cubital three ; antennae of more than 1 1 joints.Monotonous Hal. 3 sp. M. ?nervous Hal.Disco-cubital areolet short, hexagonal ; stigma internally prolonged, attenuate.TRIOXYS Hal. Aphidius p. Jresm. 12 sp. Tr. aceris Hal. Curt. 383.Disco-cubital areolet obliterated ; stigma triangular ; radius arched, abbreviated ;ventral valve of ^ with two spines.Apicius Nees. Hybrizon Fab. 29. sp. Ichn. aphidum L.Disco-cubital areolet attenuate externally. ; stigma triangular or lanceolate;ventral valve unarmed. ( Rarely apterous. ) Nees, Berl. Mag. vol. v. t. 2. f. 8.Family 5. Chalcis ID jE West. (Cympsera Latr. Diplo-lepari« Spin. Pteromalini Z>aZ»i. Halticoptera Tina?. )Subfamily 1 . Chalices West.CHALCIS Fab. Sisera Spinola, Curt. 3 sp. Split. shapes Linn. Curt. 472.Abdominal peduncle and posterior coxae elongate ; hind femora thickened andtoothed ; antennae inserted near the middle of the face, 1 3-jointed, secondjoint small, third very minute, fourth as long as the following.F66 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.BRACHYMERIA IFesiw. Cuxhcis Curt., Spin. 1 sp. Ch.minuta ¥. Pz. 32. 6.Short, thick ; antenna short ; abdomen subsessile, sub conical, scarcely compressed; posterior coxa; not elongated ; antennae inserted near the middle ofthe face.HOCKERIA Lajmrte. Chalcis p. Panz. 2 sp. Ch. armata Panz.Antenna; inserted near the mouth ; abdominal peduncle very short ; posteriortibias not acute at the tip ; hind femora thick. Stephh. pi. 44. f. 3.HALTICHELLA S/jiM. Chalcis p. Fa. 1 sp. Ch. pusilla Fah.Antennae inserted near the mouth, (J subfusiform, ^ subclavate ; posterior noiseacute at the tip ; abdominal peduncle very short ; hind femora thickened, andtoothed beneath.EUCHARIS Latr. 1 sp. Eiich. ascended Fab.Antennae thick, moniliform ; first and third joints long ; palpi very minute ;thorax gibbous ; scutellum produced ; abdominal peduncle long ; legs simple.Stephh. 111. pi. 44. f. 1.Subfamily 2. Eurytomides West.EURYTOMA Illig. 11 sp. Eur. abrotani Panz. Stephh. pi. 45. f. 3.Collar transverse-quadrate ; abdomen compressed ; antennae ^ setaceous, vertus11-jointed ; ^ clavate, 12-jointed; max. palpi 4-jointed.Hecatomb Spin. 15 sp. Ptei: higiittatus Swed. Curt. 345.Abdomen compressed; antenna $ and ^ clavate, $ 11-jointed, $ 12-jointed,third and fourth joints minute ; max. palpi 3-, labial 2-jointed.SYSTOLE Walk. 2 sp. S. alhipennis Wlk.Abdomen cylindric ; body short, thick; antennae '^ acuminated at tip, 12-jointed,short, submoniliform ; head large.I SO SO MA Walk. 26 sp. Decay. longus Dalm.Abdomen cylindric; body elongate, slender; antennae ^ rounded at tip, jointed,clavate; $ 11-jointed, pilose, filiform.Subfamily ? Spalangiides. )C'EROCEPHAL,A West. Episiacrvs Walk. 2 sp. C. cornigera^yestw.Head large, tricornuted in front ; antennae 10-jointed, third joint longer than thesecond and fourth, seven terminal joints nearly equal ; collar triangular ; pedunclenearly as long as abdomen. Stephh. pi. 45. f. 1.THEOCOLAX Westiv. has-mix Hal. 1 sp. Th. forming for mis West.Apterous, or with very minute rudiments of wings ; head sub horizontal, quadrate,very slightly tridentate in front; antennae 11-jointed, second joint large, thirdto eighth gradually thicker, three terminal joints forming a mass ; collar large,triangular ; ovipositor short, exserted.SPALANGIA Latr. 3 sp. Sp. nigra Latr. Gen. t. 12. f. 7, 8.Head ovate, narrowed in front ; antennae inserted close to the anterior margin ofthe head, 10-jointed; <J filiform, with the third joint long ; $ thickened, thethird to ninth joints short ; collar attenuated ; abdomen peduncled.MACROGLENES West. Ichneumon Kirhij. 1 sp. Ici. penetrans K.Head broad; eyes very large ; antennas short, thick at the tip, 10-jointed in $,second joint moderate, third to fifth small, sixth as large as second, seventhlarger, remainder forming a mass, 9-jointed in $ ; abdomen compressed ;ovipositor slightly exserted ; max. palpi 3-, labial 2-jointed.HYMENOPTERA. CHALCIDID^E. 67Irene Hal. Cortnocere Nees. 5 sp. P. varicornis Hal.Head ovate ; mouth prominent ; max. palpi 2-jointed, labial almost obsolete ;eyes large; antennas short, 10-jointed, second joint as large as the five following,which are minute, three terminal joints forming a very large club; collartransverse ; abdomen subsessile, compressed.Ohs. " Notwithstanding the different palpi, this genus is too closely relatedto Macroglenes to admit of their separation in different subfamilies."Haliday MSS.Ashes Walk. Chuysolampus p. Esenb. 1 sp. As. vulgaris Wlk.Head transverse; mandibles 2-dentate ; antenna? 1 2-jointed, clavate, third jointvery minute, fourth and following short ; collar large, sub quadrate ; abdomenovate-convex ; first and second joints very large, !j? rather longer ; wingsnarrow.CEA Hal. I sp. C. puUcaria Hal.Head moderate, transverse, sub quadrate ; antennae slender, filiform ; third andfollowing joints short, equal ; thorax long-ovate ; collar moderate ; metathoraxpeduncle-like ; abdomen long-ovate, compressed ; ovipositor exserted ; legslong, slender ; wings 0.Subfamily 3. Pteromalides West.[1. Torymidce Wlk.]MEGASTIGMUS Z)a?m. Diplolepis p. Fa. 2 sp. Dipl. dorsalis Tab.Stigma thickened ; legs subequal ; ovipositor long, exserted ; abdomen $ violated; mesoscutellum convex ; pro scutellum elongate. Stephh. 111. 45. f. 2.MONODONTOMERUS Jfes^MJ. Torymus B. a. Z)aZm. 2 sp. Dipl. stigma Fah.Collar large, transverse; hind femora thick, but not serrated, beneath armedwith a tooth near the tip ; mesoscutum with distinct sutures ; antennae withthe third joint minute ; club scarcely shorter than the two preceding joints.Obs. Curtis, in his Guide, gives Prisoners Wlk. as British ; it is, however,given by Walker as an inhabitant of the South of France. The posteriorfemora are thick and toothed, and the posterior tibise curved. Type,P. pachymerus Wlk.Diodorus Wlk. 1 sp. JD. nobilis \V.Collar narrowed in front ; abdomen elongate, ovate, sessile ; ovipositor exserted,long; antennae 13-jointed, sub filiform; hind femora thickened, with a spinenear the tip ; mesoscutum with distinct sutures.Calliope Spite. Misocampus Latr. 59 sp. Ichn, Cynipedis Linn.Abdomen $ not peduncled ; antennae more or less clavate, 1 3-jointed, third jointsmall, fourth as long as the fifth ; ovipositor long, exserted ; mesoscutellumconvex ; pro scutellum short ; legs subequal ; stigmal branch very minute ; max.palpi 4-, labial 3-jointed. Curtis, 552.PERIL Campus £o<r. Diplolepis p. Pe. 6 sp. P. italics Fab. Curtis, 158.Head large ; abdomen subpetiolated, short, contracted ; ovipositor hidden ; max.palpi 4-jointed; antennae 13-jointed, second joint minute, third very minute,fourth large.CRATOMUS Z)a/m. Caratomus Boh. 1 sp. C. mcgacephalus F. ^ . Stephh. pi. 44. f, 4.Head very large ; mandibles 3- to 4-dentated ; antenna? clavate, 13-jointed. secondjoint elongate, third small, fourth and following minute ; club 3-jointed ;stigmal branch long and curved.F 268 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.{Ctrtosoma Curt. ol. "1SiPHONURA Nees. l 2 sp. 0. punctiger West.Pervcyphus Bohea. JAntennae short, thick, 13-jointecl, third and fourth joints annular ; thorax convex ;abdomen '^ cylindric-ovate, second to fifth joints punctured, and with rows oftoothed impressions.[2. Miscogasteridffi Ilk. Abdomen petiolated ; stigmal branch straight.]LAMPROTATUS West. f Chrysolampus p Esenh. | ^^ ^ splendensWes.l^ MiSt'OGASTER Ilk. JBody very shining ; abdomen S shorter than the thorax, convex-ovate, impressedat the base ; antenna; long, filiform, 13-jointed, third and fourth joints annular;legs (J slender ; collar transverse, quadrate ; palpi simple ; petiole short, thick.PACHYLARTHRUS IFesfw. | pH^co'jj'i"'' c?'??'^"* 1 ^ ^P' ^'- /^°"^^^««"*' ^ahn.Head broad j maxillary palpi with the last joint very large, inflated ; antennas13-jointed, third and fourth joints annular, the three last forming a smallclub ; abdomen short, sub triangular, and depressed above in ^ ; peduncle veryshort. Curtis, 427.Polycrates Festive. 2 sp. P. Mattlmvsii West.Differs from Pachylarthrus in all the palpi having the terminal joint greatly inflated.DICYCLUS Wlk. 5 sp. D. ceyieus Wlk.Antennas ^ clavate, 13-jointed, third and fourth joints annular, fifth joint moderatesized ; abdomen ^ depressed above, elongate-ovate, or subrotundatc ; petioleshort ; thorax long ; mandibles 4-dentate.CYRTOGASTER fra. Chrysolampus p. £:sew6. 9 sp. C. ruffles \NW.Abdomen convex; antenna? $ fusiform, 14-jointed; ^ clavate, 13-jointed, thirdand fourth joints annular, fifth joint moderate sized ; intermediate tibiae notclavate ; petiole short ; thorax ovate ; ovipositor scarcely exserted ; last jointof max. palpi (? dilated.PACHYNEURON Fra. 1 sp. P. formosum^Y\k.Space between the subcostal nerve and stigmal branch thickened ; antennae ^IS-jointed, fifth joint moderate sized; intermediate tibise not clavate; peduncleshort ; abdomen $ elongate-ovate, $ nearly rounded.Corunna mk. 1 sp. C. cravat Wlk.Abdomen $ ^ clavate ; intermediate tibisE not clavate ; peduncle short ; thoraxelongate; antennae 13-jointed, $ filiform, $ thickened at the tips; third andfourth joints annular ; mandibles 4-dentate.TOXEUMA fra. 2 sp. T. fuscicornis \\\\i.Abdomen $ elongate, compressed ; intermediate tibia? not clavate ; peduncleshort; thorax elongate ; antenna? 13-jointed, third and fourth joints minute;ovipositor short, exserted.Erasmus Wlh. 6 sp. M. mfpes Wlk.Thorax elongate ovate ; prothorax rounded in front; peduncle elongate, narrowestbehind ; abdomen $ ovate, gibbous ; $ elongate-ovate ; antennae sub-elevate.Proposes Wlk. 1 sp. Pr. ater Wlk.HYMENOPTERA. CHALCIDID^. 69Prothorax rounded in front ; thorax short, rounded ; peduncle long ; antenna; $clavate, 1 3-jointed, third and fourth joints annular ; abdomen short ; legsslender, straight.EUPSILOCERA West. Psilocera Wlk. [G. Tipulida;.] 1 sp. Ps. ofccwm Wlk.Prothorax rounded in front ; thorax short ; abdominal peduncle very short ;antennae ^ moniliform, verticillate, longer than the body ; abdomen ovate, depressed.DIPARA Wlk. Sphegigaster Spin. ? 2 sp. D. petiolata Wlk.Prothorax sub quadrate ; antennae $ filiform, longer than the body, 12-jointed,third and following joints moniliform ; petiole elongate ; abdomen convex ;subcostal nerve coalescing with the costa.SYNTOMOPUS Wlk. 2 sp. S. thoracic Wlk.Prothorax sub quadrate ; antennas c? , *? clavate ; head large ; thorax elongate ;petiole linear ; ovipositor subverted ; wings short.Micrometer Ilk. 2 sp. M. rufomaculatus Wlk.Antenna $ 13-jointed, thickened at the tip, third and fourth joints minute ;petiole short ; thorax long ; abdomen S broad, nearly rounded ; $ ovate,convex above ; wings sometimes almost obsolete.ISOCYRTUS Wlk. 1 sp. /. lais Wlk.Antennae ^ 12-jointed, subclavate, third and fourth joints minute; intermediatetibiae not clavate ; petiole short ; thorax long ; abdomen elongate-ovate,depressed ; legs slender.Spacious rZyJ. 1 sp. S. dissimiUsWYk.Tibia straight ; intermediate tibiae clavate ; petiole short ; thorax long ; prothoraxrounded in front ; antennae 13-jointed, third and fourth joints annular; abdomenshort, ovate.[3. Ormocerldas Wlk. Antennae moniliform ; abdomen sessile ; stigmal branchstraight.]ORMOCERUS Wlk. 4 sp. O. rernaUs Wlk.Antennae short, clavate or sub filiform, 13-jointed, third and fourth joints minute;thorax convex above ; abdomen not compressed ; ovate, acuminate at tip ;ovipositor not exserted.Nicodemus Fra. 8 sp. M. rottmdus Wlk.Antennas 12-jointed, clavate; apex acuminate; thorax convex; abdomen notcompressed, short, nearly rounded ; ovipositor not exserted; stigma emitting ashort nerve.GLYPHE Wlk. 1 sp. G. auimnnaUs Wlk.Abdomen compressed, elongate-ovate, acuminate at tip; apex unarmed in 5 ;thorax convex ; antennae 12-jointed, subclavate, with the last joint elongate-abominate; stigma emitting a very short nerve.GASTRANCISTRUS West. 17 sp. G. pagans West.Head broader than the thorax; antennae IS-jointed in $, 12-jointed in Q,third and fourth joints annular; fifth to ninth cup-shaped; abdomen elongate-ovate^ ; apex with two small recurved hooks ; ovipositor exserted, more or lesselongate ; stigmal branch long and clavate ; tarsi 5-jointed.MEROMALUS ;ra. 1 sp. M. flavkornis yV\k.Antennae submoniliform, 13-jointed $ , not half the length of the body, with thelast joint short ; abdomen compressed, sublinear ; thorax very convex,F 370 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.RAPHITELUS Wlk. 1 sp. R. maculatus Wlk.Antennae 12-jointed S ■: clavate, third and fourth joints minute, tenth andeleventh joints very short, last joint setiform ; abdomen subeompressed, narrowedat the tip ; thorax convex.Poisonous Wlk. 1 sp. Fs. adams Wlk.Head flat in front, and rather produced ; thorax flat ; abdomen very compressed,longer than the thorax; antennae 12-jointed; ?j? subclavate, submonilifonn,clava ovate.[4. Pteromalida; mk. Abdomen flat, sessile ; antennas filiform, fusiform, orclavate ; stigmal branch straight. ]SELADERMA Wlk. 4 sp. Sel. latus Wlk.Antenna; 1 3-jointed, third and fourth joints minute ; mesothoracic parapsidesdistinct ; collar very minute, transverse ; abdomen ovate or elongate-ovate,angulated beneath ; ovipositor concealed.SEMIOTELLUS West. Serious Wlk. (G. Elaterida.) 9 sp. S. mimdus^Wk.Antennae 12-jointed; thorax coarsely punctured; mesothoracic parapsidesdistinct ; collar very short, transverse ; mandibles 3-toothed ; abdomen ovateor elongate-ovate.SYSTASIS Wlk. 2 sp. S. Encyrtoides Wlk.Antennae 12-jointed, <? sub filiform, ^ clavate; thorax not coarsely punctured,convex, short-ovate ; collar very short, transverse ; abdomen short-ovate, orrounder, flat above, ^ angulated beneath.Notus Wlk. 1 sp. E. cretaceous Wlk.Antennae 11-jointed, third and fourth joints scarcely visible; mctathoracicparapsides not distinct ; prothorax very short, transverse ; head very large ;abdomen nearly quadrate <? , basal joint covering the rest, $ apterous.MERAPORUS ;ra. 3 sp. M. ffraininicola Wlk.Antenna 12-jointed, clavate ; club of moderate size, ovate, flat ; thorax broad atthe extremity ; mesothoracic parapsides not distinct ; abdomen <J very small,rounded, $ ovate.METASTENUS fra. 1 sp. M. conchmusWlk.Short; antenna 12-jointed, subfusiform ; club moderate sized, conic, acuminate;thorax narrowed at the extremity ; mesothoracic parapsides indistinct ; abdomenovate, abruptly narrowed at base.METOPON Wlk. 1 sp. M. antrum Wlk.Antennae 12-jointed, clavate, fifth and following joints subequal ; club very thick ;collar minute, scarcely visible; abdomen small, compressed, flat ; sides elevated.Platter A Jr/A. lisp. PI. nobis W.Narrow, sublinear ; antennae 13-jointed, third joint scarcely visible, fourth andfifth minute ; club short-ovate ; thorax flat above, elongate-ovate ; abdomen(J sublinear, ^ ovate or sublinear.AMBLYMERUS Wlk. 27 sp. A. amends Wlk.Short, broad; antennae 13-jointed, clavate, shorter than the thorax, second jointelongate, cup-shaped, fifth and following, to the tenth, gradually shorter andbroader ; thorax convex above ; collar very short.PROSOPON Wlk. 1 sp. Pr. inontanum Wlk.Head moderate sized, transverse; antenna slender, clavate, 13-jointed, third andfourth joints minute ; club ovate; thorax ovate; collar very short ; abdomenovate, flat ; middle tarsi broad.HYMENOPTERA. CHALCIDIDJS, 71PLATYMESOPUS JFestto. 1 sp. PL tibialis West.Maxillary palpi not furcate, second joint large, dilated, fourth very long ; middletibisB broad, flattened, and internally sinuated, terminating on the outside in afascicle ; anterior thrice slightly dilated ; abdomen ovate, depressed, muchsmaller than the thorax.MESOPOLOBUS West. 1 sp. M. fasciiventris West.Head broad ; antennae gradually thickened, 13-jointed, third joint annular, fourthlarger ; mandibles 3 to 4-dentate ; max. palpi ^ furcate ; middle tibiae with asmall hirsute lobe on the outside near the tip ^ .Enters Wlk. 30 sp. Exit. miletus Wlk.Intermediate tibiae simple ; antennae clavate, third and fourth joints minute ;max. palpi slender, filiform ; abdomen acuminate ; intermediate femora oftenwith a tooth beneath.PTEROMALUS 5'a;erfe7-«s. 254 sp. (Wlk.) Ichn. puparum lAnn.Femora slender, intermediate beneath setigerous near the tip ; body pilose ;ovipositor concealed or scarcely exserted ; antennae 13-jointed, with the thirdand fourth joints annular, fifth moderate sized ; collar very short.Obs. The species of this genus are arranged by Walker into about 1 40 sections,the majority of which are unnamed. Some, however, appear equivalentwith the groups indicated in Curtis's Guide, under the MSS. names ofPentheus JVlk., Eusela Wlk., Lamprotes Wlk., and Pterocelis Hal. Thespecies still, however, require a careful sub generic revision, in order toplace them on a footing with the Miscogasteridae and Ormoceridce ofWalker.Epictetus West. 1 sp. E. choreiformis West.Very short, convex, contracted; antennae short, subclavate, 12-jointed, third andfourth joints annular ; fore wings with the humeral portion anteriorly dilated,and obliquely truncate at the place of union of the subcostal nerve with thecosta ; abdomen sessile.METOPACHIA West. | Col'IT cSS"" 1 ^ ' ^P" ^- ^'«P«'' Curtis. 166.Head ^J much broader than the thorax ; thorax ovate ; collar short ; abdomen c?elongate-spatulate ; $ elongate-conic, flat above, angulated beneath ; ovipositornot exserted ; antennas 13-jointed, slender, filiform, third and fourth jointsannular, very minute.HETROXYS West. Gastbacanthus West. ol. 3 sp. G. pulcherrimus West.Head broad, short ; abdomen three times as long as the thorax, narrow acuminatedto the tip; collar triangular; antennae slender, 13-jointed, third andfourth joints annular ; legs simple.CHEIROPACHUS West. Ct-eonymus Curtis. 2 sp. D. quorum Fab,Head transverse; antennas 13-jointed, third and fourth joints annular threeterminal joints coalite ; collar short, transverse ; anterior and posterior femoraJ thick, anterior thickened and notched at the tip 9 • Curtis 194. and Zl. JI.vol. iv. pi. 2. f. 2.MEROSTENUS Hlk. 1 sp. M. Phedyma Wlk.Narrow, sublinear; head large, transverse; antenna 13-jointed, third and fourthjoints minute ; thorax long, linear ; collar large, sub quadrate ; abdomen sublinear,flat ; apex sub quadrate ; legs long, simple.TRIGONODERUS West. 22 sp. Tr. obscures West.Thorax subovate ; collar triangular ; antennae $ 13-jointed, second joint minute,F 472 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.third half as long as first, fourth to eighth short, equal, five terminal jointsforming a club a little larger than the eighth joint.[5. Cleonymidae JFlk. Stigma branch incurved.]CLEONYMUS Latr. Diplolepis Fab. 3 sp. D. depressus Fab.Thorax elongate-ovate; collar nearly square; antenna 11-jointed ^ secondjoint longer than the fourth, which is not annular, tenth joint produced on theoutside ; abdomen elongate-ovate, sides nearly parallel, quite flat ; pedunclevery short; ovipositor concealed. Zl. Jl. vol. iv. pi. 2. f. 1.MACRONEURA Ilk. 1 sp. M. machines Wlk.Sublinear ; antennae moniliform, 13-jointed, third joint minute, fourth to tenthsubovate, equal ; mandibles 3-dentate ; thorax long-ovate ; collar large ;legs thick, simple ; anterior tibiaj armed with a long curved spur ; stigmalbranch long, sugarcane ; ovipositor not exserted.Subfamily 4. Encyrtides West.CALOSOTER mk. 2 sp. C. vernal Wlk. Curt. 596.Narrow, sublinear ; head moderate ; antennae filiform, 13-jointed, third joint small,fourth and following gradually shortening; thorax long-ovate; abdomen sublinear,flat ; middle tibiae with a long spur ; tarsi dilated.STENOCERA Curtis. 1 sp. St. Walkerii Curt. Curt. 596.Long, sublinear ; head sub quadrate ; antennae filiform, 1 1-jointed, inserted near themouth, third joint minute, fourth and following gradually shortening ; thoraxfusiform ; collar sub quadrate, narrowed in front ; abdomen fusiform ; middletibiffi longer, with a strong spur ; middle tarsi dilated.PLATYNOCHEILUS West. Stenocep.a p. Wlk. 2 sp. P. Erichsonii West.Elongate, slender ; collar triangular ; thorax elongate-ovate ; abdomen oblong,depressed; antennae 1 1-to 12-jointed, third and following joints small, coalite,five following distinct, equal ; costa very much incrassated at base as far as thestigma. Ent. Mag. vol. iv. p. 437.EUPELMUS Z)aZ;«. — ■- 4 sp. E. memnonius Dalm. De Geer, 2. t. 31. f. 22.Antenna; 13-jointed, clavate, third and fourth joints minute; club ovate; thoraxlong-ovate; collar moderate ; thorax depressed in the middle ; abdomen long-ovate;ovipositor exsei-ted ; wings with stigmal branch distant from the unionof the subcostal nerve and the costa.UROCRYPTUS West. Eupelmus p. Dalm. 1 sp. E. e.vcavatiis Dalm.Antennae 13-jointed, thickened towards the tip, subalterns ; collar and mesothoraxgreatly elevated and channelled ; abdomen ovate, convex ; ovipositorhidden.CHEILONEURUS West. Eupelmus p. Dalm. 1 sp. Eu. elegans Dalm.Mandibles 3-dentate; antennae 11-jointed ; collar attenuated; scutellumfasciculated ; stigmal branch very short, removed a little from the union of thesubcostal nerve with the costa ; legs as in Encyrtus.Stroma West. Eupelmus p. Dalm. I sp. E. rufus Dalm.Head large ; mandibles 3-toothed ; antennae-jointed, long in J , ninth joint notlarger than the eighth ; thorax oblong, quadrate ; collar acuminate ; ovipositorhidden.ERICYDNUS i/aZ. 2 sp. Eric, paludatus Usi\.Antennae $ 13-jointed, $ 12-jointed, third and following joints gradually shortening; thorax ovate, flat ; collar very minute ; abdomen ovate, flat ^ , ovate '^ ;ovipositor concealed ; legs long ; middle tibia with a strong spur ; tarsi dilated.HYMENOPTERA. CHALCIDID^. 73ENCYRTUS Dalm. Mira Shell. 108 sp. E. scutellaris Dalm. Curt. 395.Antennae 11-jointed, inserted near the mouth, none of the joints annular; thoraxsquare behind ; abdomen short, broad at base ; tarsi 5-jointed ; middle tibiaedilated, with long spurs ; tarsi dilated ; stigmal branch very small, arising atthe luiion of the subcostal nerve with the costa ; ovipositor not exserted.Chorus West. (nee Sphenolepis Jets.) 2 sp. Encyrtiis intus Dalm.(niffro-cBnea West.) Mag. Nat. Hist. March 1833.Apterous, broad, subdepressed ; antemife simple, formed as in the typical Encyrti,as are also the middle legs ; thorax quite square ; scutellum very large, subqua-rate ; first segment of abdomen very large and broad.CERAPTEROCERUS West. 1 sp. C. mirabilis West.Differs from Encyrtus in antennae very large, flat, like those of Chapters •stigmal nerve placed at some distance from the apex of the subcostal nerve.CERCHYSIUS West. Encyrtus p. Dalm. 2 sp. Enc. Urocerus Dalm.Wings and middle legs as in Encyrtus ; antennae ^ cylindrical, 10-jointed, withthe second to seventh joints nearly equal ; ovipositor thick and exserted, nearlyas long as the abdomen.TETRA Nemus Jfes^w. 1 sp. T. diversicor7iis West.Thorax and middle legs as in Encyrtus ; antenna 8-jointed, third, fourth, andfifth joints very minute, and emitting, as well as the sixth, a long branch • lastjoint thick, ovate ; tarsi 5-jointed ; subcostal nerve running for a short distancealong the costa and emitting a short branch. Mag. Nat. Hist. vol. i. n. s. p. 257.AGONIONEURUS fr.s;,^. ( Aphelinus 2)aZ/«. ? jm. | (13 sp Wik.) ^^.^ Mina Nees. j basaltes West.Short, broad, obtuse ; subcostal nerve short, running but a short distance after itsunion with the costa, and terminating in a callous point ; antennae shortclavate, 6 jointed ; second joint half as long as first ; third, fourth, and fifth shortgradually increasing ; sixth very large, oval ; tarsi 5-jointed ; spur of middlelegs large.PTEROPTRIX Jres<«;. (10 sp. Wlk.) Ft. dimidiatus West.Very short and broad; eyes large, pilose; antennae 8-jointed, second and thirdjoints equal; fifth, sixth, and seventh much longer; eighth very minute scutellumlarge; wings with long ciliae; stigmal branch short, forming an acuteangle ; tarsi 4-jointed.Sarcophagus presto. Aphemnus p. jr*. 3 sp. Ended. sciiiellaris Balm.Antennas 8-jointed, second joint smaller than the third, which is of equal size withthe fourth and fifth, three terminal joints forming a club ; tarsi 5-jointed •stigmal branch short, curved at the tip.TRICHOGRAMMA West. Calleptiles Hal. 1 sp. T. evanescent West.Head as broad as the thorax; antennas 6-jointed, second joint short, slender thirdlarger than the second ; fourth and fifth short ; sixth very large ; thorax long-erthan abdomen ; scutellum large ; wings with the pile arranged in twelvelines ; tarsi 3-jointed.Subfamily 5. Eidophides West.STENOMESIUS West. . 2 sp. St. pnlchelhis West.Antenna; long, slender, 9-jointed ; second joint half as long as third ; collarattenuated ; abdomen with a short peduncle, small, spatulate in ^ , lar-er,ovate in ^ ; intermediate tibiae very slender, clavate at tips in ^ .EUPLECTRUS West. Elachestus p. Esenb. 1 sp. Eupl. macuUventris W.Head small; antennae slender, 9-jointed, second joint short; third to sixth ovate;74 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.abdomen with a short peduncle, spatulate ; posterior coxje very large ; hindtibia with a very long spine in both sexes.HEMIPTARSENUS jres<!«. 3 sp. H. fulvicollis West.Antennae long, simple in both sexes, 7-jointed, second joint small ; third to sixthequal, oblong ; seventh smaller, ovate (inarticulate); abdomen ovate, depressed,acuminate at tip ; wings S abbreviated.DICLADOCERUS JFestw. 1 sp. Z>. Westwoodiiii Stephh.Differs from Eulophus in antennae $ biramose ; sc. 9-jointed, second joint small ;third and fourth longer, each emitting a branch ; fifth and sixth thicker, simple;the three last forming a mass. My vol. i. frontier. f 4.Erasmus Westiu. Aneure Esenh. 1 sp. Eul flabellaUis Fons.Antennae $ with the third to fifth joints extremely short, each emitting a longbranch, sixth long; <f 10-jointed, third and fourth joints annular ; sides of themetathorax in both sexes produced behind into a large concave plate.EULOPHUS Geoff. 37 sp. Wlk. Eul. pectimcornis Linn.Antennae (J 9-jointed, third, fourth, and fifth joints emitting a long branch atbase; $ 3-jointed, simple; tarsi 4-jointed ; stigmal branch long; abdomendepressed; max. and labial palpi 3-jointed. Curt. 133.Obs. Mr. Walker also introduces into this genus my Dicladoceri, Euplectri,Hemiptarseni, and Stenosis, together with 49 other species, formingnearly as many sections.ENTEDON Dalm. | Elachestus Esenb. 1 jg ^^^^ Latreillei Curt.^^ Eulophus p. Esenb. J '■Subcostal nerve of the fore wing longer than a third of the wing ; stigmal branchvery short ; antennae simple, short.Obs. Dalman's types of this genus are the species whose males have 3-ramoseantennae, which being the typical Eulophi, Dalman's name ought onlyto be considered as a synonym. Mr. Walker however retains it, placingin it my Closteroceri, Derosteni, Smaragdltes, Omphale Hal., and 124other species, forming nearly as many sections.SMARAGDITES JFestw. Elachestus p. Esenb. 1 sp. Sm. mirabilis West.Antenna; as long as the entire body, apparently 9-jointed; basal joint dilated,second short, third very small ; the remainder long, filiform, with long hairs ;thorax ovate ; abdomen longer and much narrower than the thorax, elongate-ovate.Demosthenes JFesfw. 1 sp. D. femmes West.Head large ; antennae 9-jointed ; fourth, fifth, and sixth joints broadest, hairy ;three terminal joints forming a small attenuated mass ; collar very narrow ;abdomen smaller than the thorax, depressed ; peduncle long,CLOSTEROCERUS IFestw. 2 sp. CI. trifasciatus West.Antenna; 8-jointed ; basal joint dilated at the tip, the remainder forming a depressedfusiform club ; fourth joint rather larger than the third and fifth ;abdomen nearly sessile, ovate, depressed ; wings large.APROSTOCETUS W'esia;. lisp. A. caudatusV^estw.Antennae 8-jointed, second, third, fourth, and fifth joints equal, but graduallythickened ; abdomen elongate, sessile, twice as long as the thorax ; ovipositorexserted ; tarsi 4-jointed.OMPHALE Hal. 7 sp. O. Salicis Hal.Antennae 7-jointed, S elongate, linear, verticillate-pilose, terminal joints equal ;HYMENOPTERA. PROCTOTRUPID^. 759 filiform, terminal joints decreasing in length ; scutellum slightly convex,without longitudinal lines ; cubital nervure short, nearer the tip of the wing.ClRROSFIL,lJ S JFesiw. 138 sp. [Wlk.] Carr. elec/antissimus West.Head emarginate between the eyes ; antennae '^ short, thick, 7-joiuted, secondjoint half as long as the third ; fourth shorter than the third, the three terminalones forming a mass ; abdomen ovate-conic, depressed ; petiole short ;subcostal nerve of the fore wing twice as long as a third of the wing. Stephh.pi. 46. f. 3.Family 5. Proctor UP IBM Stephh. ( Oxyuri Latr. )Subfamily 1. Diapriides ^^ est . (^DiapriadcB Hal.)DIAPRIA Lar. (1796.) Psilbs Jur. 17 sp. Ps. elegans Jur. Stephh. pi, 46. f. 2.Antennas (J 14-jointed, verticillate; ?^ 12-jointed; head scarcely elongated ; mandiblesforcipate ; cells obliterated ; a small callous spot in the place of the stigma.PLATYMISCHUS West. 1 sp. PL dilatatus W. vol. i. Frontier. fig. 5.Apterous, depressed, narrow; antennae 14-jointed; third joint large, internallyproduced ; thorax oblong-quadrate.CEPHALONOMIA West. 1 sp. C. formiciformis West.Head $ moderate, ^ large, oblong, flat ; antennae 1 2-jointed <? ? ; ^ filiform' ^ ;short, submoniliform ; collar triangular ; wings with a short subcostal nerve terminatedby a callous spot. Mag. Nat. Hist. Sept. 1833.ANEURHYNCHUS Weshu. Mathias Hal. 6 sp. An. galesiformis West.Head transverse, with a small frontal tubercle; antennae S scarcely as long as thebody, 14-jointed, second joint minute ; third slender, and rather longer ; fourththicker; stigma indistinct; subcostal basal nerve not reaching the costa, butobliquely extended for a short distance into the disc of the wing, whence it isdirected towards the tip of the wing, forming a long marginal cell.Gales Curtis. PsiLus p. Panz. 4 sp. Phil. cornutus Pz. Curtis, 341.Antennae (? 14-, $ 1 2-jointed, thickened at tip ; front of head much produced;mandibles rostriform ; nerves indistinct.Paralysis ?fes<zi?. Cerapsilon i7a/. 4 sp. P. rustles West.Head sub-quadrate, with a frontal tubercle ; antennae c? longer than the body,filiform, 13-jointed ; second and third joints minute; peduncle one third ofthe length of the abdomen; nerves as in Cinetus gravities (Curtis 380. 9.),but the marginal cell is longer and truncated at base ; lab. palpi 2-jointed.Basely West. 1 sp. B. fumipennis "West.Head not rostrated ; antennae c? 14-jointed; second and third joints small;fourth large, produced externally ; remainder slender ; two subcostal nervesscarcely reaching the third part of the wing, the transverse nerve connectingthem at the tip, forming a triangle with a nerve running obliquely from themiddle of the posterior of them.SPILOMICRUS West. Psilus p. Spini. 6 sp. Sp. stigmaticalis West,Head transverse-quadrate ; antennae ^ rather longer than the thorax, 13-jointed,thickened to the tip ; stigma small before the middle of the costa, its apexinternally deflexed, emitting a short branch directed towards the base of thewing; basal cell sub triangular ; the other nerves indistinct ; peduncle of moderatelength, striated ; lab. palpi 2-jointed,BELYTA Jurine. 8 sp. B. bicolor Jur. pi. 14. f. 8.Antennae $ short, 15-jointed, not thickened at tips, with the joints perfoliated ;<? 14-jointed, filiform ; marginal cell contracted, not completely closed.76 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.Cantus Jurine. 15 sp. C. graciUpes Curt.Antenna; S 14-jointed, long, slender ; $ 15-jointed, thickened at tip ; marginalcell small, trigonate ; labial palpi 3-jointed; disc of wings not related,I SM A RU S i:fa/. CiNETUs p. Cwr^ 5 sp. Cm. t/ow^-er Curtis. Curt. 380."Antenna; seated near the mouth, filiform, 14 joints r^, 15 ? ; mesothoraciescutum Icevigate ; wings with one brachial, and a small triangular radial areolet."Haliday MSS.Who RU S Latr. Psen p. Paws. 2 sp. ^. atom Jur. Curtis, 403.Antenna; porrected, 1 3-jointed; max. palpi 5-, labial 3-jointed; wings stronglyrelated ; abdomen petiolated.Subfam. 2. Proctotnipides West.Prototypes Latr. Crus Jur. 18 sp. P. niger Panz. My fig. 78. 1.Mandibles without teeth ; anterior tibia; with a single spur ; valves of ovipositorlong, exserted ; antennae 12-jointed.*Subfam. 3. Gonatopides West. ( Aculeata Cenoptera, or fam.Dryinida;, and Bethyllidfe, Hal.)APHELOPUS Dalm. $ Heterolepis Esenb. 3 sp. Jph. aratus Dalm.Mouth broad ; max. palpi long, pendulous, 6-jointed ; anterior tarsi ^ simple;discoidal cells indistinct. Ent. Mag. pi. \6. f. 3.ANTE ON Latr. Dominus Latr. 8 sp. A. Jurineanum Latr.Mouth broad ; max. palpi long, pendulous, 6-jointed ; anterior tarsi ^ relate ;inner claw connate with two joints of the tarsus ; discoidal cells distinct.CHELOGYNUS Hal. Dryinus p. Curtis. 14 sp. D. cursor Hal. Curt. 206.Differs from Anteon in inner claw of fore legs ?j^ being connate with only one jointof the tarsus.Label Hal. Anteon? p. West. esp. L. exorcisms West. Ent. Mag. pi. 16. f. 2.Mouth small ; max. palpi 3-jointed ; thorax short, compact ; stigma narrow ;occiput deeply notched.MYRMECOMORPHUS West. 1 sp. M. rufescens West.Head rounded-oblong; ocelli 0; antennae as long as the body, 10-jointed;thorax twice as long as the head ; collar sub quadrate ; wings scarcely rudimental ;fore legs simple ; max. palpi 3-, labial 2-jointed.Emblems IFestw. 1 sp. Emb. Ruddii West. Ent.;Mag. pi. 16. f. 1.Head with a frontal tubercle, on which the antennas are placed ; these are jointed,longer than the body, filiform ; second joint very minute ; fore legssimple ; one marginal, two indistinct submarginal, two basal, and two discoidalcells ; legs long and slender.GONATOPUS Lpi. Sf Kl. Dicondvlus Hal. 5 sp. G. pedestals Dalm.Thorax elongate, constricted in the middle, apterous ; fore tarsi relate ; forecoxffi very long; max. palpi 5-jointed. My fig. 78. 15.BETHYLUS Latr. Malus p. Jur. 5 sp. B. cenopteriis Pz. Curt. 720.Head oblong, flattened ; antenna; 12-jointed, filiform, the terminal joints narrowedat the base ; two long basal cells, the posterior shortest.EPYRIS Jres^M'. Pristine A7. ? 3 sp. £p. wzr/cr West. Ent. Mag. p. 1 6. f. 6.Head moderate, sub convex ; antenna; elongate, filiform, inserted near the mouth,Mr. Haliday has just had the kindness to forward to me his monograph uponthis genus, forming the first fascicle of his Him. Britcmu. Oxyura, April, 1839.HYMENOPTERA. PROCTOTRUPIDiE. 771 3-jointed, cylindric, the joints not narrowed at base ; thorax elongate-ovate,marginal cell incomplete, two basal cells of equal length.Subfamily 4. Ceraphrontides West. ( CeraphronidcB Hal. )MEGASPILUS West. ( Colliers p. Esenb. | ^g sp. Cer. dux Cm-t.Ceraphron p. Cu7-t. J '^Antennae elbowed, 1-jointed ^ ^; apex in ^ but slightly clavate ; upper wingswith a large semicircular stigma; ocelli three; max. palpi 5-jointed, long,pendulous. Curtis, 249.Crops Hal. Ceraphron p. Curt. 4 sp. Seraph. Ruhi Curtis.Apterous; ocelli ; eyes small ; ina. palpi 4-jointed ; antennae 1 1-jointed.Colliers i?sew&. Ceraphron p. C^r^ (3 sp. ?) C. Carpenter Curt.Winged ; stigma large ; antennae ^ verticillate.CERAPHRON Jur. 20 sp. Cer. sulcatus Jur. pi. 14. f. 9,Antenna; $ 11-jointed, lO-jointed ^ ; max. palpi 4-jointed ; stigma obsolete;stigmal branch curved, abrupt.Subfamily 5. Plati/ffasterides West. ( Scelionida; ifaZ.)Balls Hal. 1 sp. £. seminulum Hal. Ent. Mag. pi. 13. f. 6.Apterous ; thorax short ; scutellum not visible ; club of antennae thick, oval,5-annulated.HEMISIUS JFesiji). 1 sp. H. minutus West.Head nearly as large as the thorax ; antennas placed on a frontal tubercle, long,distinctly 11-jointed, third smaller than the second; club 4-jointed;' wingsscarcely longer than the thorax ; stigmal branch elongate, clavate, oblique ;second abdominal segment very large.GRYON Hal. 2 sp. G. misellus Walk. Ent. Mag. pi. 16. f. 5.Thorax short ; abdomen sessile, with equal sized segments ; stigmal branchshort, arising at the middle of the costa ; scutellum distinct ; antennae 1 2-jointed.TELENOMUS Hal. Teleas p. Esenb. 26 sp. Teleas phalamarum Esenb.Abdomen sessile, second joint elongated ; stigmal branch arising at the middle of thecosta, long, oblique. Ent. Mag. pi. 13. f. 1 — 4.THO RON i7aZ. Teleas p. Curt. 1 sp. Th. metallicus Bal.Abdomen petiolated ; stigmal branch arising at the middle of the costa, long ; clubof antenna $ indistinctly annulated. Ent. Mag. pi. 13. f 11.XENOMERUS JFlk. — 1 sp. X. ErgemiaWlk. Ent. Mag. 13. f. 10.Antenna S long, verticillate ; stigmal branch arising near the extremity of thecosta, rather short.TELEAS Latr. [ J™L"t„a Esenb. ] ^' ^P' ^- '^'"^^''^''^'""^ '^^''-Antennae 1 2-jointed, slightly pubescent (? ; club 6-jointed $ ; thorax rathershort ; collar linear-arched ; legs saltatorial ; abdomen more or less petiolated ;stigmal branch very short. Curt. 333.SCELIO Latr. 1 sp. Sc. rugosulus Latr. Curt. 325.Max. palpi short, 3-jointed ; front of head rounded ; thorax oblong ; antenna; $10-jointed, ^ 1 2-jointed; marginal cell elongate-originate.Separation Z,a^r. 1 sp. Sp. frontale Latr. Curt. 317.Max. palpi long, 5-jointed ; labial 3-jointed ; front of head margined ; antennae1 2-jointed.78 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.Paymaster ia<)-. 108 sp. PL ruflcornis Latr."Antenna 10-jointed, clavate in ^ ; max. palpi short, 2-jointed, labial 1-jointed,wings without cells or veins ; legs not saltatorial ; abdomen ^ not cornuted ;tarsi 5-jointed. Ent. Mag. No. 13. pi. 12. f. 10.'Evidences IVestw.f Paymaster p. W^/A-. (3sp. ?) E. easier West.Abdomen ^ with the last four segments as long as the second, and narrowed intoa tail ; antenna ^ 10-jointed, filiform ; wings without distinct veins. Ent.Mag. No. 13. pi. 12. f. 15.INOSTEMMA i7aZ. Paymaster p. Lar. 9 sp. Phil. Boscii Jur. Curt. 309.Fore wings with the subcostal nerve abruptly capitate ; club of anteniiee clavatein !^ , 4-jointed ; abdomen ^ cornuted. (My fig. 78. 13.)IPHITRACHELUS Hal. 1 sp. Iph. Lar Hal.Tarsi 4-jointed ; antennae $ verticillate-pilose ; subcostal nerve short, clubbed.Ent. Mag. No. 13. pi. 12. f. 1.Subfamily 6. M/maride« West. ( Mymaridas Jesus. )MYMAR ^aZ. GoNATocERUs-EsenZ). 4sp. M. puhhellus. Curt. 411.Antennae c? 13-jointed, $ jointed; club inarticulate; scapus in both sexeselongate, linear ; tarsi 4-jointed ; abdomen peduncled. (My fig. 78. 16. c? .)OOCTONUS Hal. 5 sp. M. insignia Hal.Antennae ^ 13-jointed, ^ 1 1-jointed, with an inarticulate club ; tarsi 5-jointed.Naples Hal. ;— 4 sp. John. punctum Shaw.Antenuffi ^ 12-jointed, $ 9-jointed; club inarticulate'; tarsi tetramerous ;abdomen subsessile, ovoid. Linn. Trans, vol. xiv. pi. 18. fig. 1.Polynesia Hal. 7 sp. Ichn. ovulorum Linn.Antennas S 13-jointed, $ 9-jointed; club inarticulate; scapus in each sex dilated,sinuated, but slightly elongate ; abdomen petiolated.Titus Hal. • 5 sp, L, dimidiatus Hal.Antennas $ 9-jointed ; club inarticulate ; tarsi 5-jointed.EUSTOCHUS i^aZ. Callitriche £:sfMZ). 1 sp. M. atripennisHgl.Antennae $ 10-jointed; club inarticulate ; tarsi tetramerous; abdomenpetiolated.Angus Hal. 5 sp. Ichn. atoms Linn.Antennae $ 13-jointed, ^ 9-jointed; club inarticulate ; tarsi 4-jointed ; abdomensessile, conic-acuminate.Latreille describes Paymaster as having the third joint of the antennae muchlong-er than the following joints, citing P. ruficornis as the type. Having examinedand made a drawing of Latrcille's typical specimen, attached to the generic label inhis own hand-writing, still contained in the collection of the Baron Dejean, I amable to confirm this description (as stated in the Mag. Nat. Hist. vol. vi. p.421.). The species considered as such by Messrs. Haliday (iiuZ. Mag. vol. i. p. 270.)and Walker (Ditto, vol. iii. p. 240.), must therefore, from its sectional characters,be distinct. The last paragraph in the note of the latter (/Z>zrf. p. 243. a.) mustconsequently be struck out.f Deceived by the filiform antennae of the females of some species of Paymaster,I regarded them as males ; and considered as their females other species which havealso the abdomen elongated posteriorly ; and upon which I constructed the genusPieces. Mr. Walker, in his Monograph, has pointed out this error ; consideringthese females as forming separate sections in the genus Paymaster. The namePieces may, however, be retained for the species with filiform antennae in thefemales, which I had regarded as males.HYMENOPTERA. CHRYSIDID/E— CRABRONID.E. 79Adapts Hal. 1 sp. M. minimus * Wlk.Tarsi pestiferous : antennae ^ 10-jointed, filiform, 8-jointed $, last jointenlarged." Haliday MSS.Tribe 2. TuhuKfera St. Far. Hal., consisting of the singleFamily CHRYSIDIDjE Leach.HEDYCHRUM ia^r. Malus p. Pair. 12 sp. Ch. aurata 'Linn. Curt. 38.Abdomen semicircular, or nearly hemispheric, convenient ; scutellum not produced ;thorax broadly truncate in front.Melampus Spinola. Hedychruji p. Pan:. 1 sp. Ch. Pander Fab. Pz. 51. 11.Abdomen convex, emarginate at the tip ; scutellum terminating in a flat mucro ;thorax broadly truncate in front.Crisis Linn. Sphex p. Scop. 23 sp. Ch. ignita Linn. Curt. 8.Abdomen oblong, semi-cylindrical, concavo-convex, convenient ; scutellum not produced; thorax broad in front.EUCHREUS Latr. Chrysis p. Panz. 1 sp. Ch. 6-dentata Latr. ? Pz. 51. 12. ?Abdomen sub quadrate ; scutellum not produced ; thorax broadly truncate infront.Cleaves Latr, Sphex p. Linn. 2 sp. Sph. semiaurata Linn. Curt. 724.Collar narrow ; abdomen lanceolate-ovate, not convenient, entire at the tip.Sect. 2. AcuLEATA Latr., Hal. (Hpn. ovitithers St. Far. H.monotrocha Hart. H. normal festa.)Subsect. 1. Insectivora West. (Fossores Latr. Jessica Hal.)Family 1. CRABRONIDJE Leach, Hal.Subfamily 1. Nyssonides West. (Larridas p. Leach.)Ness ON ia^r. Oxybelus p. jFa6/-. 4 sp. N. interruptus Yabr. Panz, 72. 13.Mandibles toothless ; eyes $ not united ; antennas inserted below the centre of theface; three submarginal cells, the second peduncled, and receiving two recurrentnerves.Last Data Z,a<r. Dimorpha Ji/r. 1 sp. Tiphia abdoininalis Fz. Curt. 261.Thorax and abdomen ovate; second joint of lab. palpi securiform ; eyes (J unitedbehind ; three submarginal sessile cells, the second receiving two recurrentnerves.OXYBELUS Z-a<r. Sphex p. Sch'dff. 6 sp. Vespa ■uniglumis lAnn. Curt. 480.Short ; one submarginal cell, receiving one recurrent nervure ; the discoidal nerverudimental ; antennae short ; mandibles toothless ; metathorax armed.TRYPOXYLON Za<r. AvivsJur. 3 sp. Sphex fgtdus Linn. Curt. 652.Eyes emarginate ; one marginal, and one distinct submarginal cell ; abdomen verylong, narrow, peduncled ; mandibles toothless.Pen Latr. Trypoxylont p. Far. 2 sp. Sphex atra Far. Panz. 72. 7.Clypeus quadrate ; abdomen long ; first segment peduncled ; antennae central,thickened at the tip ; three submarginal sessile cells, the second and third receivinga recurrent nerve ; mandibles bidentate.Mimes Shk. Psen p. Curtis. 2 sp. Psen equestris Far. Curt. 25.Three submarginal cells, the second receiving both recurrent nerves, third celllarger than the second." The type of this genus is the smallest Hymenopterous insect known, beingabout half the size of Angus atoms." Haliday MSS.80 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.Subfamily 2. Crabroiiides West. ( Crabronidae Zeac^.)ALYSONJi^r, Pompous p. i^a&r. 1 sp. Al. spinous J ur. Curtis, 584.Abdomen elongate-ovate ; collar narrowed ; three submarginal cells, the secondpeduncled, first and second receiving a recurrent nerve ; metathorax spined andstriated.Cortes Latr. Aratus p. Jur. 2 sp. Vespa mystacea Linn. Curtis, 524.Abdomen elongate-ovate ; mandibles bidentate ; four submarginal cells; thesecond narrowed at the base, sessile, and receiving two recurrent nerves ; anteriortarsi simple in both sexes.[HOPLISUS St. Far. Gorytes p. Shk. 1 sp. H. 5-cinctus St. Far.Antennae obtuse in both sexes; anterior tarsi ^ ciliated. Pz. 72. 14.][EUSPONGUS St. Far. Cortes p. Shk. 2 sp. E. laticinctus St. Far.Anterior tarsi ^ ciliated ; antennae ^ thickened, acute at tip.][LESTIPHORUS S<. J'ar^. Gorytes p. 5'/*;^. 1 sp. Cr ah. Ucinctus B-os^i.Abdominal peduncle pear-shaped ; antenna; ^ filiform, $ pointed at tip, tenth jointconcave in $ . Curtis, 524. ]Aratus J\ir. Pompilus p. Panz. 2 sp. Ar. turdus Pz. Pz. 81. 15.Three submarginal cells, second not peduncled, receiving two recurrent nerves ;antenna; $ as long as $ .CRABRO Far. Sphex p. Linn. 42 sp. Sphex criteria Linn. Curtis, 680.AntennEB strongly elbowed ; face very broad ; one marginal cell slightly appendand one subinarginal not confluent with the second discoidal ; onerecurrent nerve ; mandibles slender, bifid at tip ; max. palpi 6-, labial4-jointed.Obs. This genus has been greatly cut up by St. Fargeau. The followingare such of his genera as have been found in this country, together withexamples of each.[THYREOPUS St. Far. Crabro p. Shh. Sphex criteria Linn. Pz. ]5.18, 19.][CROSSOCERUS St. Far. Crabro p. Shk. Cr. status Far. Pz. 15. 22.][Thyrsus St. Far. Crabro p. Shk. Cr. vexillatus Pz. Pz. 46. 5.][CERATOCOLUS St. Far. Crabro p. SM. ? C. Lindenius? Shk.][Silenus St. Far. Crabro p. Shk. Sphex vag a Linn. Fz. 46. 10.][BLEPHARIPUS a. Jar. Crabro p. ^'A^i. Cr. dimidiatus Fahr. Pz. 43. 15.][LINDENIUS Sit. i^ar^r. Crabro p. ^A*. Crabro albilabris Fahr. Pz. L5. 24.][PHYSOSCELIS St. Far. Crabro p. Shk. Crabro nifiventris. Pz 72. 12.]RHOPALUM Kirhg. Corynopus St. Far. 3 sp. Cairo tibialis Far.Abdomen with a long knotted peduncle ; marginal cell with a long terminalbranch ; submarginal and discoidal cell as in Crabro ; max. palpi 5-, labial3-jointed. Curtis, 6S6.Stigmas Jwrme. St. ater Jur. Jurine, pi. 9. 7.Antenna; not elbowed ; two submarginal cells, first receiving the only recurrentnerve, which joins the cubital about the middle of the first submarginal cell ;second small ; two discoidal cells ; stigma very large ; mandibles elongate,tridentate.SPILOMENA Shk. Celia Shk. olim. 1 sp. Sting. troglodytes Vel.Stigma very large ; two submarginal cells, one recurrent nerve anastomosing withthe first transverse-cubital.HYMENOPTERA. LARRIDJI. 81PEMPHREDON Far., West. Diodontus Curtis. 3 sp, P. minutus Far.Clypeus transverse, tridentate ; mandibles bidentate, strong ; two submarginalcells, each receiving a recurrent nerve, second truncate-triangular; labrumbidentate. Curtis, 496.PASS Alcaeus Shk. ( ^vlcecus Shk. iiitab. | 3 .^ gj^^| JDlODONTUS p. Curt. J ^ ^Two submarginal cells, each receiving a recurrent nerve, second cell transverse,not petiolated ; mandibles bidentate or tridentate.Comus Jur., West. Pemphredon Latr., Curl., Shk. 2 sp. P".9"^"« ^^t)!"-■^ y^untcolor Jnx.Mandibles short, strong, 3-dentate; abdominal peduncle moderate; upper wingswith two submarginal cells, the second square, the first and second receiving arecurrent nerve; labrum entire. Jur. pi. 11. f. 28.{Cemomus p. Jur., Shk. "jPemphredon Latr. i-2 sp. Pelops. unicolor P'abr. NeeTiiiiEUB.\is West. olim. J Jurine.Mandibles elongate, 4-dentate ; two submarginal cells, the first receiving two recurrentnerves ; three discoidal cells ; abdominal peduncle short.CERATOPHORUS Shk. Pemphredon p. V. L. 1 sp. P. Moro V. L.Petiole of abdomen short ; second submarginal cell widest towards the marginalmandibles ^ bidentate.Melius Far. Sphex p. D. G. 2 sp. Vespa arvensis Linn. Curt. 580.Abdomen elongate, narrowed at the base, first segment knotted at the tip ; tarsalpulvillus large ; three complete submarginal sessile cells, fourth commenced, thefirst and third receiving a recurrent nerve.PHILANTHUS Far. Semblephilus Jur. 1 sp. Ph. androgens Rossi.Abdomen elongate-ovate ; three submarginal cells, second sessile ; marginal cellnearly linear, acuminate. Curtis. 273.Mercers in^r. Philanthropy. Fab. 13 sp. Sph. arenarialAwn. Curtis, 269.Abdominal segments constricted ; three submarginal cells, second peduncled,second and third receiving a recurrent nerve.Family 2. LARRIDjE Leach.Laura Fab. Libris p. Far. olim. 1 sp. L. Ichneumoniformis F. Pz. 76. 18.Hirsute ; antennae filiform ; marginal cell appendiculated ; third submarginal cellnarrow, oblique ; mandibles without teeth ; abdomen elongate ; metathoraxlong. My fig. 82. 14.LYROPS III. Tachytes Pz. 3 sp.? Larra pompiliformis Pz. Pz. 89. 13.Mandibles with one short tooth ; abdomen short, ovate ; metathorax shorter thanthe dorsum.MISCOPHUS Jur. 1 sp. M. bicolor Jur. Stephh. pi. 42. f. 3.Two submarginal cells, second petiolated ; marginal cell not appendiculated ;antennae filiform ; mandibles with one short tooth ; abdomen ovate.DINETUS/wr. PoMPiLUs p. Ja6/-. 1 sp. I), pectus Jur. Stephh. pi. 42. f. 4.Two submarginal sessile cells ; antennas ^ moniliform at base ; mandibles withseveral teeth ; marginal cell appendiculated.Family 3. BEMBECIDJE Leach.There is no British species of this family.G82 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.Family 4. SPHEGIDjE West.Subfamily 1. Pompilides West. (Pompilldaj Leach.)Porus Spin. 1 sp. Ap. unicolor Sp. Stephh. pi. 41. f. 1.Two complete submarginal cells, the second receiving two recurrent nerves;thorax long ; legs moderate ; collar quadrate.CRYPTOCHEILUS Pz. Pompilus p. Fab. 1 sp. Ps. anmdatus F.Antenna* inserted in the middle of the face ; three complete submarginal cells ;max. palpi much longer than labial; labrum concealed. Panz, 76. 16.VOMVII^XJS Latr., Sckiodte. Psammochar^h Latr. olim. 24 sp. Sph. gihhalAnn.Thorax oblong ; antennas inserted nearer the inouth : three complete submarginalcells ; marginal cell almost semicircular ; aculeus not exserted. Curtis, 238.[AGENIA Schiodte. Pompilus p. Auct. Sph. variegated Linn. Pz. 87. 21.]Anterior tarsi simple ; posterior tibias finely pilose, not spined ; labrum emarginate; mandibles bidentate ; labium trifid.[PRIOCNEMIS^/^Jodte. Pompilus p. ^;«<. Sph. exaltatus Yabx. Pz. 86. 10.]Anterior tarsi with short spines ; posterior tibiae serrulate and spined ^ ; mandiblesbidentate.[EPISYRON Schiodte. Pompilus p. Auct. Sph. recipes Linn. Pz. Q5. 17.]Anterior tarsi $ pectinated ; posterior tibiaj spined ; labrum longitudinally cleft ;mandibles long, tridentate ^ .CEROPALES Latr. Pompilus p. Panz. 1 sp. Cer. faculties F. Pz. 72. 9.Labrum advanced ; max. palpi long ; abdomen short ; hind legs very long ; foursubmarginal cells; aculeus exserted. Curtis 754., and my fig. 83. 14.Subfamily 2. Sphegides West. (Spherical Leach.)DOLICHURUS ia?j-. Prison ia<r., Gen., wee Spin., Jur. 1 sp. Z). ater Latr.Mandibles toothed ; max. palpi longer than the labial ; anterior tarsi ^ notspinose ; abdominal peduncle very short ; four submarginal cells. Stephh.pi. 42. f. I.PELOPiEUS Latr. Sceliphron King. 1 sp. ? Sph. spirited Linn., Jur.Max. palpi longer than the labial ; antennae central ; tarsal pulvillus largo ;labial lobes equal ; abdominal peduncle long. Donov. pi. 531.SPHEX ii;m. Pepsis p. Fair. 1 sp. Sph. flavipen7iis Jur. Stephh. pi. 1. f. 3.Maxillae and labium short, reflexed near the tip ; antenna central; abdominalpeduncle short ; marginal cell nearly linear ; three submarginal cells, secondsubmarginal cell receiving the first recurrent nerve.AMMOPHILA A7r6y. Fevsis ^. Linn. 5 sp. Sph . sabulosa 'L'mn. My fig. 83. 1.Abdominal peduncle long ; maxillae and labium long, reflexed in the middle ;three submarginal cells, the second receiving two recurrent nerves; third sessilesmaller than the second.Missus Jur. Ammophila p. Latr. 1 sp. Am. campestris Latr. Curtis, 604.Abdominal petiole 2-jointed ; third submarginal cell triangular and peduncled.Family 5. ^C0Z7/Z)/E West. {ScoViadx Leach.)Subfamily 1. ScoUides West.TIPHIA Latr. Bethylus Pz. 4 sp. T. femorata Pz. Curtis, 664.Marginal cell incomplete in ^ ; two submarginal cells, each receiving a recurrentnerve; mandibles not toothed. My fig. 84. i.HYMENOPTERA. MUTILLID^— FORMICID^. 83Subfamily 2. Sapygides West. (SapygidcC Leach')SAPYGA Z,a<r. Hellas p. J'air. 2 sp. S. punctata KXug. Curtis, 532.Antennae more or less thickened at tip ; eyes emarginate; mandibles broad, multi-dentated;abdomen cylindrical ; four submarginal cells, second and third receivinga recurrent nerve.Family 6. MVTILLWjE Leach,Matilda Lmn. Sphex Be G. 3 sp. M. Europa Lmnn. Curtis, 77.Antennae inserted in the middle of the face; three submarginal cells c? ; thorax5* continuous and apterous. My fig. 84. 13. 14.Mimosa Latr. HvLiEus Far. 1 sp. M. melanocephala Far.Four submarginal cells (J ; thorax $ not constricted in the middle. Latr. Gen.pi. 13. 6.Tenura Latr. S '\ f T. Sanvitali Latr. Ent. Text. B. pi. 3. f. 5.Method Latr. $ Mutilla }- 1 sp. -^ M. Ichneiunonides 'Latr. Curtis, 329., andp. Jur. J ( my fig. 84. i g.Three submarginal cells (? ; thorax $ trinodose ; max. palpi elongate.Division 2. Scales West. (Philopona K. Heterogyna p. Latr.)Containing the singleFamily FORMICID^ Leach.MYRMICA Latr. Monica Jur. 6 sp. Form, rubra Linn. Donovan, 503.Abdomen armed with a sting ; basal joint of antennae long ; abdominal peduncle2-jointed ; max. palpi 6-jointed ; mandibles triangular.MYRMECINA Curtis. 1 sp. M. Latreillei Curt. Curt. 265.Basal joint of antenna; very short $ ; mandibles wanting ? ; abdominal peduncle2-jointed; max. palpi 4-jointed, labial 3-jointed (J; one marginal cell often ap-reticulated; one submarginal cell.STENAMMA West. N. G. 92. Stephhhh. Cat. 1 sp. N. G. Westwoodiiii Stephhhh.Basal joint of antennae long ; abdominal peduncle 2-jointed, first joint long,knotted ; max. palpi 4-jointed, labial 3-jointed ; mandibles broad, oblique,5-dentate. My fig. 86. 1 1.PONE R A Latr. Formica p. Latr. olim. 1 sp. F. contracta Latr.Abdomen armed with a sting ; abdominal peduncle formed of one large scale ;mandibles triangular ; eyes of neuters obsolete. Stephh. pi. 42. f. 2.FORMICA /.!««. Lanius p. jPaftr. 12 sp. F. fusca 'Linn. My fig. 85.Sting wanting ; I psal joint of antennae very long ; abdominal peduncle consistingof a single elevated scale ; max. palpi 6-jointed, labial 4-jointed in (J 'j? 9 »eyes distinct. Curtis, 752.Division* 3. Diplopteryga Kirby. (Diploptera Latr.)Family 1. Eumenides West., Hal. (Vespidcep. Leach.)Eugene Latr. Vespa p. Linn. 1 sp. Eum. atricornis Fab. Curtis, 13.Abdomen with the basal segment narrowed and pear-shaped ; maxillae and labiumelongated. My fig. 87. 6.ODYNERUS Latr. Stmmorphus-j- Wesmael. 3 sp. V. muraria Linn. Pz. 53. 9.The divisions Insectivora (p. 79.), Scales and Diplopteryga, compose the firstsvbsectioti PrEedones (described in my Vol. ii. p. 184.), but omitted in p. 79.f As Latreille gives the Linnaean V. muraria as the type of the genus OdynerusG 284 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.Abdomen ovoid, conic ; basal segment short, subcampanulate ; maxillae and labiumof moderate length ; antenna; S simple.{Epipone Kirhy, nee Latr. "jOplopus* Jfesm. Is sp. V. spinipes Umn.Odynerus Shk. JDorsal surface of the first segment of abdomen consisting of only one piece ;posterior surface of metathorax entire, and convex at the sides ; antennae (Jspiral at tips. Pz, 17, 18.ANCISTROCERUS Wesmael. Odynerus Curt. 20 sp. V. varieties Linn.Dorsal surface of first segment of abdomen formed of two pieces; sides of metathoraxangulated ; last joint of antennae (J hooked. Curt. 137. My fig. 87. 1.Family 2. VE SPIDJE y^esiw. (Vespida; p. Z,eac/t.)VESPA Linn. &fc. 6 sp. V. vulgaris Linn. My fig. 88.Abdomen ovoid ; mandibles broad, oblique at the tip, and toothed ; clypeus quadrate,truncate in front. Curtis, 760.Subsect. 2. Ellis era 'hair, (or Anthophila Latr.)Family 1. ANDRENIDJE Leach. Proabeille Reaum. K.)Subfamily 1. Ohtusilingues West.HYLjEUS Za</-. nee Fa6r. Procopius /?<?•. 7 sp. ^p/s a;iw«/ata Linn. Curtis, 373.Body smooth, naked ; two complete submarginal cells ; no pollinigerous organs.Colleges Latr. Evodia Panz. 3 sp. Apis succinct Linn. Curtis, 85.Hirsute, pollinigerous ; three complete submarginal cells, second and third receivinga recurrent nerve.Subfamily 2. Aciitilingues West.SPHECODES Xa^r. Bichkoa Illiger. 4 sp. SpJiex gibbs Linn. Myfig. 90. 14.Antennae (noose; four submarginal cells; maxilla strongly elbowed; no pol-dangerousorgans ; labium straight. K. M. A. A., pi. 2. and 15.HALICTUS Latr. Manilla p. Far. 29 sp. Hylaus 6-cinctus Fab.Pollinigerous ; central division of labium longer than the external ; abdomen ^with a terminal slit ; four submarginal cells. K. M. A. A., pi. 2. and 15.[LASIOGLOSSUM Curtis. 1 sp. L. tricingulum Curt. Curt. 448.]Characters of Halictus, but with the terminal lobes of the maxilla more elongatedand lanceolate.AN Drew A Fa6r. Melitta** C. Kirby. 80 sp. Apis cineraria lAnn. Curt. 129.Pollinigerous; three complete submarginal cells; mentum long and narrow;labium shorter than the palpi ; its central division grooved ; antenna; S simple.Cilicia ZeacA. Andrea p. ia<r. 3 sp. And. hamorrhoidalis Fz. Panz. 65. 20.Antennas ^ subserrate ; maxillae bent in the middle; labium longer than thepalpi.(see Vol. II. p. 240. note), I have retained it as such. It is congenerous withOdin. crassicornis Pz., belonging to Wesmael's genus Symmorphus, which namemust be rejected, being used by Klug for a genus of bees,This generic name is employed by Laporte, for a genus of Lamellicorubeetles.HYMENOPTERA. APID^. 85DASYPODA Latr. Trachusa p. Jicr. 1 sp. Melitta Swammerdamella K.Basal joint of posterior tarsi very long, and densely pilose ^ ; central labial laconialanceolate and reflexed ; two submarginal cells; ocelli in a line. Curt. 367.Family 2. APIDJE Leach. (Abeille R£aum., Apis K.)Subfamily 1 . Andrenoides Latr. ( Panurgides West. )PANURGUS Pam. Eriops Khiy. 2 sp. Apis ursina Gmel. Curtis, pi. 101.Antenna clavate or subclavate ; mandibles acute ; two complete submarginalcells.SYSTROPHA /%er. llYLMUsyi. Fahr. 1 sp. Hill. spiralis Yah.Antenna; c? spiral ; max. palpi thrice as long as the maxillary lobe ; labial palpiwith the second joint twice as long as the preceding ; three complete submarginalcells. Panz. F. I. G. 35. 22.Subfamily 2. Denudata Latr. ( Elections West.)Nomad Scroll. Apis Linn. 40 sp. Apis ritficornis Linn. Curt. 419.Elongate, glabrous ; marginal cell broad ; labial palpi continuous, maxillary 6-jointed.Select Latreille. SYMMoarHA Kl. 1 sp. .apis punctata Fab. Curt. 125.Short, hirsute ; three marginal cells very narrow ; saragossa half as long as thelabium; max. palpi short, 5-jointed.'ETEOl-iVS Latreille. Nomadaa p. i^a6. 1 sp. Apis variegata 'Linn. Curtis, 1. 516.Short, glabrous; max. palpi minute, 1-jointed; last joints of labial palpi oblique.Subfamily 3. Longilahres West. (or Megachilides West.)CjELIOXYS Latr. Trachusa p. Jur. 3 sp. Apis monica Linn.Abdomen acute ^ > dentate at tip in (? ; pollinigerous organs wanting ; mandiblesbroad, toothed; max. palpi minute, 3-jointed. Curtis, B. E. pi. 349.STELIS Panz. Gyrodroma Klug. 2 sp. Stelis aterrima Pz.Short, ovate ; abdomen not pollinigerous ; labrum oblong, quadrate ; mandiblestriangular-dentate, max. palpi 2-jointed. Kirby, M. A. A. 2. pi. 16. f. 9.ANTHIDIUM Fab. Trachusa p. Jur. I sp. Apis manicata Linn. My fig. 91. i.Abdomen broad, sub convex, dentate $ , rounded and pollinigerous $ ; max. palpiminute, inarticulate ; mandibles strong, dentate ; claws bifid. Curtis, pi. 61.Ostia Panz. T ?''^^"'Vf'" ) lisp. Apishicornis Linn. Curtis, pi. 222.(^ Amblis Kl. j ^ ^Max. palpi short, 4-jointed ; mandibles broad, irregularly toothed ; abdomenconvex above, pollinigerous ; antennae ^ long; tongue very pilose.MEGACHILE Latr. Phyllotoma Dumeril. 10 sp. j4pis centuncularis Linn.Max. palpi short, 2-jointed ; abdomen ovate or triangular, flat above ; mandiblesbroad, 4-dentate ; labrum quadrate. Curt. 218.Heredes Spinola. Anthidium p. Panz. 2 sp. Apis truncorum Linn.Elongate ; mandibles triangular, bidentate ; max. palpi 2-jointed ; second jointof labial palpi very long, fourth obsolete ; abdomen pollinigerous beneath ;dentate in $ . Curt. 504.CHELOSTOMA Latr. Anthidium p. Panz. 1 sp. Apis florisomnis I/inn.Elongate,' subcylindric ; mandibles triangular, bidentate ; max. palpi minute,3-jointed ; two complete submarginal cells ; labial palpi 4-jointed. Curt. 628.Certain A Latr. [ ^i™,fV„;,,. } 1 sp. Apis cerulean Vil.G 386 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.Oblong; antennae subclavate; mandibles tridentate ; abdomen not woollybeneath; labrum short; max. palpi 6-, labial 2-jointed. My fig. 91. 13.Sul)family 4. Scopulipedes Latr. ( Anthophorides West.)EUCERA Scopoli. Andrena p. Panz. 4 sp. Apis lojigicornis Linn.Saragossa setiform, as long as the labial palpi, which are 4-jointed ; antennae $nearly as long as the body ; max. palpi 6-jointed ; two complete submarginalcells. Kirby, M. A. A. 2. pi. 17. f. 3, 4.ANTHOPHORA Latr. (fo^'A^'y^^ Latr. olim. | ^ sp. Apis retusa Linn.Lanius Jur. J. ' ^Three complete submarginal cells of equal size ; labial palpi with the third jointaffixed obliquely ; max. palpi 6-jointed ; intermediate legs $ with long brushesof hair. Curt. 357.SAROPODA Latr. Heliophila. King. 5 sp. Apis rotunda Panz. Curt. 361.ParaglosScE much shorter than the labial palpi ; max. palpi 4-jointed ; labialpalpi straight ; three complete submarginal cells.?XYLOCOPA Latr. Centris p. Fahr. 1 sp.? Apisviolacea Fab.Broad, bombiform, hirsute ; mandibles $ obtuse ; labrum short, densely ciliated ;three complete submarginal cells ; second triangular. Kirby, M. A. A. 2. pi. 1 7.f. 9.MELITTURGA Latr. Eucera p. Latr. olim. 1 sp. M. clavicornis Latr.Abdomen elongate-ovate; max. palpi 6-jointed; antennas $ short, clavate ;labial palpi straight. Latr. Gen. t. 14. f. 14.Subfamily 5. Sociales Latr. (Apices Westw.")Bombs Latr. Remus Jur. 37 sp. Apis muscorum Linn.Hind tibise spurred ; poUinigerous ; two last joints of labial palpi minute, oblique.Kirby, M. A. A. 2. pi. 18.Paths iV«.m. {p'^;";!30MBts^<. MSS. } ^ 'P' Apis rupestris Far.Hind tibia; spurred ; poUinigerous organs wanting. Curtis, 468.APIS Linn. §'c. 1 sp. Apis mellijica Linn. My fig. 92., and Curtis 769.Hind tibia not spurred ; basal joint of hind tarsi of neuters striated.Order VIII. STREPSIPTERA Kirby. (Hemiptera Latreille.) Composingthe singleFamily STYLOPIDm Kirby.Styles Kirhy. . 5 sp. St. MelittcB K. My Vol. I. front, f. 6.Eyes peduncled ; antenna 6-jointed, flattened, third producing a very large flatlobe. Curtis, 226.ELENCHUS Curtis. Stylops p. Kirhy. 1 sp. St. tennicornis K. Curtis, 385.Eyes sessile ; antenna? 5-jointed, long, slender ; third joint produced into a longslender appendage.IIALICTOPHAGUS Dak. 1 sp. //. Cwtisii Dale. Curtis, 43S.Eyes peduncled ; antennas 7-jointed ; third and three following joints producinga flattened branch.LEPIDOPTERA. PAPILIONIDiE — NYMPHALIDiE. 87Order IX. LEPIDOPTERA Linn. (Glossary Far.)Sect. I. Rhopaloceua Dumeril, Bdv. (Diurna Latr. Papilio Linn.PapilionidcE Horsff. )Subsect. 1. Nudi West wood.Family 1. PAPILIONIDuE Leach. (Hexapoda Latr. Stirps Horsff.)Subfamily 1. PapilionidesWestw. (^Eqiiites and Heliconiiii Linn.)PAPILIO Lhm. Amaryssus Huhn. 2 sp. Pap. Machaon L. Curtis, 576.Hind wings tailed ; labial palpi very short ; larva with a nuchal fork.Doris Fab. Parnassius Latr. 1 sp. P. Apollo L. Donov. pi. 433.Hind wings rounded ; labial palpi moderate ; larva with a nuchal fork ; chrysalisreticulated.Subfamily 2. Pierides West. (Danaii Linn.)PIERIS Latr. Leuconea Donzel. 1 sp. P. Cratayi L. Curtis, 360.Wings rounded, almost denuded of scales ; club of antennae compressed ; secondand third joints of labial palpi equal.GONIAPTERYX West. f R"odocera 5c?y. jj p.RhamniL. Curtis, 173.L (jonepteryx /ycac/t J ^Wings angulated ; antennae short, clavate, tufted at base.COLIAS Jai. PiERisp. scar. 4 sp. ? P. Hale L. Curtis, 242.Hind wings rounded ; antennae short ; club gradual ; last joint of labial palpi minute; ungues deeply bifid.Pontiac Far. Pieris p. Boisduv. 7 sp. ? P. BrassiccB L. Donov. pi. 446.Hind wings rounded ; fore wings trigonate, squamose ; club of antennae compressed; last joint of labial palpi longer than second.MANCIPIUM Hun., Stephh. Anthochabis Bdv. 2 sp. Pap. carabines.Wings varied beneath ; fore wings rounded at tip ; last joint of labial palpishorter than the second. My fig. 96. i.LEUCOPHASIA S^ep/i. Pieris p. ia^r. 1 sp. P. sinapis L.Wings sub orbicular ; discoidal cell small, basal; labial palpi short, flat; firstjoint very large ; last very small. Donov. pi. 280. f. 2.Family 2. Relic ONIWjE Swainsonon. (There is no Britishspecies belonging to this family.)Family 3. NYMPHALID^ Swainsonon. (Nymphalis Linn.)Subfamily 1 . Nymphalides West. ( Chi'opodiform StirpsHorsficld.)VANESSA Fab. Hamadryades Hub. 7 sp. Pap. To Linn. Curtis, 96.Antenna; abruptly clubbed ; eyes very pubescent ; fore wings angular.CYNTHIA i^air. Vanessa p. C«r<is. 2 sp. P. cardui L'mn. Donov. pi. 292.Antenna; abruptly clubbed, compressed ; eyes very pubescent ; wings scalloped,anterior suffocate.Natura J'air. Nymphalis Z,c«;-. 1 sp. Pap. Iris L. Curtis, 338.Antenna gradually clubbed ; club nearly straight ; eyes naked ; labial palpislender ; hind wings scalloped.LIMENITIS Far. Nymphalis Latr. 1 sp. Pap. Camilla L. Curtis, 124.Antennae gradually clubbed ; eyes pubescent ; fore wings rounded at the end.G 488 GENERIC SYNOPSIS,ARGYNNIS Fahr. Dryades Hub. 4 sp. Pap. Paphia L. Curtis, 290.Antennae with a short abrupt club ; eyes naked ; wings broad ; head large.M EL It A Fair. Lemonade iJr(6. 6 sp. Pap. Cinxia'L. Curtis, 386.Antennae with a short abrupt compressed club ; eyes naked ; fore wings elongatetriangular ; head moderate.Sul)family 2. Hipparcliiides West. (Satisfies Boisduval.Thy satire form Stirps Horsfield.)Hipparchus Fahr. Satyrus Latr. 16 sp. Pap. Megara L. Curtis, 205.Antennae with an elongate, compressed, and curved club ; head small ; wings moreor less rounded.Family 4. ER YCINID^.HAMEARIS Huh. Nemeobius Stephh. 1 sp. Pap. Lucina L. Curtis, 316.Eyes pubescent ; palpi short ; fore legs spurious in $ , perfect in '^ .Family 5. LYCjENIDJE Leach. (Polyommatidae Swainsonon.Vermiform Stirps Horsff. )THECLA Far. Lyc^na p. Rocks. 5 sp. Pap. Betula L. Curtis, 264.Club of antenna elongate ; eyes pubescent ; hind wings generally tailed.LYCjENA Far. Polyommatus Latr. 5 sp. Pap. Phineas L. Curtis, 12.Club of antennae ovate ; eyes naked ; hind wings not tailed.POLYOMMATUS Latr. Argus p. Scop. 13 sp. P. Arian L. Lewin, pi. 37.Club of antennae abrupt, compressed ; eyes pubescent or naked ; wings entire ;posterior obsoletely denticulated.Obs. P. argiolus and Aldus belong to Dr. Horsfield's subgenus Pithecops.Subsection 2. Involuti Boisduval. Containing the singleFamily 1. (or 6.) Hesperides Swainsonon. ( AnopluriformStirps p. Horsff. )Thimble Far. Thanks Bdv. 2 sp. P. Tages L. Lewin, pi. 45. f. 3, 4.Club of antennae curved and fusiform, not hooked; fore wings rounded posteriorly.PAMPHILA Fahr. Strokes Bdv. 7 sp. P. Comma L. Curtis, 442.Club of antennae abrupt, fusiform, and hooked at the tip; fore wings nearly triangular.Sect. II. Heterocera Boisduval.Family 1. SPHINGIDuE Leach. (Sphingida; and SesiidasStephh.)SMERINTHUS Latr. Lathe Far. 3 sp. Sph. ocellata L. Curtis, 482.Wings angulated ; spiral tongue short.ACHERONTIA Ochss. Brachyglossa Bdv. 1 sp. Sph. Atropos L.Wings entire, acute; spiral tongue short. Curtis, 147.SPHINX Linn. Eumorph^k //?«&. 6 sp. Sph. Ligustri L. Curtis, 195.Wings entire, acute ; spiral tongue very long ; antenna; not clavate ; labial palpirobust.DEILEPHILA Ochss. Spectrum p. Scop. 3 sp. Sph. Euphorbia L. Curt. 3.Wings entire, not subfalcate ; spiral tongue long ; labial palpi robust ; antenna;clavate; neck of larva not retractile.LEPIDOPTERA. Springtide — BOMBYCID^. 89DAPHNIS Huhn. Sphinx Linn. 1 sp. Sph. Neri L. Curtis, 626.Wings entire, acute, posterior si glibly lobed ; spiral tongue long ; antenna; andlabial palpi slender ; caterpillar with the neck retractile.METOPSILUS Duncan. EuMORPHiE Hub. 3 sp. Sph. Emperor L.Fore wings subfalcate ; antenna obscurely clavate ; spiral tongue long ; neck ofcaterpillar retractile. Donov., pi. 1S2.MACROGLOSSA Ochss. Sesia p. Jafcr. 1 sp. Sph. Stellatarum 1 Curt. V47.Wings squamosa ; apex of abdomen strongly tufted.Sepia Fair. Macroglossa p. Ochss. 2 sp. Sph. uniforms L. Curtis, 40.Wings partially hyaline ; abdomen tufted at the extremity.Family 2. VRANIIDM West.(There is no British species of this family.)Family 3. ANTHROCERID^T: Vfestw. {Zyg^mi^ Stephh.)INO Leach. Process Far. 1 sp. Sph. Statices L. Curtis, 396.Antennae straight, $ bipectinated, ^ simple ; posterior tibia not spurred.ANTHROCERA Scop. Zyg^na Fab. 5 sp. Sph. flipendulw L,. Curt. 547.Antennae with an abrupt, bent, fusiform club ; posterior tibia spurred.Family 4. JE GE RIIDJE Sites. ( Besides Za^r.)^ Germ A i^aftr. Trochihum Stephh., Curt. 2 sp. Sph. apiformis L. Curt. 372.Maxilla very short ; abdomen robust ; antenna abbreviated.TROCHILIUM Scop. \ ^^^^/^^ ^ste'''h Curt 1 " ^P* ^P^'' ^'P^'^'formis L.Maxilla elongated ; abdomen slender ; strongly tufted ; antennae long, slender.Curtis, 53.Obs. Mr. Newman has separated this genus as follows : — Pyropteron 2V.,type S. chrysidiformis ; Bembecia i/!«&n., type Sph. Ichneumoniformis ;Synanthedon Hun., type Sph. CEstriformis ; Trochilium, type Sph. ti-uniformsizwM. ; Colonia Hubti., type Sph. culiciformis ; ParanthreneHun., type Sph. vespiformis Linn. (Asiliformis Haw.)Family 5. HE PI JLW^E Stephh. (Hepialites Zair., R. An.)HEPIALUS J'tt^. Hepiolus ///. 5 sp. Fh. Humuli L. Curt. 185.Labial palpi obsolete ; antenna sub filiform, much shorter than the thorax.COSSUS Far. Hepialus p. Schr. 1 sp. C. ligniperda Fab. Curt. 60.Labial palpi erect ; antenna setaceous, as long as the thorax, denticulated tothe tip (? $ .ZEUZERA Latr. Cossus p. Fur. 1 sp. Ph. jEsculi L. Curt. 722.Labial palpi very small ; antenna ^ bipectinated from the base to the middle, ^simple.Family 6. BOMBYCIDjE Stephh. (Bombycites Latr., R. An.)Saturnian Schr. Attacus Germar. 1 sp. Ph. Pannonia minor Ij. Don. pi. 1. 254.Wings entire, ocellated ; joints of antenna with two internal and two externalpectinations.ERIOG ASTER Ger??!. Gastropacha E. OcAs. 1 sp. Ph. lanestris Ij. Don. 310.Wings entire ; fore wings sub diaphanous, elongated, with a central white spot ;larva gregarious ; eggs covered with down.90 GENERIC SYNOPSIS,PCECILOCAMPA S'^epA. Lasiocampa p. Sea. 1 sp. Ph. populi L,. Donov. 307.Wings entire ; fore wings sub diaphanous, elongate, without a central spot ; apexof abdomen of females not tufted ; larva solitary ; eggs naked.Obs. Cnethocampa ( St. ) procession and C. Pityocampa are doubtful natives.CLISIOCAMPA Curt. Gastropacha E. y. Ochss. 3 sp. Ph. Neustria L.Wings entire, short ; hind wings subtruncate, subacute ; antenna; short ; larvaegregarious ; eggs arranged in a spiral coil. Curt. 229.liJilCWWJKA Stephh. Lasiocampa p. ^c/tr. 1 sp. Ph. Cfatagi L,. Donov. IJ 7.Wings entire, rounded, obtuse, opake ; antennae straight ; tail strongly tufted inboth sexes.LASIOCAMPA aa Gastropacha C. D. OcAs. 4 sp. Ph. Quercus Ij. Curt.181.Wings entire, opake ; joints of <? antennas strongly bipectinated ; tail scarcelyhirsute.ODONESTIS Gen. Gastropacha B. Ochss. 1 sp. Ph. Potatoria L. Donov. 148.Fore wings entire, acute at the apex, posterior slightly denticulated ; labial palpielongated.DEN DROLIMUS Germar. Enrich a Stephh. 1 sp. Ph. Pint L. Curtis, 7.Hind wings denticulated ; labial palpi rather short ; antennae short, nearly straight ;larva with a tubercle on the eleventh segment.GASTROPACHA OcAs. Lasiocampa p. &/^r. 1 sp. Ph. Quercifalia 'L. Curt. 24.All the wings dentate ; labial palpi elongate ; antenna; curved.Family 7. ARCTIIDJE. ( Pseudo-Bombyces Latr. )Subfamily 1. Notodontides West.STAUROPUS Germ. Harpy Ochss. 1 sp. Ph. Fagi L. Curt. 674.Fore wings narrow, with raised tufts on the disc ; antennae $ bipectinated, exceptat the tip ; larvae with the second and third feet long, and with two slenderanal appendages.PYG/E R A Oc/(s. Laria p. &/»•. 1 sp. Ph. bucephala I Curt. 530.Apex of wings subdenticulated ; posterior margin of fore wings not lobed ;thorax crested ; antennas ^ setose ; larvae cylindrical, pilose.Closer Hoff. Pyg^ra A. Ochss. 5 sp. Ph. curtis L. Curt. 705.Wings entire ; thorax crested ; antennae bipectinated $ ?j? ; larva with a tubercleon the third and eleventh segments.NOTODONTA Oc/(s. Ptilodontis p. /Zm6. 4 sp. Ph. dromedaries L Curt. 739.Fore wings slightly denticulated at the tip, inner margin with a tuft ; thoraxnot crested ; antennae ,^ bipectinated ; larva with conical dorsal tubercles.'L'EIOC AMF A Stephh. Notodonta C. OcAs. 2 sp. Ph. dictceaL,, Donov. 239. fel.Fore wings slender, rather acute, inner edge with a tuft; anteniiEe ^ slightlypectinated ; thorax not crested ; larva naked, with a small tubercle on the analsegment.LOPHOPTERYX ^<ep/i. Notodonta B. OcAs. 3 sp. Ph. Cameliim L.Thorax crested behind ; fore wings strongly denticulated, inner margin with atuft ; larva slightly hairy, with an anal tubercle. Donov. pi. 183.PTEROSTOMA (Jem. Orthorhinia 5rfy. 1 sp. Ph. alpine Ij. Myfig. lOG. 4.Labial palpi greatly elongated ; thorax crested ; inner margin of fore wings withtwo tufts ; larva naked, smooth.VET A&\ A Stcph. Asteroscopus /?Jii. 1 sp. Bo. cassia F. Donov. 397. f. 2.Labial palpi short ; fore wings entire, with a tuft of scales on the inner edge ;larva naked, fleshy, with the anal segment gibbose.LEPIDOPTERA. ARCTIIDiE. 91Pride Stephh. Notodonta D. Ochss. 1 sp. Bo. serrata Thumb. Donov. 359.Wings sub diaphanous and elongate, fore wings with a single tuft on inner edge ;antennae serrated ; larva sphingiform.DRYMONIA Hun. Chronic St. 3 sp. A^oct. Coloris F. Curt. 755.Antennas S bipectinated, $ subserrate ; fore wings entire, with a little tuft ofscales ; thorax very slightly crested.PTILOPHORA S'fejoA. Notodonta D. Oc/js. 1 sp. Bombphi/nigeraW.Y.Wings sub diaphanous, pubescent ; abdomen tufted in J ; antennae (J with verylong pectinations ; larva smooth, naked. Curtis, 328.Crura 5'cAr. Dicranura Xa^r. 9 sp. Ph. vinula L. Curtis, 193.Thorax not crested ; wings sibylline, upper pair long ; max. palpi distinct ;larva with two anal filaments.EPISEMA OcAs, Gravhiphora p. Hub. 1 sp. Ph. caruleocephala T,. Donov. 100.Wings entire; thorax crested; maxillae short, filamentous; antennae sub-elongate,straight ; larvae cylindrical, not tubercled.ENDROMIS Ochss. Dorvillia Leach. I sp. Ph. versicolor L. Curtis, 434.AntennEB bipectinated in both sexes ; body thickly clothed with hairs ; wings veryample and transparent ; larva sphingiform, with an anal tubercle.Subfamily 2. Archives West. (ArctiidcB Stephh.)LIMACODES ia^r. Apoda 7iau;. 1 sp. Hep. Testudo F. Donov. pi. 76.Wings opake, elongate, posteriorly rounded ; antennae simple ; maxillae obsolete ;palpi short.Heterogeneous A'lV. Hepialus Fa. 1 sp. H.asellusW.V. Stephh. pi. 17. f. 2.Antennas r? simple; wings triangular, posteriorly subtruncate, opake; maxillseobsolete ; palpi very minute.Fumes i/aw. FsYCHE p. Curt. 5 sp. B. pull Esp. Curt. 332.Trophy obsolete ; wings sub diaphanous, rounded, very pilose, ^ apterous ; antennae(J strongly pectinated, about 20-jointed.FSY CHF, Schr. 'Bavaria p. Haw. 1 sp. N.fttsca Haw. St. pi. 18. f. 3, 4.Trophy obsolete ; wings sub diaphanous, not squamose, elongate, subacute, 9apterous.[THYRIDOPTERYX Stephh. Sphinx Haw. 1 sp. Sph. Ephemerceformis H.Stephh. in Ent. Trans, i. pi. 10. f. 1.]NUDARIA Haw. Ph. Attacus L. 3 sp. Ph. mundane L. Curt. 400.Maxillae much longer than the head ; wings diaphanous, pilose, short ; antennaesimple in both sexes.Obs. The six preceding genera are not at all typical of this subfamily, butI have placed them in this situation in order to maintain the passage fromthe slender-bodied tiger moths to the Eithosiidae unbroken. Whereas inStephens's arrangement they interrupt this chain, whilst in Curtis'sGuide they are thrown out of the family after the Lithosiidac.HYPOGYMNA i7w6/i. 1.aria p. Schr. 1 sp. Ph. dispar L. Donov. 163.Maxilla; obsolete ; wings opake ; antennae pectinated in both sexes ; first joint oflabial palpi minute ; abdomen § with a brush.PSILURA Stephh. Hypogymna Curt. 1 sp. Ph. monarch L. Curt. 767.Maxillae obsolete ; wings opake ; antennae pectinated in both sexes ; basal joint oflabial palpi elongate-clavate ; abdomen ^ pointed.92 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.ORGYIA Ochss. Laria p. Schr. 2 sp. Ph. antiqua L. Curt. 378.Maxilla obsolete ; wings opake, short, triangular $ , almost obsolete ? ; antennastrongly bipectinated, $ serrated ; labial palpi inarticulate, clavate. *DASYCHIRA Stephh. • Laria Schr. 2 sp. Ph. fascelina L. Donov. 576.'Maxillae obsolete ; anterior tarsi very pilose ; wings elongate, opake ; legs short,stout, pilose ; palpi very short.Dumas Stephh. Colocasia Ochss. 1 sp. Ph. Coryli L. Donov. 309.Maxillae short, sub spiral ; wings opake ; thorax crested ; antennae slightly pectinated.LEUCOMA Stephh. Arctia Curt. 2 sp. Ph. Salicis L. Donov. 30.Maxillas short ; wings sub diaphanous ; body unspotted ; palpi short, rather divergent; abdomen ^ not tufted.LjELIA Stephh. Arctia p. Curt. 1 sp. Bo. ccenosa Hb. Curt. 68.Maxilla short ; wings sub diaphanous ; body unspotted ; palpi elongate, projecting; antennae moderate, shorter in $ .PORTHESIA ^^epA. Laria p. Scar. 2 sp. Ph. chrysorrhcea L. Donov. 10.Maxilla; distinct; wings opake; thorax not crested; body not spotted; tail Sthickly tufted, '^ with a downy mass ; antennae short.TRICHETRA JFe^L ( Trichocercus Ste. (g.lnfusor. Lam j ^^ Sparshalii.LArcturus Curt. (g.Crustac. Lett, j ^ ^Trophy minute ; antennae strongly pectinated ; fore wings sub lanceolate, denselysquamose ; abdomen with a large tuft of hairs. Curt. 336.SPILOSOMA Stephh. Arctia p. Schr. 5 sp. Ph. luhricipeda L. Curt. 92.Maxilla short ; wings opake ; body spotted ; basal joint of palpi longer thansecond, third short, ovate.CYCNIA Huh. DiAFHORA Stephh. 1 sp. Ph. medica L. Donov. 388.Maxillae short ; wings sub diaphanous, sub-abbreviated ; body spotted ; palpi distinct,squamose, with last joint as long as second.PHRAGMATOBIA ^fepA. Arctia p. Scar. 1 sp. Ph. fuliginosa L. Don, 80.Maxilla; short ; wings sub diaphanous ; body spotted ; palpi scarcely distinct,pilose ; antennae short, nearly simple in both sexes.PENTHOPHORA Gerwar. Paris p. OcAs. 1 sp. P. niffricatis. Curt. 213.Maxilla; obsolete; wings sub diaphanous, clothed with minute scales; body robust,^ with abbreviated wings ; labial palpi thick, porrected.Arctic Schr. Eyprepia p. Ochss. 2 sp. Ph. casa L. Donov. pi. 15.Maxillae short; wings opake; thorax not crested; basal joint of palpi longerthan second, third subacute ; body robust.EUTHEMONIA 5'fe. Evprepia Oc/is. 1 sp. Ph. Russula 'L. Curt. 21.Maxilla; short ; wings opake; body rather slender; basal joint of palpi shorterthan second, third cylindrical.NEMEOPHILA Ste. Chelonia p. God. 1 sp. Ph. Plantains L. Don. 134.Maxillae short ; wings opake ; thorax not crested; palpi very short ; basal jointshorter than second, third globose ; body rather slender.Hyperbola i:/^!*?*. ? Callimorpha p. Lat. 1 sp. Ph. Dominus L.Maxillae much longer than head ; wings densely squamose ; antennae $ $simple. Donov. 141.Family 8. LITHOSIIDJL Stephens.CALLIMORPHA Latr. Lithosia p. Haw. 2 sp. Ph. JacohcBce L. Curt. 499.LEPIDOPTERA. NOCTUID^. 93Fore wings subtrigonate, not subtruncate ; palpi 3-jointed, second and third jointssubequal ; antennas (J conciliated.DEIOPEIA ^/epA. EvcHEhix Bdv. 1 sp. Ph. puella L,. Curt. 169.Fore wings oblong, subtruncate ; palpi 3-jointed ; labial palpi much longer thanthe head, last joint short, ovate, hind wings sub diaphanous ; antenna simple<? ?•Eugenia Curt. Emydia Bdv. 2 sp. Ph. crihrum L. Curt. 56.Fore wings oblong, subtruncate ; labial palpi 3-jointed, two apical joints equal ;maxilla not much longer than the head ; antenna S bipectinated.LITHOSIA Fah. Ph. Noctua L. 10 sp. Ph. quatre L. Curt. 3S.Fore wings oblong ; labial palpi 2-jointed, basal joint very large.GNOPHRIA S'^ep/j. LiTHOsiA p. Far. 1 sp. Ph. rubricollis l^. Don. 350. f. 3.Fore wings oblong ; palpi 3-jointed ; maxillae much longer than head ; hindwings opake ; body short.Retina Ste. Lithosia p. Fah. 3 sp. Ph. irrorella F. St. pi. 17. f. 1.Fore wings subtrigonate ; palpi 3-jointed, third joint much shorter than second ;hind wings broad ; antenna simple $ ^ .Family 9. iVO CTC/ZD.E Stephh.TRIPH^NA Ochss. Ph. Noctua L. 7 sp. Ph. N. pronuha L. Curt. 348.Fore wings bistigmatiferous ; palpi ascending ; wings incumbent, entire ; thoraxnot crested ; body flat ; antenna simple.CERIGO St. Polit D. Ochss. 1 sp. No. text Esper. 4. pi. 108. f. 6.Fore wings rather broad, obtuse, brownish ; posterior yellowish : palpi ascending;thorax with a bifid crest behind, and calculated in front.LYT^A 5'<e/>A. ApAMiEA p. OcAs. 1 sp. A^o. w?n6rosa Hun. f. 456, 457.Fore wings horizontal, narrow, shining, with transverse lines ; thorax not crested,squamose ; palpi slightly ascending.Charles 5'<c/>A. Agrotis p. Oc/is. 9 sp. No. cesipitis'W .N. Hb. f. 428.Thorax not crested ; antennae $ pectinated; maxilla elongated ; palpi very short,porrected, not ascending ; wings more or less denticulated.CERAPTERYX CMr<. Charles p ;S<. 1 sp. Ph. B. Graminis'L. Curt. 451.Palpi short, ascending ; wings obtuse, slightly deflexed ; body short ; antenna $pectinated, nearly to the tip.RUSINA Stephh. Agrotis p. Ochss. 1 sp. B. ferruginea Esper. 3. pi. 47. f. 5, 6.Antenna $ strongly bipectinated, '^ ciliated ; body slender ; fore wings broad,rounded at shoulder ; palpi ascending ; thorax suggested.Gratis Huhn. Bombyx p. Esper. 28 sp. N. septum W. V. pi. 1. a. b. f. 3.Wings horizontal ; fore wings tristigmatiferous, entire ; palpi ascending ; antennapectinated ; thorax not crested.GRAPHIPHORA mien. Agrotis p. Ochss. 20 sp. Ph. N. C. nigrum L.Fore wings horizontal, broad, glossy, bistigmatiferous ; palpi ascending ; antennagenerally simple, sometimes pectinated in <J ; thorax slightly crested. ,Esp. 76. 3.SEMIOPHORA 5Ve/jA. Episema p. OcAs. 1 sp. Ph. N. gothic,. Hun. fll2.Thorax smooth, wocUy, not crested ; fore wings elongate, deflexed, posteriorshort ; palpi short ; antenna bipectinated g •ORTHOSIA Oc/is. Noctua p. /faw. 17 sp. Ph. N. Litera L,. Curt. 237.Palpi nearly horizontal ; thorax robust, woolly, not crested ; antenna pectinatedor ciliated $ ; wings slightly deflexed ; fore wings elongate.94 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.MYTHIMNA Stephh. Ph. Noctua L. 4 sp. Ph. N. turba L. Hub. f. 218.Body elongate ; fore wings broad, acute at tip, slightly deflexed, stigmataobliterated ; palpi short, ascending ; eyes pubescent ; thorax slightly crested ;antenna; finely ciliated.S^GY.TIA Stephh. Caradrina p. Cw^. 2 sp. N. XanthographaW.Y. Hb. f.l38.Wings slightly deflexed ; fore wings short, obtuse, rounded behind ; antennaciliated $ ; palpi slightly ascending ; eyes naked.C AR AD RIN A Oc/ts. Noctua p. saw. lisp. N. cubicularisW.Y. Hb. f.4l7.Body rather slender ; wings glossy, slightly deflexed ; thorax subcrested ; antennaciliated ^ ; palpi subporrect, slightly ascending,Grammes S^ejoA. Caradrina p. Cari. 2 sp. N. belinda Uh. Curt. 651.Palpi short, scarcely ascending ; fore wings obtuse, with transverse lines ; thoraxstout, woolly ; antennae S serrated.GIjMA. Huhn. Erastus Oc/(s. 4 sp. No. ruhricosa W . V . Curtis, 268.Body depressed ; wings glossy, incumbent, entire ; fore wings chestnut-coloured ;antennae simple ; palpi very short, horizontal ; thorax tufted in front.SCOPELOSOMA Cii. G-ljex p. St. 1 sp. Ph. satelUtia Linn. Curt. 635.Fore wings dentate, elongated, incumbent ; palpi very broad, scarcely reachingbeyond the head, last joint concealed ; antenna setaceous, hirsute.AMPHIPHYRA OcAs. Pyrophila p. i/b. 1 sp. Ph. pyramidal. Don.I93.Palpi recurved above the head, last joint very long ; antennae slightly ciliated ;thorax not crested ; fore wings denticulated, incumbent.PYROPHILA 5';. Amphipyra p. Tr. 2 sp. Ph. tragopoghnslAnn. Hb.f. 40.Palpi recurved, last joint short, stigma wanting ; antenna very slender ; wingsincumbent, glossy, entire.DYPTERYGIA a. Xylena D. Oc/is. 1 sp. Ph. pinastri h. Don. pi. 347.Palpi ascending ; antenna very short, simple ; thorax with a dorsal crest ; wingsincumbent ; fore wings short, broad, subdentate.LEMUR! S i/i. '!>ia:ma. Stephh. 1 sp. Ph. typlca Uh. f. 61.Palpi rather long, porrect, ascending, the two basal joints clothed with longscales ; thorax crested before and behind ; wings incumbent, slightly dentate.XYLINA Tr. Xylena p. Oc/w. 5 sp. Ph. patris L,. Hb. f. 245.Fore wings elongate, sublinear, obsoletely dentate, incumbent ; thorax crested jpalpi short, slender, sub horizontal ; antenna simple.RHIZOLITH A C'/r^. Noctua i/att;. 10 sp. N. Lambda F. ? Haw. Hb.f. 242.Palpi porrected horizontally; head tufted; thorax crested; abdomen tufted attip ; fore wings with the hind margin subangulate, incumbent ; posteriormargin rounded.LITHOMIA Hun. Xylina Oehs. 1 sp. Solidaginis Hb. Curt. 683.Palpi porrected obliquely ; third joint slightly exposed at tip ; antennasetaceous ; thorax tufted behind ; fore wings very closely deflexed, long,narrow.CALOCAMPA St. Xylina p. Curt. 2 sp. Ph. e.vohta L. Curt. 256.Fore wings long, narrow, incumbent ; palpi short, with the last joint concealed ;eyes naked ; thorax slightly crested ; antenna short, stout.XYLOPHASIA St. Xvlena 'R.Ochs. 9 sp. Ph. polygon L. Hb. f. 82.Body with a large tuft at the tall ; fore wings broad, deflexed, hinder marginsubdonticulated ; palpi slightly ascending, last joint exposed ; antennaslender.LEPIDOPTERA. NOCTUIDiE. 95HADENA Schr. Dianthoecia Bdv. 8 sp. Ph. plebeian L. Curt. 308.Fore wings slightly deflexed, with the hind margin subrotundate ; antennae short,simple ; head with a frontal crest ; thorax slightly crested.Heliopolis Bdv. Hadena p. Schr. 2 sp. Bom. popular F.Antennae $ strongly bipectinated, elongate, "^ bristly ; maxilla? very short ;palpi short, stout, porrected ; thorax crested ; wings subdenticulated. Donov.pi. 505.Maestro Ochss. Noctua p. Haw. 11 sp. Ph.N. Persicarice L. Don. pi. 317.Antennae simple ; forehead densely crested j thorax with a bifid dorsal crest; forewings subdenticulate, subdeflexed.EUPLEXIA St. Phlogophora p. Curt. 1 sp. Ph. lucipara L. Curt. 619.Fore wings longitudinally folded at rest ; eyes naked ; thorax with a doubleposterior crest ; abdomen crested ; antennae closely ciliated ; palpi subclavian.HAM A St. LuPERNiA^di). 4 sp. No. basilica F. Hb. f. 427.Fore wings denticulated, not folded in repose ; thorax scarcely crested, woolly ;antennas ciliated, stout ; back of abdomen fasciculated.APAMiEA Oc/js. GoBTYNA p. Tr. 9 sp. Ph. nictiiansL,. Donov. 397. f. 3.Palpi short, subclavate ; thorax with a bifid crest in front and behind ; fore wingselongate, triangular, subdentate ; hind margin obtuse.MI AN A .Sit. ApAMiEA B. Ochss. 7sp. Ph. stric/ilis L. Hb. f. 95.Palpi small, slender ; head crested ; thorax not crested in front, with a crestbehind; wings entire, deflexed, anterior elongate, triangular.CELiENA St. ApaMxEA p. Curt. 4sp. C. Haworthii St. Curt. 260.?Palpi porrected obliquely, densely scaly ; antennae ciliated ^ ; wings deflexed,entire, anterior obtuse ; head tufted ; thorax not crested.SCOTOPHILA St. Lycophotia Hb. 1 sp. N. porphyries W. V.Palpi porrected obliquely ; antennae long, subpectinated ^ ; head and thoraxnot crested ; wings entire, deflexed ; anterior narrow. Hb. f. 93. 473.Alsatia inc. li.kv.vs 'p. Bdv. 1 sp. N. piniperda Koh. Curt. 117.Palpi minute, concealed ; last joint concealed ; head minute ; thorax large,downy ; antennae short, subserrated ; abdomen short, stout, pubescent.U Fall A Hb. AcTEBiA St. 1 sp. Ph. N. Prmcox 1^. Curt. 539.Head small, with a thick frontal crest ; thorax small, subcrested behind ; forewings very narrow, linear, glossy, deflexed ; antennae slender, ciliated $ .TRACHEA Ochss. Noctua p. Haw. 1 sp. Ph. striplings h. Curt. 631.Fore wings elongate, triangular, deflexed, subdenticulate ; antenuce simple ;pubescent (J ; head crested ; thorax crested before and behind.Valerian Cez-m. Miselia p. i/6. 1 sp. B. oleagma W. V. Donov. 439.Antennae bipectinated in both sexes; palpi short; fore wings crenated ; thoraxslightly crested.MISELI A OfAs. Polit p. 5c?y. 5 sp. Ph Aprilina'L. Curt. 177.Palpi short, porrected obliquely ; antenna; subpectinated <? ; head crested ;thorax large, crested ; wings sub deflexed, anterior with the hind margin crenate.Folia Hb. Agrotis Tp. Ochss. 13 sp. Ph. occulta L. Curt. 248.Palpi porrected obliquely ; antennae subpectinated, bristly ; head with shortscales ; thorax slightly crested ; wings deflexed, anterior elongate, sublanceolate,crenate.Pamela Hb. Acronycta p. Curt. 3 sp. Ph. Leporina L. Donov. 327.Palpi porrected ; antenna simple ; head tufted ; thorax not crested ; fore wingsdeflexed, elongate, triangular, acute at apex ; larvae very hair.9S GENERIC SYNOPSIS.ACRONYCTA Ochss. Pamela p. Hh. 13 sp. Ph. Psi. L. Curtis, 136.Palpi moderate, porrected obliquely ; antennae slightly pubescent g ; thorax notcrested ; fore wings entire, deflexed, rounded at the apex ; larva fasciculated.BRYOPHILA Ochss. Pgeciha Sch. 2 sp. iV. jjerla W. V. Hb. f. 25.Body slender ; palpi slender ; antennae pubescent c? ; thorax not crested ; abdomenslightly tufted ; fore wings sub deflexed, broad, elongate, triangular, entire.Diphtheria Hb. Noctua p. Haw. 1 sp. A^. Orion Esp. Curtis, 404.Palpi porrected obliquely, subclavate ; antennae simple in both sexes ; thorax notcrested ; abdomen tufted on the back ; fore wings deflexed, entire ; .THYATIRA Ochss. Noctua p. Haw. 2 sp. Ph. Bails L. Curtis, 72.Palpi distant ; terminal joint exposed ; antennae short, robust, pubescent ; wingsample, anterior deflexed, obtuse, broad, subacuminate at tip ; thorax transverselycrested.SCOLIOPTERYX Germ. Calyptra Ochss. 1 sp. Ph. Cicatrix L.Palpi elongate, ascending ; antennas $ bipectinated ; head tufted ; thorax with afrontal crest; fore wings deeply notched and emarginate. Donov. 216.CEROPACHA .S^ Tethea p. Cwrf/s. 7 sp. iV. 0/-. W. V. Curtis, 272.Palpi short, porrect ; antennae short, robust in the middle ; head with a frontaltuft ; thorax not crested ; fore wings deflexed, entire, long.Tether Ochss. Cymatophora A. Tr. 3 sp. Ph. retusa L. Hb. f. 214.Palpi porrected obliquely ; antennae setose S ? 5 head with a frontal tuft ; thoraxsubcrested in front ; fore wings deflexed, short, retuse or subemarginate.BOMBYCIA Stephh. Tethea p. Curt. 1 sp. N. vitalis F. Hb. f. 50.Palpi very short, porrected sub horizontally ; antennae bipectinated J ; headtufted in front ; thorax not crested ; fore wings deflexed, narrow, elongate,rounded at tip.CYMATOPHORA Tr. Tethea p. Curt. 1 sp. Ph. Oo. Linn. Donov. 179.Palpi short, ascending ; antenna bipectinated <? ; thorax robust, woolly beneath ;abdomen ^ conic at tip ; fore wings deflexed, entire, obtuse.Cosmic Ochss. Noctua p. Haw. 5 sp. Ph. trapetzina L. Hb. f. 200.Palpi moderate, ascending ; antenna setose $ ^ ; head rounded ; thorax notcrested ; fore wings deflexed, sub triangular, subtruncate, or subemarginate at tip.Cynthia Hb. Noctua p. Haw. 8 sp. Ph. fulvago L. Curtis, 84.Palpi with the last joint not much exposed ; antenna; simple, pubescent ; headsmall ; thorax slightly crested ; fore wings deflexed, sub triangular, golden coloured.XANTHOLEUCA Sei. Lampetia Cwr;;. 1 sp. No. croceago W . \ . Hb. f 189.Palpi forming a beak ; head conically crested ; thorax with a dorsal subconiccrest ; wings decumbent, anterior rounded at the shoulder, truncate andacute at apex ; legs compressed.Fortuna OcAs. Noctua p. i7«tt). 2 sp. N. Jiavago W . V . Curtis, 252.Palpi short, ascending ; antennas simple, pubescent ; head with a dense frontaltuft ; abdomen elongate, robust ; thorax crested in front ; fore wings broad,triangular, subindented.NONAGRIA Ochssss. Noctua p. Haw. 6 sp. N. Typh(E Ochssss. Curtis, 459.Palpi nearly vertical ; antennae stout, subserrated ; head with a frontal tuft ;thorax subcrested ; abdomen tufted at tip ; fore wings deflexed, narrow, slightlycrenated.LEPIDOPTERA. NOCTUIDiE. 97LEUCANIA Oc/w. Heleophil^ i?&. 15 sp. Fh.commaJj. Curt. 157.Palpi short, ascending ; antennae simple, ciliated (? ; head small ; thorax woolly,not crested ; abdomen tufted at tip (J j fore wings incumbent, rather narrow,entire.SIMYRA Ochss. NocTUA p. Haw. 3 sp. I\r. nervosa W. V. Hb. f. 326.Palpi slightly ascending ; antennae strongly serrated J ; head small ; thorax notcrested ; fore wings deflexed, broad ; apex acute.PHLOGOPHORA Tr. Hadena C. Oc^s. 1 sp. Ph. meticulosa 'L. Donov. 139.Palpi ascending, clavate ; antennae long, slender, simple ; thorax with an acutecrest in front, and a bifid one behind ; fore wings longitudinally folded inrepose, deeply indented.CUCULLIA ^/jr. TaiBONoPHORiE ^&. 14 sp. Ph. verhasci L,. Curt. 45.Body long ; palpi short ; antennas simple ; head small, rounded ; thorax crestedin front ; fore wings acute at tip, lanceolate, deflexed ; tongue-case of pupaelongated.CALOPHASIA St. Xylina p. Tr. 1 sp. A^, Linaria W. V. St. pi. 29. f. 2.Palpi very short, porrected ; maxillse very long ; antennae slender, simple ; headfasciculated ; and thorax acutely crested in front j fore wings deflexed ; tongue-caseof pupa long.CHARICLEA St. Xylina p. Tr. 1 sp. Ph. Delphic L. Curt. 76.Palpi short, ascending ; antennae simple, slender ; thorax subcrested in front ;fore wings deflexed, sub lanceolate ; anterior tibia; with two spurs.EREMOBIA St. Cynthia p. Curt. 1 sp. N. ochroleucaW. V. Donov. 340. f. 2.Palpi short, ascending ; antennae very slender, simple ; head densely squamose jthorax slightly crested behind ; fore wings entire, deflexed, elongate-triangular,rounded at tip.ABROSTOLA Oc/t«. Plusia p. ilfc. 3 sp. Ph. triplasia L,. Hb. f. 268.Palpi rather long, ascending ; antenna simple ; head with a frontal crest ; thoraxwith a thick bifid crest ; fore wings elongate-triangular ; larva 1 6'-footed, fourthpair of feet small.PLUSIA Ochss. Phytometra 1 Haw. 14 sp. Ph. chrysalis L. Curt. 731.Palpi long, ascending ; maxilla very long ; antennae simple ; head crested •thorax crested behind; fore wings deflexed, with metallic spots; larvas footed.HELIOTHIS Ochss. Heliothentes Hb. 4 sp. Ph. dipsacea L. Curt. 595.Palpi short, suspending ; antennae rather short ; thorax not crested ; fore Wind'selongate-triangular, deflexed, entire; fore tibise with two spurs ; larvae footed.ANARTA Ochss. Phytometra Haw. 4 sp. Ph. myrtilli L. Curt. 145.Palpi short, last joint almost obsolete ; antennas alike S ? > slender ; thorax obscurelycrested ; fore wings deflexed, sub lanceolate, or sub triangular ; larva footed.Contra Ochss. Phytometra Haw. 5 sp. A'^. Solar \V. V. Stephh. pi. 29. f. 3.Palpi short, ascending, last joint distinct ; antennae alike $ ^ , pubescent ; thoraxslightly crested ; wings deflexed, entire, rhomboidal ; larva fusiform.Emphasis St. Contra p. Curt. 1 sp. Ph. catania Sow. Curt. 276.Palpi short; antenuce simple; fore wings elongate-lanceolate, entire, roundedbehind ; head broad ; thorax smooth.Erastian Oc/is. Erotyla p. J7i. 8 sp. Ph. sulphureous l Curt. 140.H98 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.Body slender ; palpi porrected obliquely ; antennae simple, finely ciliated ; thoraxnot crested ; fore wings horizontal, forming a triangle.Cosmetic Stephh, Anthophila p. Ochss. 5 sp. N. caliginosa Curt. 356.Palpi short, last joint minute ; antenna slightly pectinated $ ; head with a smallfrontal crest ; thorax not crested ; fore wings elongate-triangular, obtuse at tip,without stigmata.PHYTOMETRA Haw. Anthophila Ochss. 1 sp. N. tinea W. V. Hb. f. 350.Flight semi diurnal ; palpi short, terminal joint slender, acidulated ; antennaeslender, filiform J ? ; thorax slender, not crested ; fore wings entire, subtri-angular.Tibia Stephh. Phalaena Haw. 1 sp. Fh. anomolata Haw. Curt. 631.Body slender ; palpi short ; antenna simple, pubescent $ ; thorax not crested ;fore wings large, glossy, elongate, sub lanceolate, stigmatiferous.OPHIUSA Ochss. Ascalaph^ Hb. 3 sp. Ph. austria L. Curt. 475.Body slender ; palpi stout, slightly recurved, last joint scarcely visible ; thoraxnot crested ; abdomen tufted at tip $ ; fore wings broad, subtriangular.CATE PHI A Oc/js. Phytometra saw. 2 sp. Ph. leucomelas Li. Hb. f. 303.Palpi forming a slight beak ; antenna long, slender, finely pectinated S > thoraxslightly crested ; wings entire, forming a triangle ; larva 16-footed.Moro Ochss. Hemigeometra Haw. 1 sp. Ph. laura L. Don. 30. f. 1.Antenna simple, pubescent S ; thorax crested ; abdomen crested ; fore wings deflexed,forming a triangle, sub triangular ; larva ciliated.CATOCALA&^r. Blephara inc. 5 sp. Ph. nupta l Curt. 217.Palpi porrected obliquely, last joint exposed ; antenna slender ; thorax subcrested; fore wings deflexed, forming a large triangle ; larva ciliated.BR'EFHA Hb. Hemigzometra Haw. 3 sp. Ph. Pai-thenias L. Curt. 121.Palpi very short, concealed ; head densely pilose ; thorax slender, pilose ; forewings nearly horizontal, entire; larva semi geometrical, 16-footed.Euclid Ochss. PhytOxMetra p. Haw. 2 sp. Ph. glyphica L. Curt. 659.Palpi rather short, last joint exposed ; antenna short, simple, subpubescent <J ;thorax not crested; fore wings deflexed, entire, short; larva slender, footed.*Family 10. G£ 0M£' TiJ/Z)^ Stephens. (Phalaena GeometraLinn., Phalanidaj and Georaetrida Curtis.)Subfamily 1. Geometrical.PSODOS Tr. PsYcoPHORA Kirhy. 2 sp. G. alpinata W.V. Curt. 424.Palpi porrected, very hairy ; maxilla long ; antennae thickened, simple ; coloursblack, or dark ; wings short, rounded.SPERANZA Curt. Fidelia p. Tr. 2 sp. Ph. linaria Fab. Curt. 225.Palpi very scaly ; antenna $ slightly pectinated, except at the tip ; anteriorwings with a small tubercle near the base ; colours yellow or fulvous, with adark border.Fidelia Tr. Palus? p. Curt. 4 sp. Ph. G. atomaria'L. Donov. 248. 1. 2.Palpi minute, squamose ; maxilla moderate ; antenna J bipectinated nearly tothe tip ; wings entire, irritated.Stephens describes this larva as 16-footed, and Curtis, attempting to correctStephens in his observations on this genus, states that the larva is 14-footed.LEPIDOPTERA. Geometrical. 99B UP Als Zeac^. Fidelia p. Tr. 1 sp. P. G. pitiiaria'L. Donov. 336.Palpi very short, hairy ; maxillas very short ; antennae ^ bipectinated to thetip, fj! simple ; wings erect in repose, anterior with a basal tubercle in ^ .MCESIA 5'^. BuPALUs p. Cwrf. 1 sp. G. favillacearia Tr. Curt. 33.Palpi distinct, curved ; maxillse short ; antennae moderately pectinated to thetip ; wings not tubercled at the base in S , deflexed in repose, irritated ^ ,small.ANISOPTERYX St. Hybernia p. Curt. 2 sp. G. hucophearia W.V.Palpi minute ; joints of antennae ^ producing a short ciliated twig, or a fascicleof hairs ; wings entire in $ , imperfect in ^ ; colour brownish, with transversestreaks. Harr. Aur. pi. 43. m — q.Hibernia Latr. Lampetia St. Cat. 3 sp. P. G. defoliaria L. Curt. 703.Fore wings long and thin in $ , entirely wanting in ^ > palpi very short ; maxillsenearly obsolete ; antennae <? bipectinated to the tip ; colour yellowish, withcross streaks.PHIGALIA Z)Mp. Amphidasis p. Tr. 1 sp. G. p7osar/a W. V. Wilkes, pi. 87.Palpi very short ; antennae with the joints biramose to the tip in S > broadestin the middle ; wings thin, entire, rudimental in ^ ; thorax robust.NYSSIA Z>u/). Amphidasis p. 5/. Ca. 2 sp. G. htspidariaW.Y. Curt. 615.Wings thick, rather small, entire, almost obsolete in $ ; maxillae obsolete ; antennasstrongly bipectinated in (J , pubescent in ^ ; abdomen robust ; palpivery hairy.Bison Leach. Amphidasis p. TV. 3 sp. Ph. prodromaria W . V . Don. 219.Robust : palpi very short, velvety ; maxillas very short ; antenna strongly bipedssometimes to the tip ; wings thick, rather small, $ winged.Chimera JDup. Metra St. Cat. 1 sp. P. G. pennaria L. Don. 287. 2.Thorax very robust ; wings slightly dentate ; palpi very short ; antennae $ verystrongly bipectinated, ^ subserrated.CROCALLIS St. Geometra p. Hh. 1 sp. P. G. elinguaria L.Palpi rather projecting; maxillse entirely wanting ; wings rather broad, slightlydenticulate ; antennae shortly bipectinated to the tip. Albin, 39. f. 63. e — h.ODONTOPERA Stephh. Ennomos D. p. Tr. 1 sp. P. G. hidentata L.Palpi distinct ; maxilla elongated ; antennae (J bipectinated, ^ subserrated ;thorax stout ; wings sub deflexed, deeply dentate and ocellated. Harr. A. 10.s — z.Geometry ZeacA. Ennomos C?<r<.' 14 sp. G. erosaria^Y.Y. Curt. 667.Palpi rather long ; maxillae short ; antenna $ bipectinated to the tip ; thoraxrobust ; wings angulated and indented, elevated in repose.PERICALLIA St. Geometra p. Huhn. 1 sp. P. G. Syringaria L,. Don. 181.Antennae bipectinated in both sexes; palpi and maxillae rather short; wingsdeflexed, anterior wings retuse, subdentate, posterior rounded, irregularlydentate.Angelina Drip. Hipparchus p. Curt. 1 sp. P. G. prunaria L.Palpi very short, remote ; antennae bipectinated in <? , simple in ^ ; thorax narrow ;anterior wings rounded, entire, covering the posterior, which arc irregularlyemarginate. Donov. pi. 27.RUMIA Dup. Ennomos D. p. Tr. 1 sp. P. G. Crata-gata L. Harr. A. 29. g— 1.Palpi short ; maxilla long ; antennae subserrated in S > simple in ^^ ; thoraxslender ; wings partially expanded in repose, entire, posterior angular in themiddle; larva 14-footed.H 2100 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.OURAPTERYX Leach. Ac^na Tr. 1 sp. P. G. Samhucaria L. Curt. 508.Antennae simple in (J 9 ; hind wings truncate-caudate, anterior very acuteat tip.Camps Lam. Metrocampa Latr. 1 sp. P. G, margaritaria L. Don. 543.Palpi very short ; maxilla long ; antennae slightly bipectinated in cT ; thoraxslender ; wings partially expanded, hinder margin angular ; larva 12-footed.ELLOPIA St. Camps p. Lam. 1 sp. P. G. fasciaria L. Hb. f. 446, 447.Palpi very short ; maxilla elongate ; antennae <J bipectinated, 9 pubescent ;thorax slender; wings slightly expanded, hinder margins rounded; larva footed.HIPPARCHUS Leach. Geosietra p. Huh. 1 sp. P. G . papilionaria L.Palpi distinct, approximating ; maxillas moderate ; antennae slightly pectinated,subserrate at tip in c? , simple in 9 5 wings green, deltoid in repose, anteriorentire, posterior denticulate. Curt. 300.HEMITHEA Drip. Hipparchus p. Curt. 3 sp. P. G. vernaria L. Curt. 300.Palpi short, slender, remote ; antenna; slightly pectinated, subserrated at tip in ^ ;thorax slender; wings deltoid, anterior acute at tip, posterior sometimesangular.CHLORISSAS'^ Hipparchus p. Leach. 4 sp. Peg. viridata L. Alb. f. SO. a. c.Palpi slender ; maxillae rather long ; antennae short, ciliated in $ , subpubescentin 9 ; wings entire, deltoid in repose, apex acute, posterior angulated ; posteriortibiae $ thick.CLEORA Curt. Boarmia p. Tr. 5 sp. G. Bajularia W. V. Curt. 88.Palpi distinct, scaly, obliquely porrected ; maxilla nearly as long as antenna,which are bipectinated in (J , but simple at tip ; wings partially extended, anteriorentire, posterior subdentate.EPHYRA Slip. Cyclophora St. 8 sp. P. G. porta L. Curt. 447.Palpi slender, drooping; maxillae long;" antenna bipectinated in ^ , terminal halfsimple ; thorax slender ; wings slightly expanded, ocellated, anterior with theapex acute, posterior subangulate.Acis Curt. Boarmia p. Tr. 10 sp. P. G. repandata L. Curt. 113.Palpi porrected, obtuse ; maxilla moderately long ; antenna c? bipectinated,simple at tip ; thorax slender ; wings horizontal, anterior entire, posteriordentate.HEMEROPHILA St. Acidalia p. Tr. 1 sp. P. abruptaria Thumb.Palpi short, subclavate ; maxillae rather short ; antenna bipectinated, except atthe tip, in $ , which is serrated ; wings expanded, deeply indented, anteriorangulated. Donov. 251. 1.Bohemia Tr. Geometra p. Huhn. 7 sp. G. ahietaria W. V. Curt. 280.Palpi and maxilla short ; antenna $ pilose, 9 simple ; thorax small ; wingshorizontal in repose, speckled, anterior entire, posterior dentate.HALIAZ)m/». Grammatophora St. Cat. 1 sp. P. G Bavaria L. Don. 196.Palpi short, basal joint very long ; wings short, triangular, pulverose, anteriorentire, posterior subdentate ; antenna (J bipectinated, terminal joints simple ;maxilla long.Numero Dup. AziNEPHORA iSi. Cat. 1 sp. P. G. pulveraria L.Palpi distant, projecting ; maxilla short ; antenna bipectinated, except at thetip, in (J, serrated in 9; thorax slender; wings entire, pulverose. Harr. A.42. o.Camera Oc/is. Aspirate p. C«r<. 3 sp. P. G. piisaria h. Harr. A. 44. h.LEPIDOPTERA. Geometrical. 101Palpi very short, scarcely projecting ; maxillae rather long ; antennae <? pectinatedexcept at the tip ; thorax slender ; wings partially extended, entire, androunded at hind margin.BRADYEPETES St. Ennomos B. p. Tr. 1 sp. P. G. amatory L. Don. 33. 2.Palpi distant, slender ; maxilla rather long ; antennae $ bipectinated nearly tothe tip ; wings partially expanded, anterior acute at tip, posterior subjugated.EPIONE Dup, Bradyepetes p. St. Cat. 3 sp. P. G. vespertaria L.Palpi very short ; maxilla long ; antennae c? bipectinated to the tip ; wings slightlyextended, anterior acute at tip, posterior rounded, emarginate near the apex.Hb. f. 43, 44.Jurymen Bup. Beadyepetes p. St. Cat. 1 sp. P. G. dolabraria L.Maxillae rather long ; antennae $ slightly bipectinated nearly to the tip ; wingspartially expanded, anterior narrow, angulated, subtruncate, posterior large,excised towards the anal angle. Donov. 349. 1.Aspirate Tr. Camera p. Tr. 4 sp. P. G. purpuraria L. Curt. 467.Palpi rather long ; maxillae short ; antennae short, bipectinated to the tip J , subserratedin 9 ; wings entire and rounded, all of nearly equal size.PHASIANE Bup. Aspirate St. Cat. 1 sp. Ph. linaria F. Hb. fig. 221.Palpi long, horizontal ; maxilla long ; antennae $ slightly bipectinated nearlyto the tip, subserrate ^ ; wings entire hinder margin rounded, apex of anterioracute.Parentis 5"^. Euboea Z>i<p. 4 sp. P. G. chenopodiata L. Curt. 707.Palpi rather long, beak-like ; maxillae long ; antennae (J slightly bipectinated tothe tip, ^ subserrate ; thorax slender ; wings partially expanded, entire, nearlyequal, anterior acute at tip.Venus Curt. 1 sp. V. America Curt. 759.Palpi very short ; maxillae apparently not so long as the antennae, which arerather short, bipectinated <y ; anterior wings subtrigonate-ovate, posterior .Linaria St. Zerynthia p. Curt. 13 sp. P. G. didymata L. Curt. 296.Palpi short, slender ; maxilla rather long ; antenna $ slightly bipectinatednearly to the tip ; wings short, deltoid, subtrigonate, entire, anterior slightlyacute at tip.HARPALYCE 5^. Zerene p. Cwr^. 12 sp. G. fuhataW.V. Hb. 297.Palpi short, acute ; antennae simple, ciliated in t? ; wings short, deltoid in repose,anterior trigonate, outer margin more or less angulated, posterior rounded.Article St. Cidaria p. Tr. 4 sp. G. derivata W. V. Hb. 289.Palpi very short ; maxillae rather short ; antennae simple, compressed at base ^ ;wings rather broad, short, rounded, and subdentate at the hind margin.Polynesia «. Electra p. Cwrf. 8 sp. Ph. centum notata F. Hb. 445. ?Palpi rather long ; maxilla long ; antenna simple, pubescent beneath in (J ; wingsdeltoid during repose, hinder margin entire, posterior ovate-triangular.LAMPROPTERYX5i. E lector a p. Cwr^. 3 sp. G. stiff utnata W.V. Hb. 306.Palpi very short, and maxilla moderately long ; antennae ^ with the joints pro .duce beneath, and furnished with a row of hairs j fore wings glossy, long,subdentate.STEGANOLOPHIA St. Cidaria p. Tr. 1 sp. P. G. punta L. Don. 233. 1.Palpi and maxillae of moderate length ; antenna simple in both sexes ; wingsH 3102 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.entire, deltoid in repose, anterior acute at the tip, and furnished beneath at thebase with a tuft of hairs.ELECTRA St. Cidaria p. TV. 6 sp. P. G. comitatus L. Curt. 603.Palpi rather long; maxillas long; antenna simple, subserrate beneath in <? ;wings entire, deltoid in repose, anterior elongate trigonate ; abdomen $elongate.Celia St. Clarissa p. C^lrt. 1 sp. G. imhiitata Curt. 324.Palpi and maxilla short ; antenna simple, strongly pubescent $ ; wings entire,deltoid in repose, anterior sublanceolate.SI ON A Dup. iDAisA A. TV. 1 sp. P. G. dealhata L. Curt. 691.Palpi rather long, scaly; maxilla very long; antenna simple, pubescent $ ; wingsentire, with strong dark nerves, posterior margin rounded.ABRAXAS Leach. Zerene p. TV. 3 sp. P. G. grossulariata Curt. 515.Palpi not visible from above ; maxilla small ; antenna simple, ciliated <? , pubescent$ ; wings broad, entire, rounded, expanded in repose.MELANIPPE Dup. Zerene p. Tr. 1 sp. P. G. cantata L. Don. 129. f. 1, 2, 3.Palpi remote, short, acute ; maxilla long ; antenna simple, faintly pubescent $ ;wings ample, entire, rounded.Serene Tr. Geometra p. Hb. 6 sp. P. G. alUcillata L. Curt. 643.Palpi not visible from above, remote ; maxilla very long ; antenna slender, simple,slightly pubescent $ ; wings entire, rounded.Thalia St. Ypsipetes St. Cat. 4 sp. P. G. miata L. Don. 479. 3.Palpi elongate, beak-like, acute ; maxilla rather long ; antenna simple, slightlypubescent S ; thorax with a bifid crest behind ; wings entire, rounded.PHIBALAPTERYX 5^. Aspirate C«r^ 7 sp. G. tersata\Y.\. Curt. 623.Palpi short, subclavate ; maxilla long ; antenna robust, subserrated <? , simple5 ; wings entire, deltoid in repose, anterior elongate-sublanceolate, very acuteat tip.Scotia Sis. AciDALiA p. T/-. 3 sp. G. Rhanmata Way. Hb. 271.Palpi long, beak-like ; maxilla rather long ; antenna simple, subpubescent (J ;wings deltoid in repose, anterior sub indented, posterior deeply crenate on hindmargin.TRIPHOSA St. AciDALiA p. Tr. 3 sp. P. G. dubitata L. Don, 246. 2. ^Palpi moderate, beak-like ; maxilla long; antenna $ simple, slightly pubescent ;wings glossy, deltoid in repose, anterior sinuated, posterior indented on hindmargin.CAMPTOGRAMMA Sei. Acidalia p. Tr. 1 sp. P. G. blli?ieata LPalpi rather long, beak-like, acute ; maxilla rather long ; antenna simple, sub-quiescent(J ; wings deltoid in repose, hinder margin waved. Donov. 287. 3.EUCOSMIA St. AciDALiA p. Tr. 1 sp. P. G. undulated L. Donov. 342. 3.Palpi moderate, not beak-like ; antenna <? simple, subpubescent ; fore wingswith the hind margin waved, posterior indented, the inner margin with abunch of hairs.Clarissa Curt. Gnophos p. Tr. 5 sp. G. dbscuraria W. V. Curt. 105.Palpi short, compressed in <? ; maxilla long ; antennae ^ compressed, subtusbeneath ; wings deltoid in repose, anterior subordinate, posterior indented.PACHYCNEMIA St. Fidelia p. Tr. 1 sp. G. Hippocastanaria Hb.Palpi moderate ; maxillae very long ; antenna slightly pubescent $ ; wings entire.LEPIDOPTERA. Geometric, 103anterior elliptic, posterior oval ; posterior tibi dilated with a fascicle of hairs.Curt. 611.LOZOGRAMMA St. Clarissa p. Curt. 1 sp. G. petrarch Hb. f. 113.Palpi very short, acute ; maxilla long ; antennae subpubescent S ; wings entire,anterior broad-triangular, posterior ovate-triangular ; posterior tibise with afan of hairs.Awaits Dttp. Aplocera St. Cat. 2 sp. P. G. plagiata'L. Donov. 233.2.Palpi long, approximating, beak-like ; maxillae long ; antennae simple, subtus(J ; wings entire, deltoid in repose, anterior acute.APLOCERA St. Licentia p. Tr. 2 sp. G. ccBsiata W. V.Palpi short, acute ; maxilla rather short ; antenna perfectly simple ; wings ample,entire, hind margin rounded; abdomen long, slender. Hb. 275., and Curt.324.Chests Tr. Phal^nap. F. 2 sp. Ph. spartiata F. Donov. 342. 2.Palpi long, beak-like, acute ; maxilla moderate ; antennae simple, subcom-pressed, subpubescent ; wings entire, glossy, anterior ovate-lanceolate ; legssimple.There 5"^. Chess p. Tr. 5 sp. P. G. juniperataT,. Curt. 519.Palpi rather short, acute at tip ; maxillae moderately long ; antenna subpubes-cent or slightly bipectinated in <J ; anterior wings ovate-triangular ; posteriorample, oval.OPORABIA «. AciDALiA p. Tr. 1 sp. G. dilutata W. V. Donov. 517.Palpi minute, not visible from above ; maxilla short ; antenna serrated and pilose(? ; wings ample, thin, anterior rounded, posterior subovate.CHEIMATOBIA «. Hybernia p. Cmt-^. 2 sp. P. G. brumata L.Palpi very minute ; maxilla very short ; antenna slender, pubescent ^ ; wingsample, thin, entire; females nearly apterous; legs simple. Hb. 415. 509.LOBOPHORA St. Chess p. Tr. 7 sp. Ph. hexapterata F. Curt. 81,Palpi short, subacute ; maxilla moderate ; antenna (J subpubescent ; wingsentire, horizontal in repose, anterior elongate-lanceolate, posterior with, a lobein the males.EUPITHECIA Cm>^ Parentis p. Tr. 36 sp. P. G. rectangular LPalpi rather long ; maxillae moderate ; antenna ^ simple, pubescent ; wingshorizontal in repose, hind margins rounded ; anterior elongate-lanceolate ;posterior small, ovate. Curt. 64.Minor Tr. Tanagra God. 2 sp. P. G. cha:rophyllata L. Donov. 253. 4.Palpi very short, compressed ; antennae robust, long, $ slightly pubescent ; wingserect in repose, entire, rounded, unicolorous.CLEOGENE Duty. Minor p. St. Cat. 1 sp. G. tinctaria Hb. ? Hb. 121. ?Palpi very short, velvety, acute ; maxilla very long ; antenna bipectinated ^ ,simple 9 ; wings rounded, unicolorous ; legs slender.Bapt St. CoRYCiA God. 2 sp. P. G. bimaculata Will. Hb. 90.Palpi short, obtuse ; maxilla long ; antenna simple, short ; wings ample, entire,hinder margin rounded.EMMELESIA 5"?. Melanippe p. Cwr^ 19 sp. G. rivulets Uh. Curt. 416.Palpi short, acute ; maxilla rather long ; antenna simple, sometimes pubescentin 9 ; wings entire, deltoid in repose, hinder margin rounded, posteriorsometimes angulated.Serena Dup. Arte St. Cat. 1 sp. P. G, clathrata L. Donov. 248. 2,Palpi short ; maxilla rather long ; antennae simple, pubescent in $ ; wings 4104 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.told in repose, with many longitudinal and transverse marks ; posterior sub-angulated.Cecilia Dup. Arte St. Cat. 2 sp. P. G. malaria L. Curt. 647.Palpi short ; maxilla long ; antennae simple ; wings deltoid in repose, hindmargin of anterior excised, posterior subemarginate, maculated.Syria St. FiDONiA p. Tr. 1 sp. G. auroraria Hb. Curt, 523.Palpi very short ; antenna $ slightly serrated and pubescent ; wings entire, veryrounded at tip ; hind tibia ^ without spurs, ^ with two apical spurs ; larvasvery slender.PTYCHOPODA St. Geometra p. Hh. 11 sp. P. G. lividata UPalpi short, slender ; maxilla long ; antennae (J ciliated ; hind margin of wingsentire, horizontal in repose, posterior subsisted ; posterior tibia thickened,and often with a long brush of hairs in <? . St. pi. 31. f. 1.ACIDALIA Tr. Dosithea Bup. 11 sp. P. G. avesta L. Curt. 384.Palpi very short ; maxilla long ; antenna; simple, ciliated in $ ; wings entire,partially expanded in repose ; posterior tibise often thickened and spotless, orwith only one pair of spurs in J .TIM AN DR A Stephh. Phal^na p. Haw. 4 sp. Ph. variegata Scop. Hb. 109.Palpi moderate ; maxillffi rather long ; antenna slightly pectinated to the tip c? ;wings entire, apex very acute, posterior acutely angulated.PCECILOPHASIA 5*. Abraxas p. Curt. 1 sp. P. G. marginal L.Palpi very short, slender ; maxilla long ; antenna short, simple, subpubescent $ ;wings expanded in repose, hind margin of anterior nearly straight, of posteriorsubemarginate. Don. 293. 2.Bellona Dup. Malaria p. Curt. 1 sp. P. G. vibicaria L, Hb. 50.Palpi obtuse ; maxilla long ; antenna very long, bipectinated (^ ; wings entire ;legs very long ; larva 10-footed.Malaria Curt. Ennomosp. Tr. 6 sp. P. G. notata L. Curt. 132.Palpi short, obtuse ; maxilla short ; antenna <? long, subordinated, pubescent ^ ;wings entire, horizontal in repose, anterior slightly excised, posterior angulated; hind tibia fasciculated ^ .Asia St. Malaria p. Curt. 2 sp, P. G, marginal L. Don. 493. 3.Palpi short, slender ; maxillae short ; antenna $ subserrated and ciliated ; wingshorizontal in repose, anterior acute, hind margin produced, posterior angulated,sinuous.Subfamily 2. Platyptericides West.Avesta Z)?^j9. Ennomos Tr. 1 sp. Ph. flexnla rab. Hb. f. 19.Palpi rather long ; maxilla elongate ; antenna simple, subpubescent ^ ; wingsexpanded, anterior elongate, with a deep notch near apex, posterior rounded ;body rather stout ; larva sublacertine.PLATYPTERYX Last. Malaria p. Haw. 1 sp. P. G. lacertinaria L.Fore wings falcate, hind margin denticulate ; palpi very minute ; maxillae nearlyobsolete; antenna bipectinated in both sexes. Donov. 251. 2.Trepan Last. F. Platypteryx p. Curt. 5 sp. p. G. falcataria L.Fore wings falcate ; hind margin entire ; palpi minute ; antenna c? bipectinated,ciliated or subpectinated. Curt. 555.Cilia Leach. Euclea Hb. I sp. Bomb, compressa F. Donov. 329. 2.Fore wings not falcate ; palpi short, slender ; antenna S slightly bipectinated,9 subserrate.LEPIDOPTERA. PYRALIDiE. 105Family 11. Pyramids Leach. (Phalaena Palls Linn.)Hyena Schr. Herminia Latr. 5 sp. P. P. prohoscidalis L. Curt. 288.Palpi two, much longer than the head, compressed, third joint recurved ; wingsample, deltoid in repose, anterior subtrigonate-acute, often squamiferous ;anterior coxae very long ; antenna; simple.MACROCHILA i7&. Pyralis p. Coif. 1 sp. P. cribralis Uh. Curt. 527.Palpi two, very long, porrected, last joint ascending ; antennas <J bipectinated ;wings abbreviated, anterior subfalcate j anterior tibiee (J thickened, with largefans of hairs.PECHIPOGON Hb. PoLTPOGON p. Schr. 1 sp. P. G. borealis L.Palpi two, very long, porrected, last joint recurved ; antenna <J bipectinated ;wings entire, anterior rather elongate-triangular ; anterior bite cJ with a largefan of hairs. Harr. A. 43. 1. t.Parabola iJ6. Polygon p. scar. 3 sp. P. derivalis Hb. Stephh. 33. 2.Palpi recurved, longer than the head, ascending; antenna ^ subbipectinate ;wings slightly elongate, anterior sub triangular ; head tufted ; anterior tibias(? fasciculated.JETHIA Hb. PoLYPOGON p. St Cat. 1 sp. P. emortualis Hb. Py. ). 1.Palpi two, short, pilose, reflexed ; antennae (J subbipectinated ; wings shortish,hind margin of anterior rounded ; legs slender.Obs. The last four genera form the genus Polypoffon Schr. in Stephh. Cat ,and the G. Pyralis Curt.COLOBOCHYLA Hh. Madopa St. Cat. 1 sp. Py. saUcaUs W. V.Palpi two, short, slender, porrected horizontally ; antenna slightly bipectinated ;wings entire, anterior sub triangular, hind margin dilated. Hb. Py. 1. 3.SYNAPHE Hb. Cledeobia St. 1 sp. Py. augusta's Hb. Hb. Py. 4. 21. 'Palpi four, conspicuous, labial very long, hirsute, depending ; antennae S denselyciliated and pectinated ; fore wings very narrow, long ; body long, slender.CLEDEOBIA St. Crassus p. Haw. 2 sp. P. albistrigatus Haw.Palpi two, long, porrected, longitudinally compressed, third joint very small ;antennas <J densely ciliated ; head tufted ; fore wings elongate-triangular,obtuse at tip.CAMPTYLOCHTLAa. Pyralis p. i7aw. 2 sp. Py. unduIalisHaw. St. 33, 3.Palpi two, semicircularly recurved, slender ; antenna; $ subbipectinated ; headnot tufted ; wings entire, hind margin rounded ; maxilla rather long.Gloss Latr. Crassus p. Fab. 4sp. Ph. Py. pinguinalis L. Curt. 455.Palpi four, labial long, porrected, last joint exposed ; maxilla almost obsolete ;antennae $ bipectinated ; wings entire, hind margin rounded, deltoid inrepose.Pyramids Liii. AsoPiA Tr. 4 sp. P. P. farinalis L. Curt. 503.Palpi four, labial ascending, compressed, last joint exposed ; maxilla; moderate ;antennae $ ciliated; wings rather narrow, not pointed, posterior rounded.HYPSOPYGIA i/6. Sopha p. IV. 1 sp. P. costal Yah. Hb. Py. 15. 77.Palpi two, short, ascending ; maxillae short ; antennae slender <J , ciliated ; wingsglossy, deltoid in repose, anterior sublanceoiate-triangular ; legs moderate.AGROTERA Schr. Sopha p. Tr. 1 sp. P. flamealis Hb. 15. 99.Palpi two, short, recurved ; antenna; long, slender, ciliated $ ; wings entire,anterior elongate, very acute, posterior lubin dented ; legs very long.106 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.SIMAETHIS Leach. Anthophila Hb. 5 sp. Ph. T. Patricians L.Palpi two, short, ascending ; maxillae long ; antennae slender, ciliated in $ ;wings broad, wide, anterior retuse, or acute ; legs short. Curt. 320.(Sect. A. Choreutis Hb. S. Patricians. Sect. B. P. Myllerana.)Ananias Hb. Enntchia p. Tr. 1 sp. G. S-maculata L. Donov. 266. 4.Palpi four, labial corrected, beak-like ; maxillae long ; antennae slender, ; wings entire, anterior acute, elongate-triangular ; legs long andslender.ENNYCHIA Tr. Pyrausta p. Curt. 4 sp. P. G. cingulata L. Curt. 128.Palpi four, labial beak-like ; maxilla moderate ; antennae simple, pilose beneath ;wings entire ; anterior rather short ; legs slender.PYRAUSTA ^'c^r. Boats p. ia^r. 6 sp. P. P. purpuralis L,. Donov. 339. 2.Palpi four, labial beak-like, last joint concealed by scales ; maxilla long ; antennaevery slender, pilose beneath S > wings entire, anterior elongate-triangular,acute.HYDROCAMPAiair. Botys p. Schr. 6 sp. P. G. PotamogataL Curt. 495.Palpi four, labial short, or moderate, dependent or recurved ; maxillae short ormoderate ; antennae simple, or slightly denticulated in $ ; wings very narrow,acute, or rounded at tip, posterior ovate-originate ; legs long ; larvae aquatic.EUDIOPTIS Hb. Diaphania St. Cat. 1 sp. P. lucernalis Hb. Py. 9. 58.Palpi four, labial densely squamose, mask-like ; maxillae ver)' long ; antennassimple ; wings entire, sibylline, anterior acute, obliquely truncate ; legs long.EURRHYPARA i/5. Botys p. Za^r. 1 sp. P. G. urticata L. Donov. 549. 2.Palpi four, labial remote, horizontal, maxillas elongate; antenna simple; wingsdeltoid in repose, anterior acute, hinder margin rounded, entire ; legs moderate.Geography l/"6. Scapula p. Car?. 1 sp. P. P. forjicalis 1Palpi four, labial drooping, connivent ; maxilla; elongate ; antennae slender,simple ; wings entire, deltoid, anterior acute, hind margin rounded. Hb.Py. 9. 58.Margarita St. Scapula Curt. 30 sp. P. vertical L. Curt. 312.i^ Palpi four, labial rather short, corrected ; maxilla long ; antennae slender, setaceous; wings entire, herbaceous, anterior sometimes long and slender ; legslong, or very long ; abdomen long, slender.Fascia Curt. Margarita p. St. 1 sp. P. civilis Hb. Curt. 559.Palpi four, labial long, beak-like, independent ; maxilla; moderate ; antennasslender ; fore wings trapezate, apex acute, subfalcate ; abdomen rather short.CYNiEDA Hb. Odontia Dup. 1 sp. P. dental Hb. Curt. 563.Palpi four, labial long, beak-like, corrected ; maxilla very short ; wings sub-deflexed,anterior rounded at apex,'posterior ovate.Nova Leach. Roeselia Hb. 3 sp. P. T. cucullatella L. Curt. 428.Palpi two, labial robust, suspending ; antenna $ bipectinated, simple $ !wings entire, anterior sub lanceolate ; abdomen and legs short.Family 12. TORTRICIDJEl.Qa.ch. (Phalaena Tortrix Z,a««.Parasites p. Latr. Platyomides Duponchel.)Hyperaemia St. Torthix p. Hath. 1 sp. P. T. Christiana LPalpi very long, divaricating, recurved ; antennae moderate ; fore wings elongate-triangular.St. 38. 2.LEPIDOPTERA. TORTRICID^. 107HYLOPHILA Hb. Alias Tr. 2 sp. P. T. prasinaria L. Curt. 573.Palpi moderate, slender, porrected ; antennas simple ; fore wings green, with paleoblique stripes ; larva naked ; cocoon boat-shaped.Ears Hb. HAHAsp. Curt. 1 sp. P. T. lorna L. Hb. Tor. 25. 160.Palpi short, ascending, rather stout, scaly; antennae simple; wings short, anteriorgreen, with pale margins, triangular ; larva naked ; cocoon boat-shaped.TORTRIX Linn. Pyralis Fab. 5 sp. P. T. vtridmia L. Curt, 763.Palpi short, sub horizontal, or drooping, second joint tumid ; antennae . simple,slightly pubescent (J; wings broad, anterior rounded at the shoulder, posteriorlarge ; larva concealed in a rolled up leaf.LOZOTiENIA St. Tortrix p. Curt. 28 sp. Py. Fostering Fab.Palpi short, horizontal, or slightly ascending ; antennae subpubescent (J ; wingsentire, anterior elongate-triangular, hind margin remanded with obliquemarks. Albin. 62. a — d.Philemon Hb. Ajiphisa Curt. 2 sp. P. Gerningiana F. Curt. 209.Palpi moderate, porrected horizontally, apical joint drooping ; antenna? bipecti-- named in (J ; wings deflexed in repose, anterior obliquely truncate at tip ; costasubemarginate ; abdomen slender.DITULA St. P^DiscA Tr. 9 sp. T. profundity W. V. Curt. 571.Palpi ascending, broad, very squamose ; antennae simple in both sexes ; thoraxwith a bifid crest behind ; wings sub deflexed, anterior with the hind marginsomewhat rounded.Antithesis St. Penthina p. Tr. 9 sp. T. corsicans Hb. Curt. 567.Palpi short, ascending, very squamous ; antenna? simple ; thorax with a bifid crestbehind ; wings deflexed, anterior black and white, rounded at hind margin.SPILONOTA i-^. Pyralis p. Pa. 17 sp. P. T. cynosbatella 'L. Curt. 551.Palpi short, sub horizontal, clavate ; antennae simple ; thorax not crested ; wingsdeflexed, anterior rather narrow, inner margin with a white blotch in themiddle.HEUSIMENE 5^. Tortrix p. inc. 1 sp. 2\ fimbrianaHaw.Palpi short, clavate, last joint concealed ; antennas simple ; thorax not crested ;wings deflexed, anterior elongate, slender, with a notch on hind margin. Hb.To. 7. 362.PSEUDOTOMIA St. Zeiraphera Tr. 23 sp. P. T. Strobilella L.Palpi moderate, horizontal, densely squamous ; antenna simple ; thorax notcrested ; wings deflexed, anterior rather long, apparently cleft on hind margin.Hb. To. 8. 46.STEGANOPTYCHA 5-^ Tortrix p. i7aw. 12 sp. P. Baberana V .Palpi moderate, clavate ; antenna; simple ; males with a tuft at base of forewings beneath ; wings very narrow, linear-triangular, subemarginate at hindmargin. Donov. 53. 3. 59. 1.ANCHYLOPERA ^if. Ancylis //"6. 12 sp. P. LundanaV. Curt. 376.Palpi moderate, porrected, sub horizontal ; antenna simple, scaly ; fore wingsslightly falcate, with the costa slightly emarginate, posterior subemarginate.PHILALCEA St. Article St. 12 sp. T. camilla L. Curt. 583.Palpi short, subclavate, densely squamous ; antennae short, stout in $ ; wingssub deflexed, anterior elongate-triangular, subfalcate at tip, costa straight, posteriorentire.Romana St. Carpocapsa p. Curt. 1 sp. P. T. arcana L. Donov. 364. 1.Palpi moderate, compressed, ascending ; thorax subjected behind ; wings delosGENERIC SYNOPSIS.flexed, anterior elongate-triangular, hind margin rounded, dark coloured,with silvery lines.CARPOCAPSA Tr. Samaria «. Ca. 16 sp. P. T. pomonella L. Curt. 352.Palpi moderate, ascending, subclavate, terminal joint exposed ; antennae simple ;wings sub convoluted, anterior elongate-triangular, subfalcate, ocellated nearhinder angle.Bactria St. Aphelia St. Cat. 5 sp. T. pauperana Haw. Curt. 599.Palpi moderately long, compressed, densely squamose, terminal joint concealed ;wings horizontal, anterior very narrow, hind margin obliquely truncate,acute at tip.Arabia Hb. Bactria p. Curt. 1 sp. T-i-punctata Haw.Palpi moderately long, rather slender, last joint long and drooping; wings deflexed,anterior glossy, elongate, entire, hind margin truncate. Hb. To. 36.227, 228.CNEPHASIA C?/r^ Pyralis p. Jas. 12 sp, P. T. LoffianaL. Curt. 100.Palpi shortish, ascending, last joint exposed ; antennae slender ; wings deflexed,anterior lanceolate-ovate, posterior triangular-ovate.SERICORIS Tr. Orthot^nia St. Cat. 18 sp. T. urticaria Hb. 11. 65.Palpi short, slightly ascending, densely squamous ; antennae S rather stout, pubescent; wings deflexed, anterior rather broad, hind margin slightly rounded.NOTOCELIA Hb. Aspis Tr. 1 sp. P. T. Udmanniana Tl Donov. 153. 1—3.Palpi stout, subclavate, terminal joint concealed ; antennas $ subserrated ;wings entire, anterior broad, short, with a dark blotch near the anal angle.PCECILOCHROMA a. Sfilonota p. Curia. 7 sp. P. T. Solandriana'L.Palpi horizontal, densely squamous ; antennae S robust, pubescent ; wingsample, anterior long and broad, hind margin entire, rounded. St. 4. 36. 1.Psychology St. Tortrix p. Hun. 2 sp. P. T. Lecheana L,Palpi very short, slender, rather ascending ; antennas (J robust, pubescent, wingsdeflexed, anterior slightly rounded behind, costa dilated and reflected at basein (J, with metallic marks. Hb. To. II. 67.EUCHROMIA St. Orthot^nia p. Curt. 2 sp. T. pur pur ana Haw.Palpi robust, compressed, subclavate, horizontal ; antennae $ subpubescent ;wings deflexed, anterior without streaks or fascia;, costa straight, hind marginrounded.LOPHODERUS St. Tortrix p. Haw. 2 sp. T. ministry L.Palpi short, drooping, slender, or slightly ascending ; head tufted in front ; thoraxcrested behind ; wings deflexed, anterior plain, rounded, slightly dilated atshoulder. Donov. 380. 2.SARROTHRIPUS Cwr^ A\i a Hb. 7 sp. P. Ilicanus V ah. Curt. 29.Palpi long, filiform, beak-like ; maxilla long ; antennae slender ; thorax crestedbehind ; fore wings dilated at base, costa waved, hind margin rounded, discwith elevated tufts or scales.Prone Cart. Lopas i/6. 45 sp. Py. JDesfontainiana Fah. Curt. 16.Palpi long, porrected, tumid in middle, very squamous ; antennae simple ; thoraxslightly crested ; wings rounded at base, costa emarginate, apex subfalcate,disc with raised tufts or scales.ACLERIS//^. PAKA3IESIA «. Ca 6 sp. P. T. gnomon I Hb. 27. 170.Palpi short, clavate ; antennae slender, pubescent in (J ; wings entire, retuse,anterior rounded at base, hind margin subemarginate, apex subacute, discwith a few raised scales.LEPIDOPTERA. TORTRICID^. 109LEPTOGRAMMA Curt. Oxigrapha Hh. 5 sp. P. T. literary L.Palpi horizontal, clavate, thickly squamous; antennae $ rather stout, pubescent ;thorax slightly crested behind ; fore wings oblong, trigonate, with numeroussmall tufts. Curt. 440.TERAS Tr. Rhacodia Hb. 4 sp, P. mariana F. Curt. 699.Palpi rather long, swollen in the middle ; costa of fore wings deeply notched.DICTYOPTERYX S'<. ALEiMMAi^6. 6 sp. P. T. Lceflingeana Ij. 'Dono. 90.Palpi short, stout, ascending, clavate ; antennae slender, pubescent in <? ; wingssub deflexed, anterior acute or subtruncate, reticulated, costa not ciliated.CAPUA St. N. G. 276. St. Cat. 1 sp. C. ochraceana St.Palpi short, somewhat drooping ; antennae short, deeply pubescent ; fore wingsvery short, broad, faintly tessellated, hind margin truncate and entire, costathick at base in $ .CHEIMATOPHILA St. ToRTRix p. Haw. 1 sp. T. castanets Haw.Palpi short, slender, horizontal, tumid above ; antennae $ slender, subpubes-cent ; wings very glossy, anterior narrow, acute at tip, hind margin sub-marginal.St. 36. 3.ARGYROTOZA St. Croesus p. Hb. 5 sp. P. T Bergmanniana L.Palpi very short, clavate, drooping ; thorax not crested ; antennae slender ; forewings short, truncate at hinder margin, costa straight, yellow, with silverylines. Donov. 157. 1 — 6.ARGYROLEPIA a. CocHYLis p. (7Mr^ 6 sp. T. Za^Aamana Hb. 30. 189.Palpi short, filiform, horizontal, last joint nearly concealed ; wings entire, anteriorelongate-triangular, hind margin subtruncate or rounded, disc withsilvery markings.ORTHOT^NIA Curt. Argtrolepia p. St. Cat. 6 sp. P. T. Turionella L.Palpi short, horizontal, subclavate, last joint exposed ; antenna; ^ subpubescent ;fore wings elongate-triangular, hind margin rounded, with silvery markings.Curt. 364.RHYACIONIA i/6. Zeiraphera p. Crit. 1 sp. P. T. Hastiana'L. Curt. 711.Palpi short, slender, beak-like ; maxillae very short ; wings entire, anterior ,hind margin obliquely truncate, costa straight.EUPCECILIA St. CocHYLis p. Curt. 7 sp. T. augustan Uh. Donov. 452.Palpi very short, thick, horizontal ; antennae S thickly pubescent ; wings entirefore wings rather narrow, hind margin sub obliquely truncate, disc glossy.PHTHEOCHROA St. Tortrix p. Hb. 1 sp. T. rvgosana Hb.Palpi very long, slender ; maxillae very short ; fore wings rugose, not rounded atthe shoulders. Donov. 371. 1.COCHYLIS Tr. Tortrix p. i/i. 5 sp. T. rubellana Uh. Curt. 491.Palpi short, subclavate, very squamose ; antennae $ subpubescent ; fore wingselongate-triangular, hind margin obliquely truncate, disc with an oblique centraldark base.LOZOPERA St. CocHYLis p. C^lrt. 8 sp. P. Franciscan F. Donov. 355. I.Palpi rather long, subclavate ; antenna; $ faintly pubescent ; wings entire, anteriorwith the hind margin very obliquely truncate, posterior with the apexproduced and angulated.XANTHOSETIA St. Pyrai.is p. F. 3 sp. P. T. Zenana L. Donov. 106. 2.Palpi long, horizontal, beak-like, last joint concealed ; antennae S pubescent ;wings entire, anterior with the costa straight at base, hind margin slightlyrounded.no GENERIC SYNOPSIS.PHIBALOCERA St. Pyralis F. 1 sp. P. Qicercana F. Donov. 106. 3.Palpi very long, slender, and recurved ; antennas very long ; fore wings triangularand truncated.ORTHOT^LIA St. 1 sp. O. venosa St. St. 35. 3.Palpi very long, recurved ; antenna short and slender ; fore wings sublinear,hind margin subtruncate, costa straight.Family 13. FPONOMEUTIDJE Stephh. (Parasites p. Latr.)Depress RI A i7aw. Molucca Zaifr. 24 sp. P. T. Ahtroimeriana 1,.Body broad and depressed ; wings horizontally incumbent in repose ; palpi recurved,long, apical joint very slender and attenuated ; fore wings lanceolate.Curt. 221.Anabasis Curt. Recurvaria p. Haw. 43 sp. P. T. Juniperella L.Body slightly depressed ; palpi very long, recurved, apical joint very long ;antennas rather long, slender ; wings incumbent, anterior linear-lanceolate.Curt. 189.Tavern Curt. Anabasis p. St. 4 sp. P. T. sarcitella L. Curt. 735.Palpi very long, slender, recurved, second and third joints of equal length ; headshort, broad ; fore wings horizontal, linear-lanceolate, acute at tip, inferiorlanceolate.LOPHONOTUS5'^ 1 sp. L. fasciculellus Si. St. 39. 1.Body slender ; wings narrow, the anterior subfalcate, with three fascicles of scaleson the inner margin.Acrid St. Tinea p. Donov. 1 sp. P. T. emarginella Donov. 392. 3.Palpi divaricating, terminal joint acute ; wings entire, anterior rather long,linear, the apex dilated and rounded, and the costa with a circular notch in themiddle.CHELARIA Hair. Htpatima p. Huhn. 1 sp. P. T. rhomhoidella L.Palpi two, very long, recurved, divaricating, clothed nearly to the tip ; anteriorwings very narrow, obtuse, hind wings broad, acute, with very long cilia.Curt. 368.Leonora «. Recurvaria p. Jaw. V sp. T. silacellaUh.'i Curt. 671.Body long and slender ; palpi two, very long and divaricating, slightly recurved ;fore wings long, narrow, cilia rather long, posterior small.ACAMPSIA Hb. Tinea p. Hb. 3 sp. T. tinctella Hb. Tin. 31. 214.Palpi very long, slender, recurved, terminal joint very long and acute ; headsmall, glossy ; fore wings acutely and obliquely truncate, without markings.MACROCHILA St. Aplota p. Ctirt. 5 sp. P. T. Castella L. Curt. 655. 1Palpi large, divaricating, densely squamous, terminal joint setaceous and acute ;antennae long, slender ; fore wings elongate, sublinear, hinder margin sub-truncated.APLOTA St. Ypsolophus p. Haw. 1 sp. Y. palpettus Haw.Palpi two, elongate, divaricating, clavate, terminal joint nearly concealed ; antennaewith fine whorls of hairs ; fore wings sublinear, hinder margin obliquelytruncate.ENICOSTOMA St. Pyralis p. Fab. 1 sp. P. Thunbergana F. Hb. Ti. 35. 288.Palpi two, much longer than the head, recurved, thickened nearly to the tip, theapex of last joint exposed ; wings scarcely deflexed, anterior sub lanceolate, withsmall scaly tufts.Albania Hb. Enicostoma p. St. Cat. 1 sp. P. T. GeoffroyeUa L.LEPIDOPTERA. YPONOMEUTIDiE. IllPalpi two, nearly as long as the body, very much divaricating, fore wingsdeflexed, elongate lanceolate, with metallic lines, posterior with long cilia.Hb. 18. 123.CECOPHORA Latr. Dasycerus Haw. 2 sp. T. Oliviella F. Curt. 408.Palpi longer than the head, recurved, slender ; antenna; stout at the base,densely clothed with scales above, pilose beneath ; apex simple, with a pale ringnear the tip.Del A ia<r. Capillaries J/aa;. lisp. P. T. DeGeerella lu. Curt. 463.Palpi four, labial slender, recurved ; antenna; greatly elongated $ , thickened in5 ; eyes very large and approximating in <? ; body slender ; head pilose ;wings metallic.OPORINIA Hb. DiuRNEA p. Haw. 2 sp. T. Vorticella Hb. Ti. 2. 11.Palpi very short, slightly drooping, terminal joint exposed ; wings glossy,slightly decumbent, anterior elongate-lanceolate, with one or two patches ofscales.COCHLEOPHASIA Curt. Capillaries p. Haw. 2 sp. C. tessellea H.Palpi two, very short, drooping; maxilla* wanting; antennas ciliated ^ ; wingsin (J ample, sub lanceolate, smooth, ^ apterous ; larva in a case. Curt. 487.DASYSTOMA Curt. Diurnal p. Haw. 1 sp. T. salicella Hb. Ti. 2. 9.Palpi longer than the head, densely hairy ; maxillas obsolete ; antennae ciliated (J ;wings decumbent, anterior sub lanceolate, costa curved ; female with the forewings half the length of the body.Oxalate Hb. CiiEiMAPHASiA Curt. 1 sp. P. P. gelatella L.Palpi minute, drooping, hairy ; maxilla obsolete ; antennae subpubescent $ ; forewings (J sub lanceolate, narrow at base, disc smooth, ^ with very short wings.Hb. To. 42. 266.CHEIMOPHILA Hb. Diurnal p. Haw. 1 sp. T. phryyanella Hb. Ti. 2. 10.Palpi rather long, slender, recurved, apical joint sub elongate ; antennae $pilose, pubescent ; wings smooth, glossy, anterior sublanceolate-truncate, ^apterous.Diurnal iJaw. Chimabache gift. 2 sp. T. Fagella'Fab. Albin. 36. 57. a— e.Palpi rather long, large, porrected ; maxilla; rudimental ; antennas densely pubescent(J ; wings $ incumbent, anterior elongated, pale, with irregular markings,^ with short acute wings.SEMIOSCOPIS Hb. Biographia St. Cat. 2 sp. P. Steinkelnerana F.Palpi two, elongate, slender, recurved, sub parallel ; maxilla short ; antennas pubescentin ^ ; wings decumbent, anterior elongate lanceolate, pale, with letter-likemarkings ; ^ winged. Hb. Ti. 4. 26.ANESYCHIA 7/^6. Melanoleuca a. Ca 4 sp. P. T. puella L,. Curt. 412.Palpi two, long, slightly recurved, slender, terminal joint much exposed ; maxillaespiral ; fore wings obliquely truncate at the hinder margin, pale, with largedark blotches ; larva solitary.YPONOMEUTA F. Ermine Haw. 6 sp. P. T. patella L. Donov. 9.Palpi two, cylindric, nearly horizontal ; antennae subpubescent ; wings large,convoluted, anterior long, linear, pale, with minute black spots, rounded ; larvassocial.TELE A Stephh. Yponomeuta p. St. Cat. 8 sp. P. T. leucatella L.Palpi moderate, sub filiform, slightly ascending ; antennae slightly pubescent <^ ;fore wings elongate, sublinear, occasionally fasciated ; cilia of hind wings large.Hb. Ti. 21. 146.112 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.Theresa Curt. Ismene St. 11 sp. P. T. Prunella L. Hb. Ti. 26. 175.Palpi moderate, slender, sub filiform ; antennae slender ; wings convoluted ; forewings elongate-sublinear-lanceolate ; apex rounded, posterior wings long andslender.ARGYROSETIA St. Argyresthia Hb. 7 sp. P. T. Goedartella L.Palpi slender, drooping, oblique ; raaxillEe rather short ; antenna; simple ; wingsconvoluted, anterior sublanceolate-linear, with metallic letter-like marks.Donov. pi. 63. 2, 3.ARGYROMIGES Curt. Lyonetia Hb. 25 sp. P. T. Patella L. Curt. 284.Palpi two, very short, drooping, sub filiform ; antennae nearly as long as thewings, which are very narrow, sub lanceolate, convoluted, anterior with metallicmarks.HERIBEIA St. Tinea p. Haw. 5 sp. T. Forsterella Fab. St. 39. 2.Palpi curved and ascending, apex acute ; maxilla very short ; antennae simple ;wings sub convoluted, anterior elongate-triangular, hind margin obliquely sub-truncated.Micrometer St. Tinea p. Haw. 27 sp. T. Stella Hun. Ti. 20. 138.Palpi rather long, slender, incurved ; antennae simple, subpubescent within in $ jwings convoluted ; anterior elongate-sublinear ; cilia short ; hind wingsslender.GLYPHIPTERYXi??/. CEcophora p. 5;;. Ca. lisp. P. T. Linneella J Curt.152.Palpi slender, drooping, divergent ; maxillae short ; wings sub deflexed, anteriorsublanceolate-linear, with elongate terminal scales ; metallic cilia very long.PANCALIA St. CEcoPHORA p. Latr. 6 sp. P. T. Leuwenhoekella L. Curt. 304.Palpi recurved, longer than the head ; maxillae rather long ; anteniite setaceous ;fore wings superincumbent, lanceolate-linear, with raised metallic spots.^CHMIA Ochss. Callisto St. 4 sp. P. T. Fyesiella F. Donov. 382. 1.Palpi slender, slightly divaricating, curved upwards ; maxillae short ; head smooth ;fore wings rather long and narrow, metallic, hind margin subtruncate, posteriorsublanceolate.HARPAGUS St. Tinea p. Haw. 2 sp. P. T. cinctella L. Hb. Ti. 21. 142.Palpi much longer than head, much recurved, slender at tip, last joint longer thanthe preceding ; fore wings elongate-sublinear, rather rounded behind, black,with a pale central fascia.Stages St. Mutatis Ochss. 11 sp. T. Coracipetiella Hb. Ti. 30. 209.Palpi not very long, slightly bent, incurved ; antenna; simple ; maxillae veryshort ; fore wings narrow, sublanceolate-linear, rarely metallic, immaculate.CHRYSOCORYS Cri. 'HG.\099. St. Cat. T. scissella Haw. Curt. 663.Palpi slender, subincurved, joints subequal ; maxillae short ; antennae thickened,subserrated in <? ; fore wings very long, sub lanceolate, slender, apex acute,subfalcate, posterior narrow.METALLOSETIA St. Damophila Curt. 2 sp. Poor. splssicornis Haw.Antennae with the basal joints dilated and squamose c? ; palpi longish, curvedupwards ; fore wings brilliant, immaculate, metallic, very long, slender, andacute; cilia long. Curt. 391.Correct ARIA Haw. Tinea p. /?«&«. lisp. T. anatipeyinella Hh.Paljii rather short, stout, drooping, or unporrected ; antennae porrected ; wingsdeflexed ; fore wings very long, narrow, acute at tip ; cilia very long ; larvain a case. Curt. 687.APHELOSETIA St. Porrectaria p. Haw. 12 sp. T. cygnipenneUa Hb.LEPIDOPTERA. TINEID.E. 113Palpi moderate, drooping, and incurved ; maxillae short ; antennae stout, subverted; wings sub deflexed ; anterior very short, generally without markings,hind margin oblique. Hb. Ti. 30. 207.Bahia S**. Recvrvaria p. Haw. 6 sp. T. flavifrontella Fab. Curt. 543.Palpi rather long, divaricating, recurved ; maxillae rather long ; antennas pubescentwithin ; wings deflexed ; anterior sub elongate triangular ; hind marginsubtruncate.Family 14. TINEIByi: Steyih. (Phalaena Tinea p. inn. )ACHROIA Hb. Galleria p. Auct. 1 sp. G. algeria Fab. Hb. Bo. 23. 91.Palpi four, very short, nearly concealed ; thorax and abdomen slender ; anteriorwings short, sub lanceolate, gradually rounded on hind margin ; horizontallyincumbent.GALLERIA Fab. Ph. Tinea Linn. 1 sp. P. T. cereana Linn. Curt. 587.Thorax and abdomen stout ; anterior wings emarginate at the apex in $ , truncatein 5 ; palpi dissimilar in the sexes ; labial ascending in $ , drooping in ^ .My fig. 113. 1. (?.Scythia Latr. Crassus p. Far. 2 sp. P. T. colonel Linn. Don. 263. 2.Palpi four, concealed, and the labial ones turned up with a terminal spoon-shapedjoint in (J ; labial palpi elongated, porrected in $ ; wings convoluted, narrow,with the costa arched in (J , broad, with a straight costa, in $ .Sent Si. Melissa Cttr<. G. 2 sp. M. Jammed Curt. B. E. 201.Palpi four, maxillary concealed, labial curved upwards, slightly visible from above ;antennae slightly pubescent ; wings elongate, anterior sublinear.BV DO RE A Curt. Scopakix Haw. lisp. P. T. Merairella h. Curt. 170.Palpi four, conspicuous, maxillary small, labial elongated and brush-like, slightlydrooping ; antennae subserrate ; wings nearly decumbent, anterior longish, sub-triangular.PHYCITA Curt. Phocis p. Fab. 28 sp. T. nebula Hb. Curt. 233.Palpi four, maxillary minute, 3-jointed, labial as long as the head, recurved,slender ; antennae $ with an ovate mass of scales at base ; fore wings fasciated,convoluted in repose, elongate-originate, hind margin rounded.HOM^OSOMA Ciirt. Phocis p. Hair. 1 sp. P. gemini Haw,Palpi four, labial porrected, slender ; antennae simple ; wings convoluted, anteriornarrow, sub lanceolate, sub obtuse at hind margin, posterior ample, much folded.PRIONAPTERYX 6^ 1 sp. P. nehuUfera St.Fore wings with three or four deep features towards the apex of the costa ;antennae S slightly pectinated.NOMOPHILA Hb. Scapula p. Curt. 1 sp. P. hybridalis Hb. Py. 17. 114.Palpi four, labial porrected and ascending, joints concealed by scales ; antennaepubescent in $ ; wings sub deflexed and convoluted, anterior narrow, long,transparent ; legs long.ONCOCERA 5<. Crassus p. Fat. 3 sp. P. T. cornelia L. Donov. 153. 5.Palpi four, labial elongate, slender, recurved ; antennae (J with a mass of scalesnear the base; fore wings without fascinate, convoluted, elongate-triangular, sub-truncatedat apex.ARAXES St. Palparia p. Hair. 4 sp. T. ahenella Hun, Ti. 58. 9.Palpi four, maxillary minute, labial much longer than head, porrected, slender ;apex acute; antennae simple; fore wings subconvohited, anterior ,hind margin rounded./"4 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.Crabs Fah. Palparia p. Haw. 38 sp. P. T. pascuella L. Curt. 109.Labial palpi long, porrected, beak-like, very slender, last joint sub deflexed ; forewings narrow, convoluted, hind margin obliquely truncate or subemarginate ;antennae setaceous. My fig. 112. \A.Child Zenck. S. Palparia p. Haw. 6 sp. P. T. catella L. Curt. 727.Palpi four, labial as long as the head and thorax, beak-like ; fore wings long,lanceolate ; apex acute, obliquely truncate, or subemarginate at hind margin jantenuce pubescent or subpectinated S •Thersites Hb. Plutella p. Schr. 2 sp. P. T. novella L. Stephh. 40. 1.Palpi four, labial long, incurved ; maxillas rather long ; fore wings subcon-volute, very long, acuminate or falcate at tip ; antennae simple, porrected. Curt.3S5. dcscr. gen.HARPIPTERYX Hb. Plutella p, Scar. 3 sp. P. T. scabrella L. Curt. 535.Palpi four, labial rather long, with very long scares, the last joint being slender,curved upwards, and rising apparently from the middle of the palpus ; forewings defile ed,anterior narrow ; apex falcate, emarginate.HYPSOLOPHA Hb. Ypsolophus p. Far. 3 sp. P. T. asperella L.Palpi four, labial rather long, directed forwards, beak-like, last joint drooping ;antennae simple ; fore wings deflexed, narrow, elongate, sometimes tufted, hindmargin deeply excised. Hb. Ti. 15. 101.CH^TOCHILUS St. Cerostoma p. Curt. 9 sp. P. T. sequel L.Palpi four, labial rather long, curved upwards, beak-like, last joint slender, recurved,setiforra ; fore wings incumbent, very long, narrow, lanceolate, posteriorsub lanceolate. Stephh. 40. 2.CEROSTOMA Latr. Ypsolophus p. Far. 4 sp. P. T. Xyhstella L.Palpi four, labial rather long, curved upwards, thickly squamous, last joint seti-form ; antenna simple, porrected ; fore wings narrow, elongate, roundedbehind. Curt. 420.EUPLOCAMUS ia/r. Phyois p. Oc^s. 1 sp. T. medulla Wc. Curt. 591.Maxillary palpi as long as the very short maxilla;, 6-jointed, labial turned upwards; antennas $ fasciculated ; fore wings rounded at hind margin.ACROLEPIA Curt. 2 sp. A. Bttulcetella Curt. B. E. 679.Maxilla; nearly as long as the antenna; ; max. palpi 3-jointed, short, labial palpilong, slender, recurved ; fore wings much deflexed, elongate-sublinear, roundedat apex ; cilia short ; posterior lanceolate, with long cilia.TINEA Auct. Phal^na Tinea p. L. 15 sp. P. T. pelUonella L. Curt. 511.Head strongly crested in front ; maxillary palpi longer than the very short maxillas,5-jointed, labial slender, short, straight ; fore wings glossy, incumbent,elongate, rounded behind. My fig. 113. 5.Lepidoptera St. Ypsolophus p. Haw. 4 sp. T. Taurella Hb. Curt. 344.Head rough ; palpi and antennae S clothed with very long clavate scales ; wingsscabrous, sublinear.Incurvated Haw. Tinea p. Hb. 5 sp. T. masculella W. V. Curt. G07.Antennae S strongly pectinated; maxillary palpi incurved, long, 6-jointed; headdensely clothed with erect scales.AMAUROSETIA St. Tinea p. Haw. 9 sp. P. T. albineUa L.Labial palpi rather long, slender, straight, drooping ; antenna simple ; forewings incumbent, elongate-sublinear j cilia short, hind margin rounded. Hb.Ti. 21. 141.LAMPRONIA St. Tinea p. Haw. 12 sp. P. T. castella L. Curt. 639.LEPIDOPTERA. Hemiptera. 115Maxillffi shorter than the max. palpi, which are 6-jointed ; labial palpi slender,deflexed ; antenna ^ with diverging hairs ; head crested ; fore wings deflexed,ample ; apex oval ; posterior subtriangular.ERIOCEPHALA Curt. Lampronia p. St. 10 sp. P. T. Castella L.Maxilla very small ; max. palpi longer than head, porrected, 5-jointed ; labialpalpi small ; fore wings deflexed, ovate-lanceolate, with many radiating nervures.Curt. 751. My fig. 113. lo.EUSPILAPTERYX St. 1 sp. E. auroguttella St.Maxillary palpi very distinct, slender, curved, deflexed ; labial palpi slender, short,incurved ; antenna very long, slender j fore wings deflexed, elongate-linear,posterior lanceolate.ACENTROPUS Curt. / Acentria S'^ l j ^ ^.^^^ ^^^^ ^^Zancle St. J ^Legs entirely without spurs. My fig. 1 LS. ii — 17.GRACILLARIA i/ai<7. Alicia p. Fa6r. 19 sp, T. Thunbergella Fob.Middle tibije densely squamous ; labial palpi long, very slender, and recurved ;maxillary palpi short, slender, diverging ; wings very narrow ; cilia very long.Curt. 479. -'Family 15. AL U C Ibid jE Leach. ( Pterophorites iafr.)AGDISTES Hb. Adactylus Curt. 1 sp. A. Bennett. Curt. 471.Wings entire.PTEROPHORUS Geq^r. Alicia p. scar. 27 sp. P. A. pentadactylaJAnterior wings 2-, posterior 3-lobed. Curt. 161. My fig. 113. 18.Alicia Scop. Obneodes ia<r. 3 sp. P. A. hexadactyla Ij. Curt. 695.All the wings 6-lobed.Order X. Homoptera. (Homoptera sect. Homoptera Latr.Omoptera Leach. Hemiptera p. Lmn. Rhvngota p. Far.)Sect. I. Trimera West. (Cicada Li'mn. Cicatrices 'Last. CicadaBurm.)Family 1. CICADIDJE West. (Cicadiidse Leach. Cic. man-literaeLinn. Chanteuses Latr. Stridulantia Burm. )CICADA Linn. Tettigonia Fab. 1 sp. — C. anglice Sam. Curt. 392.Antennae 7-jointed; tarsi 3-jointed ; ocelli three. (C tibialis. Pz. 59. 51.)Family 2. FULGORIDuE Leach. ( Fulgorelles Za/r. Fulgo-ring Burm.)[PSEUDOPHANA Burm. Fulgora p. Auct. 1 sp. F. Enropcea Linn.Donov. pi. 203.]ISSUS Fab. Cercopis p. Panz. 1 sp. I. cohoptratus Fab. Curtis, 449.Very broad ; hem elytra angularly dilated in the middle of the outer edge ;ocelli 0.CIXIUS Latr. \ Q^V^^iT^Of n t \ ~^ ^1'" *"' '^"'**cm^'"'«« L. Curt. 673.Antennae shorter than the eyes; second joint nearly globular ; ocelli two; abdomennarrow.116 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.ASIRACA Latr. Delphax p. Fah. 4 sp. A. davicornis Fab. Curtis, 445.Antennae much longer than the head ; basal joint longest, carinated ; ocelli 0.Delphian Jas. 19 sp. D. minute Vab. Curtis, 657.Antennas not longer than the head ; basal joint shorter than the second, andentire ; ocelli two.Ohs. Criomorphus Curt, is composed of partially developed individuals ofDelphax.Family 3. CERCOTIDJE Leach. (Cicadelles Latr. Cica-telling and Embracing Burm. )SMILIA Germar. Centrotus p. Curt. 1 sp. S. Genista; L. Curtis, 313.Tibiae pragmatical, not dilated ; tarsi equal ; prothorax extended over the abdomen.Controls Fab. Membracis St. Cat. 1 sp. C. cornutus L.Tibia flattened, denticulate at the edge ; prothorax extended over the abdomen ;scutellum distinct. Donov, pi. 83.Leda Fah. MeiMbracis p. OKv. 1 sp. L. auritalAnn. My fig. 116. 1.Head flat; prothorax lobed at the sides ; scutellum exposed; hind tibiaj flat, serrated.EUPELIX Germar. Cicada Fah, ] sp. C. cuspidata Fab.Head very large, flat, and triangular, margined in front ; ocelli exposed on theupper surface of the head ; hind tibia; with three rows of spines ; thorax simple.Burm. Gen. pt. 2. pi. 3.Parthia Germ. Megophthalmus Curt. 2 sp. VI. scenic Fall.Head flat, forming a narrow lunule, edge acutely margined ; ocelli facial ;thorax posterior, tibia with a few external spines. Germ. Faun. 11. 11.ULOPA Fall. Cercopis Ahr. 3 sp. Ul. Ericce Ahr. Burm. Gen. 3. pi. 1.Very gibbose ; wing-covers elytriforrn ; ocelli ; head very broad, rounded infront, strongly punctate.CERCOPIS Fah. Cicada Linn. 1 sp. C. mdnerata Rossi. Curtis, 461.Head small ; ocelli apart on the upper side of the head ; posterior tibiae bidentate; prothorax large, hexagonal.APIIROPHORA Germ. Tettigonia Oliv. 2 sp. C. spumaria L.Head moderate ; ocelli two, approximate on the crown of the head, posteriortibia 2-dentate ; prothorax trapezoidal. Pz. 103. 8.PTYELA Serv. §• St. F. Tettigonia p. Oliv. 5sp. C. hifasciata I>inn. nee Pz.Differs from Aphrophora in the ocelli being as wide apart as they are distantfrom the eyes. Var. C. lateralis Pz. 6. 24.Bucephalus Germar. Approves p. Curt. 11 sp. C. trifasciatus F.Vertex trigonate, not keeled ; ocelli remote, marginal, not immersed in a fovea ;prothorax transverse ; hind tibiae multispinose. Curtis, 620.Approves Curt. Cicada p. Z)o?i. 22 sp. A-costataY. Curtis, 633.Suboval ; head flat, subtrigonate lunate ; thorax transverse ; ocelli marginal ; hindtibia multispinose ; anterior pectinated within.PHRYNOMORPHUS Curt. 1 sp. P. nitidus Curt.Oblong shining ; head crescent-shaped above ; ocelli marginal ; thorax transverse ;wing-covers indistinctly veined ; hind tibia thickly spined.Acanthus Enc. M. Amblycephalus Curt. 7 sp. Interrupts L.Ocelli placed on the anterior part of the upper side of the head in a sulcus ; hypos-tom oblong ; posterior tibitE angulated with two rows of spines. Curt. 572.Hemiptera. CERCOPID.E — PSYLLlDiE. 117TYPHLOCYBA Term. Eupteryx Cwr<. 30 sp. C. Ulmii Inn. Curtis, 640.Ocelli ; hypostoma oblong-subtrigonate ; fore wings indistinctly nerved; posteriortibiffi with a double row of spines.PE NTH I MI A Germ. G. 1425 St. Cat. 1 sp. sanguinicollis F. Pz. 61. 18.Wing-covers folding over each other at the tip ; hypostoma flat, transverse ; ocellion the crown of the head ; hind tibia with two rows of spines.Gallia Ctirt. Bythoscopus p. H. Sch. 4 sp. C. venosa Ahr.Face ovate, trigonate ; head above forming a narrow lunule ; ocelli in the forehead ;prothorax narrower than the head ; wings very much deflexed, apical nervuresreticulated ; posterior tibicB spined externally.IDIOCERUS Lewis. Bythoscopus p. Barm. 5 sp. /. stigmaticalis Lew.Head broader than the thorax ; face subordinate ; ocelli facial ; fore-wings membranous,overlapping at the tips ; seta of antennae $ clavate. Curt. 733.BATRACOMORPHUS Lewis. Trans. Ent. Soc. vol. i. 1 sp. B. prioratus,.Depressed ; head nearly as wide as the thorax ; anterior margin very convex ; ocellinear superior margin of face ; wing-covers slightly deflexed ; interred. tibia;spined. Trans. Ent. Soc. vol. i. pi. 7. f. 5.MACROPSIS Lewis A. S. G. Pediopsis Burm. . . . sp. C. vires cens Fab.Head as wide as the thorax, anterior margin convex, posterior concave ; face sub-homicidal,flat ; apex truncate ; ocelli facial ; antenna? placed in excavationsbeneath the eyes. Trans. Ent. Soc. vol. i. pi. 7. f. 3.ONCOPSIS Burm. Macropsis B. Lewis. . . . sp. C. flavicollis L.Differs from the last in having the face tumid, and the prothorax transverse-ovate,notched behind. Trans. Ent. Soc. vol. i. pi. 7. f. 4.lASSUS Fab. Bythoscopus p. Germ. 1 sp. 7. Lanio L. Curtis, 636.Head very broad and short, base concave ; ocelli placed on the forehead betweenthe eyes ; thorax transverse-ovate ; face broader than long ; clypeus oblong ;ovipositor recurved.Obs. The genera Bythoscopus and Tarsus have been much confused. Burmeisterthus distributes them into subgenera in his Genera Iiisectorum : —Bythoscopus. 1 A. Bythoscopus (Flataa varia Fab). 1 B. IdiocerusLewis.2 A. Oncopsis (Macropsis B. Lewis). 2 B. Pediopsis(Macropsis A. Lewis).lassus. 1 A. lassus [N. G. Curtis's Guide] (I. atom arius, cristatusGermar, §-c.) 1 B. Athysanus (C. argentum,histrionic, &c.). 2 A. Deltocephalus (I. pulicarisFan,Sfc.). 2 B. Platymetopius (I. vittatus Fab.,S,-c.).Sect. II. Dimmer Westiu, {Phytophthires Burm.)Family 1. (or 4.) PSYLLWjE. (Faux-Pucerons Reaumur.Psyllodes Burm.)PSYLLA Geoff. Chermes Linn. 27 sp. C. Pyri Linn. Curtis, 565.Head moderately notched in front ; antennae slender ; wing-covers membranous.Villa Ctirt. 1 sp. L. Ulicis C. Curtis, 625.Head very deeply cleft in front ; antennas long, slender ; wing-covers convex,coriaceous.LI VI A Latr. Diraphia Illig. 1 sp. Ps. Itmcorum Latr. Curtis, 492.Head strongly bifid ; antennas short, dilated at base ; wing-covers deflexed, coriaceous.118 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.Family 2. (or 5.) APHIDJE Leach. (Aphidii Lair. Aphi-tina Burm. )APHIS Linn. 21 sp. A. Rosa Linn. Curtis, 577.Abdomen bicorniculate ; antennae long, setaceous ; fore wings with three obliquediscoidal nerves, the first trifid ; proboscis short ; collar long.Laches niig. CiNARA Curt. 35 sp. A. Cohorts L. Curtis, 576.Abdomen tubercles ; antenna; moderate, often filiform ; collar short ; proboscislong.Heroines Hal. (Ann. Nat. Hist.) 2 sp. A. sepultus, A. hirtellus Hal.Apterous, linear, flattened ; spiracles of penultimate joint simple ; antenna; notlonger than half the body ; proboscis shorter than the body.ERIOSOMA ZeacA. Myzoxyle .B/o<. lisp. L. lanifjera l\\.Abdomen without tubercles or horns ; antenna; short, filiform ; body woolly ;fore wings with simple oblique discoidal nerves.Apelles Vallot. Aphis p. De Geer. 22 sp. A. Lyrics V.Legs and antenna; very short, female very much swollen ; legs and antennaescarcely visible ; seta; of the mouth very long. (De Geer, Mem. torn. iii. tab. 8.Aphis Gallarum Abietis. )BRYSOCRYPTA Hal. Chermes Burn. ? sp. Aph. bulgaria L.Composed for the reception of those species of Eriosoma, which inhabit closedfollicles on the leaves and shoots of plants. Swam. pi. 45. f. 22 — 25.[PHYLLOXERA Consol. doubtingly introduced by Curtis into his Guide, P.Roberts. Fore wings carried flat on the back, with one simple stigmal and twosimple oblique discoidal nerves.]Relaxes West. 3 sp. T. Quercicola West.Wings carried flat on the back at rest, anterior with three oblique discoidalnerves, the anterior bifid ; antenna short.Family 3. (or 6. ) ALEYR ODIDjE West.ALEYRODES Zai!r. Phal^na p. i. 2 sp. P. protoe/fa Linn. My fig. 1 18. i.Wings four, of nearly equal size ; eyes on each side divided.Sect. III. MoNOMERA West. {Gallinsectes hath. Cocaine 'Burm.)Family 1. (or 7.) COCCW.Tl Leach.DORTHESIA Boscccc. Cionops Leach. 6 sp. D. Caracas Boscccc.Males with a thick pencil of seta; at the tail ; females active, covered with flakesof a waxy secretion. My frontispiece, Vol. I. f. 8. $ , Jig. 118. 20. $ .Auspicious i?0Mc/it'. Coccvs\>. Auct, 3 sp. A. Geyiista: Wcsiw.Males very broad, with broad wings, without lateral anal filaments, with a centralappendage ; puparium with a double shield ; females immoveable.COCCUS Linn. Lecanium p. Burm. — ? sp. C. aceris Fab. Curtis, 717. (J.Males winged ; abdomen with two very long lateral filaments and a shorter centralappendage; females large, gibbous, gall-like, fixed to plants (Jig. 118. 17, I8.)[Geranium HI. {L. hesperides Linn., Burm. $ tab. 1. fig. 11. ; and myfig. 118. 19.), having the females flat and shield-like, with short legs and twoanal seta,] and[PSEUDOCOCCUS Westiv. (C. adonidum, Cacti, &c.), having the females notfixed, and clothed with a woolly secretion, cannot be considered as indigenous.]HETEROPTERA. NOTONECTID^ — HYDROMETRIDiE. 119Order XI. HETEROPTERA. (Hemiptera MacL., Stej^k. Hem.Neuroptera Lah: Hemimeroptera p. C/v. Rhyngota p. Far.)Sect. I. Hydrocorisa Latr.Family 1. Tone CTWjE Each. ( Notonectici i??<m.)NOTONECTA Lin. 3 sp. A^. glauca L. Curtis, 10.Cylitidric-oval ; fore tarsi 3-jointed ; hind tibia without ungues. (My fig. 119.1.)Plow Stephh. Plea Leach. 1 sp. N. minutissima Fourcc. Pz. 2. 12.Ovate-quadrate ; fore tarsi 3-jointed, hind tarsi with ungues.SIGARA Leach. Notonecta L. 1 sp. TV. minutissima \,.Anterior tarsi l-jointed; scutellum distinct.Corona Geoffrr. SiGARA p. Fab. 10 sp. N. striata L.'mn. Donov. pi. 176.Anterior tarsi l-jointed; scutellum not distinct.Family 2. NEPIDjE Leach.NAUCORIS Geoffrr. Nepa p. Linn. 1 sp. N. Cimicoides L. Don. pi. 381.Body oval, depressed, without anal setae.Nea Lin7i. Hera p. Geoffrr. 1 sp. N. cinerea L. Curtis, 700.Body broad, flat, with too long anal set. (My fig. 119. 10.)Tanagra Far. Nepa p. Linn. 1 sp. A^. linearis L. Curtis, 281.Body linear, with two long anal seta;.Sect. II. AuRocoRisA JFestw. (Geoocorisa Latr.)Family 1. (or 3.) GULGVLIDJE.(There is no British species in this family.)Family 2. (or 4.) ACANTHIIDJE Leach. (Riparii Burm.)APHELOCHEIRUS ?Fes<z«. Naucoris p. ^mc<. 1 sp. N. festivals Val.Antennas very short ; hind legs senatorial. My frontispiece, Vol. I. fig. 7.Cynthia Latr. Sala Far. 10 sp. Ci. salvator Linn. My fig. 120. 10.Antennae of moderate size ; legs formed for running. Curtis, 548.Family 3. (or 5.) HYDROMETRWJE Leach. (Ploteres Latr.Hydrodromici Burm. Amphi arises L. Dufour.)TjvT^noTVTT^Tti A f Lot. 1796., nee Fab. S. Rh. "1 , >-< o^ tHYDllOMETRA{ , ' 1- 1 sp. C. Stagnoru7n L,.Limnobates Burm. J y •-m^Linear, first and second joints of antenna; short, third longest ; legs formed forwalking. Curtis, 32. (My fig. 120. 6.)Vela Latr, Htdrometra p. Fab. 1 sp. C. Rotulorum L. Curtis, 2.Basal joint of antennae longest ; legs moderate, placed at equal distances apartformed for rowing.MICROVELIA West. Hydroessa Burm. 1 sp. V. pygmies Duf.Last joint of antennae longest, intermediate joints short ; legs of equal length,short; thighs simple. Curtis, 681.Terris Fa. 1794. Hydrometra i?Mr»i. §• Fat. S. R. 6 sp. C. lacustris L.Basal joint of antennae longest ; four hind legs very long, at a great distance fromthe fore legs. Curtis, 553. (My fig. 120. 2.)Herbs Walk. Lyg^us p. Fall. 1 sp. Lyg. pusillus Fall.Ovate, depressed ; ocelli two ; hind legs curved ; tarsal ungues apical ; scutellum/ 4120 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.distinct; apical membrane veinless. West. in Ann. Soc. Fr. 1834, pi. 6.fig. 6.Family 4. (or 6.) REDUVIID^IL Stepli. (Reducing Burm.)REDUVIUS Fafcr. Opsic^tus jfiT/***;. 1 sp. R. persoiiatus 'Lynn.Antennae 4-jointed, basal joint short, second long, subclavate, third twice as longas second, fourth as long as all the rest, capillary ; proboscis short, stout ;eyes large ; wings ample. My fig. 120. 15.Corals Curt. CoLi.icoRis Hahn. 1 sp. C. subalterns De G. Curt. 453.Proboscis not reaching beyond the fore legs ; antennae 8-jointed, first, third, fifth,and seventh minute, second longest, fourth and sixth short; eyes small, remote; wings mostly rudimental.PROSTEMMA Lap. Postea L. Duf. 1 sp. Red. guttula Fab.Fore legs thick ; femora spined ; tibiaj with an apical pulvillus ; basal joint ofantenna? slightly elongated, second very short, three others long, the thirdlongest ; wing-covers sometimes rudimental. Curtis, 684.PYGOLAMPIS Germar. Ochetopus Hahn. 1 sp. P. denticulatus Germ.Narrow ; head oblong ; antennae strongly elbowed, apical joints incurved ; facespined. Hahn, W. I. t. 28.PLOIARIA Scop. Gerris Burm. 3 sp. Cim. vagahuiuhis De G.Fore legs very short ; coxa elongated ; four hind legs exceedingly long andslender. De G. Mem. torn. iii. pi. 17. f. 1.■»T . xiTf. r . f Nabis and Actus Hahii.'X t.* t^ ,NABIS Latr. -I Ti r^- 7 r 6 sp. M. pagans Tab.'^^■^^ \ Reduviolus isTirfcy. JAnterior tibia with an apical cushion ; proboscis slender, extending to hind legs.Hahn, W. I. t. 6.Family 5. (or 7.) CIMICIBJE West. (Cimicidre p. Leach.Membranes p. Latr., Burma')CIMEX Linn. AcANTHiA Fahr. 4 sp. C. lectularius L. Curtis, 569.Abdomen nearly circular ; wing-covers very short, scaly ; wings wanting. (Myfig. 121. 1.)Family 6. (or 8.) T/iVC/Z)^ West. C Phymatites, Tingidites,and Incites p. Lap. Membranes p. Latr., Burm.)Aneurism Curt. Abates p. Fab. I sp. A. laves Fall. Curtis, 86.Antenna with the terminal joint longest ; tarsi 2-jointed ; hem elytra veinless.Aratus Fab. Cimex p. Linn. 3 sp. C. depressus Fab. Curtis, 230.Antennae with the second joint longest ; tarsi 2-jointed; hem elytra not coveringthe abdomen, strongly veined ; scutellum distinct.Tinges Fab. Catoplatus Spin. 12 sp. C. Cardui Linn. Curtis, 741.Ovate, depressed; antenna; naked, with the third joint longest ; prothorax scarcelydilated at the sides, extending triangularly behind, like a scutellum, with threeelevated lines.T.TT-.m./r» r,, T-. o r. f AsPIDOTOMA Crit. "1 ,- , -^ j ixr 1 ™,PIESMA,S^F. §• Serv. | Zosmerus £«;,.§• 5«rm. | - ^P-^- '■°/"<«^« Wolff.Thorax sub quadrate, not carinated nor hooded ; front of head with two short corurgent horns ; scutellum distinct, hem elytra with distinct apical membrane;Wolff, Icon. C. f. 125./HETEROPTERA. CAPSIDiE. 121Narrow ; anteniiEe short ; thorax not dilated at the sides, nor 3-carinate ; hem-elytrahomogeneous ; legs short.MONANTHIA Enc. M. Tingis p. Lap. 1 sp. T. clavicornis Lain.Sides of prothorax scarcely dilated ; antenna; pilose, last joint clavate. Pz. 23. 23.GALEATUS Curt. Tingis p. Burm. 4 sp. T. cristata. Pz. 99. 19.Prothorax much dilated at the sides, with a large hood in front ; antenna; long,slender, pilose ; creole of the thorax and hem elytra very large.DICTYONOTA Curt. Tingis p. Burm. 2 sp. T. Eryngii Latr. Curt. 154.Sides of thorax dilated, and areolate ; the antennae scabrous ; terminal jointthinner than the third ; prothorax with a frontal hood.ACALYPTA West. Tingis p. Panz. 1 sp. T. carinata Pz. My fig. 120. 12.Prothorax with the sides slightly dilated, 3-carinated ; antennae long, clavate,hem elytra meeting in a straight suture ; wings wanting.Family 7. (or 9.) CAPSID^ West. (Causing 5m;v«. Coreidaep. Stephh. Astemmites p. Lap.)Here Room A Zair. Capsus p. Fa. 2 sp. H. spissicortiis Fah.Narrow, smooth ; antennas with the second joint very thick and setose throughoutits whole length. Pz. 2. 16.Casus Fab. Ltg^us p. JFoIff. 4 sp. C. ater Linn. My fig. 121. 5.Broadly ovate, punctum-ed ; antenna with the second joint longest, clavate at tip ;wings and hem elytra perfect ; neck moderate or narrow.CHLAMYDATUS Curt. Capsus p. Hahn. 1 sp. C. marginatus Curt.Subovate ; head rather large, trigonate ; antennae with second joint longest ; thoraxsemicircular ; hem elytra small, ovate ; hind legs long ; thighs thickened. Curt.B. E. 693.TOrthonotus West., Hai.ticvs Hahn, "1■ \ EuRYCEPHAi.A Lap. olim, Bryocoris Fall. J3 .sp. O. rujifrons Fall. Hahn, f. 61.Hemelytra uniting in a straight suture, without any apical membrane; thoraxtransverse, quadrate ; antennas long, slender ; basal joint short ; head as broadas the thorax ; hind legs very long, slender.Locus Hahn. Phytocoris p. Burm. 7 sp. L. triguttatus L. Hahn, f. 4.Elongate-ovate ; sides of the thorax acute, elevated, margined ; head broaderthan long; eyes prominent; antenna; with the second joint not strongly clavateat the tip.Phosphorus Hahn. Globiceps Enc. M. 1 sp. bifasciatus F. ? clavatusL.?Narrow ; head broader than front of thorax, which is broadest behind ; legs moderatelylong; antennae with the two terminal joints short. Hahn, Icon. 1. 23.Artus Hahn. Phytocoris p. Fall. 1 sp. A. pulicaria Fall. Hahn. f. 62.Broadly ovate, thick, pulverose; antennae moderately long, second joint longest,third and fourth together as long as the second; wing-covers entire; hind Icsnot thickened.HARPOCERA Curt. Azinecera Stephh. 1 sp. H. Burmeisteri. Curt, 709.Narrow-ovate ; antennae with the second joint much shorter than the third,obliquely clavate at tip in c? •PANTILIUS Curt. Lupus p. H. Sch. 1 sp. C. tunicatus Fab.Elliptic, depressed ; head small, subtrigonate ; antenna; almost as long as thebody, third joint not so long as first ; fourth shortest ; hind tibia; smooth,tarsi very short.Asthma Latr. nee Enc. Methh.122 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.I.Y GV S Hah. Cime p. Linn. 40 sp. C. Cori/U Linn. Hahn, 18. 23.Oblong-ovate, shining, finely punctured j thorax rounded in front ; head muchnarrower than the thorax ; antennae with the third joint long and slender.(POLYMERUS Hahn differs in having the sides of the thorax straight and legsthick).Collectors i/oAw. — sp. C. agilis Wolff. Hahn, f. 182.Narrow ; thorax strangulated in front ; antennae and legs slender ; head as broadas the front of the thorax.PHYTOCORIS Fa. Cimex p. Line. 12 sp. CPopuKL. Wolff, 149.Antennae slender, with the first joint as long as the head and thorax, the latternot margined ; head broader than long; hind legs very long.Maris Fab. Stenodema Lap. 12 sp. C. dolahratus Linn. Curtis, 701.Elongate, narrow ; antenna very long, basal joint thickest, porrected, secondjoint longest, slender ; ocelli 0.Family 8. (or 10.) LVGjE Idle West. (Coreidas p. Z,eac/«,Stephh. Lygaeodes Burm. Lygajites and Astemmites p. Lap. )LYG^US Fab. CiMEx p. Linn. 1 sp. C. equestris Linn. Curtis, 481.Oblong; wings perfect; ocelli two ; legs all slender ; last joint of antenna sub-uniform.HETEROGASTER 5cA//;. Lyg^us Fa. 4 sp. C. UrticcB F. Curtis, 597.Antenna; with the basal joint shorter, fourth longest, slightly clavate ; eyes prominent; ocelli two ; ovipositor arising from the centre of the abdomen ; legs ofequal thickness.TTtTn nTT^z-i/AriTCi t^ii f Pi.ATYNOTUS Schill. ~\ , /^ j T' „PYRRHOCORIS Fall. -! ,, r ^ 1 sp. C. apterus Lum.| Meganotus Lap. J ' -^Obovate ; thorax broad, slightly narrowed across the middle ; ocelli wanting ;antennae with the first and fourth joints of nearly equal length, second thelongest; wings often obsolete. Curtis, 465. (My fig. 121. s.)TjHVPATfnrHTin f ApHANusZap., Pachymerus 5'<. i^. §- sto. "lMUS 7/ /> 1 Pachybrachius TTaA/i, Plinthisus West. V 25 sp."*■ ( Hyacinthus Lap., Microtoma Lap. olim. JC. Echini F. Curtis, 612.Ocelli two, fore thighs thickened, toothed ; first joint of antennae shorter, fourthlongest.Obs. The species, which are very numerous, differ in the form of the thorax :Pachybrachius Hahn (Icon. Ciraic. ) has it constricted in the middle; inPlinthisus West. (P. brevipennis Latr. ) it is nearly square, without anytransverse impression. H. Schaffer retains Pachymerus (previously employedin Cleopatra) for P. Echini, Pini, &c., and Aphanus (P. fabulousFall. ). Burmeister reunites them with the next into a single genus.G ASTRO DES West. Paymaster Schill. 1 sp. C. Abietis Linn.Fore femora thickened, toothed ; females with the last two abdominal segmentscleft in the middle ; abdomen flattened ; thorax dilated behind. Pz. 92. 22.A •vTrrirT/-w^/-«TlTC' T^ 71 f RhYNARIUS //oAw, PeDETICUS jLa/J. "| /-.AT TANTHOCORISi^aW. -^ „ fix ri. fSsp. C.NemorumL,.\ Hylofhila Kirby, LygjEus Fab. J ^Face rostrated ; apical membrane of elytra veinless ; stigma very large ; first andsecond joint of proboscis very short, third very long, fourth short ; ocelli two.Hahn, f. 58.HETEROPTERA. COREID^. 123XYLOCORIS Dufour. 1 sp. X. ater L. D.Differs from Anthocoris only in the two basal joints of the antenna being ratherlonger, and the terminal joint of the antennae slenderer ; the hem elytra aresometimes imperfect. Ann. Soc. Ent. Fr. vol. ii. pi. 6. B. f. 3.MICROPHYSA West. Loricula C^irt. 2 sp. L. Pselaphoides Burm.Very broad ; abdomen nearly round ; head advanced in front ; three terminal jointsof antennae nearly equal, second joint of proboscis longest ; legs slender ; hem-elytracooperated, short. West. in Ann, Soc. Ent. Fr. vol. iii. pi. 6. f. S.Family 9. (or 11.) COREID^ West. (Coreidse p. Zeac^,Stephh. Corrodes Burm. Anisoscelites and Cortes Za/j.)Corpus Fab. Svromastes Latr. 3 sp. Typ. verus, C. marginatus L. Curt. 174.Antennas with the basal joint flattened, second and third longer, slender, nearlyequal, fourth shorter, clavate ; sides of thorax not dilated.MEROCORIS Hah7i. Coreus Latr: 3 sp. C. denticulatus Scop. My fig. 121. n.Antennae with all the joints compressed ; first large, sugarcane ; the three lastnearly equal in length and thickness ; sides of thorax often dilated.ARENOCORIS i7«A«. f Tracts ia;,., C«r^ T 1 sp. A. Uterus Curt.L PsEUDOPHLCEUs Bum. J Curtis, 500.Obovate, depressed ; basal joint of antennas flattened, second and third slender,third longest, fourth short, thick fig. 121. 15.); sides of thorax not dilated./-itj/-vT5/-»c/-»i\/i A /~i J. r Rhopalus fam. 2. Schiller „ ( Rh. Schillinqii Scum.LHOROSOMA Curt. \ ,, „ , }-2sp. -^ ,^, , ,••/-.,• sJ iViTRMus ifaft?j. J ^ y {Ch. Arunmms Curtis.)Linear ; antenna; moderate, not elbowed, second joint longest ; legs moderatelylong. Curtis, 297.STENOCEPHALUS Latr. Dicranocephalus Hahn,Icon. 1 sp. L. 7iuga.v Fab.Elongate-ovate ; antennae with the first joint thickest, second and fourth equal,fourth not thicker than the preceding. Donov. pi. 218. f. 1.Aldus Fahr. Lyg^us Fab. 1 sp. C. calcareous Linn. Curtis, 369.Narrow; three basal joints of antennae nearly equal, fourth longest and thickest ;hind legs longest ; femora spined.NEIDES Latr. Beatus Fab. 3 sp. Cim. tipularius L. Curtis, 150.Linear ; antennae very long, elbowed, basal joint longest, second very short ; legsvery long.Curious Fallen. Lyg^eus p. Fab. 1 sp. C. Hyosciami L. Curtis, 481.Head rhoraboidal, narrowed behind; eyes small, prominent; basal joint of antennaeshortest, terminal joint stoutest, subfusiform ; elytra ample ; legs simple.RHOPALUS S'c/iiVZ. fam. 1. Corizus p. ^wrm. 3 sp. C. ca;jita<«s Wolff, f. 72.Differs from Corizus in the hem elytra being sub membranaceous, diaphanous withthick nerves, forming a quadrate cell ; seventh ventral segment covered by thesixth./-iTrnTTTr. rr 7 f KlEIDOCERTS WestlU. "1 . y r, j T, a^ „^Cyrus Hahn. | h^terogaster, fam. 3. Schill. J ^ «P- ^Vg- ^esedcB Pz. 40. 20.Hemelytra covering the abdomen, with the outer margin depressed ; apical membranewith slight separate nerves inflexed at the base ; terminal joint of antennasclavate.Family 10. (or 12.) Scuttle Ride West. (Sculati Burm.Pentatomidas Leach, Stephh. Pentatomites and Scutellerites Lap. )Subfamily 1. Pentatomides.Julia Fab. Cimex p. Burm. 1 sp. ^. acuminata F. Curtis, 704.124 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.Head elongate-originate ; legs smooth ; tarsi 3-jointed ; scutellum not coveringthe abdomen ; first and second joints of antennas very short, subcqual.ACANTHOSOMA C?<ri;. Clinocoris i/a/i«. 4 sp. C. hamorrhoidalis'L. Curt. 28.Scutellum not covering the abdomen ; tarsi 2-jointed ; antennae with joints nearly-equal,third rather shortest ; pro and meta-sternum keeled. (My fig. 121. 17.)II APHIG ASTER Sap. Pe nt atom a p. C2<r<. 20. 1 sp. C.punctipen7iis\\\\g.,grisea¥.Monasterium with a long porrected spine ; antennae with the first joint shortest,third shorter than second. Pz, 33. 19.EURYDEMA Lap. Trachea Hahn. 4 sp. C. oleracea Lum. Pz. 32. 12.Broadly ovate ; head broad ; eyes transverse ; legs long ; antenna? long, basaljoint oval, second longest.PENTATOMA Latr. Cimex and Asopus Burm. 15 sp. C. rufipes Linn.Subelongate-ovate ; head oblong ; legs smooth ; tarsi 3-jointed ; scutellum notcovering the abdomen; eyes slightly prominent. (My fig. 122. 1.)Ohs. Hahn has separated several genera from this; viz. Eysarcoris (P.errata, punctata'), alla (P. duniosa), Aria (P. lurid, custos, hides), andTropicoris (P. rufipes).CYDNUS Fab. Cimex p. Linn. 6 sp. C. hicohr L. Curtis, 74.Orbicular, ovate, depressed ; legs very spinose ; two basal joints of antennae veryshort, three last nearly equal.SCIOCORIS Fallen. Cydnus p. Fahr. 1 sp. Cim. umbrhius Pz. 93. 15.Depressed, acutely margined ; head large ; second joint of proboscis long ; legspilose ; sides of abdomen exposed ; scutellum moderate.Subfamily 2. Scutellerides.COPTOSOMA Lap. Thyreocoris Leach. 1 sp. C. globus Fab. Wolff, fig. 3.Scutellum very broad behind, emarginate in ^ ; second joint of antenna; very short.ODONTOSCELIS Lap. Thyreocoris Halm. 1 sp. C. scai-ahaoides Linn.Legs very spinose ; antenna inserted under the eyes, third joint twice as long asthe second. Wolff, f. 4.URTOCORIS i7a/(M. Odontoscelis p. Piw-m. 2 sp. C. fuUginosa L.'um.Legs very spinose ; antenna; inserted under the eyes, second joint of antennalonger than third. Curt. 685.PODOPS Lap. Tetyra p. Stephh. 1 sp. C. immcta Pz. 36. 24.Prothorax appendiculated on each side in front ; second joint of antenna; shorterthan third ; legs almost smooth.BELLOCORIS i/a/m. Eurygaster Z-op. esp. C. tnaura Linn. Hahn, f. 139.Legs slightly spinose; second and third joints of antennae of equal length.[GRAPHOSOMA Sap. Trigonosoma p. ^wrm. 1 sp. C. linea L. Wff. f. 1.]Order XII. APHANIPTERA Alrhi/. (Victoria De Geer. SiphonLatr. RoPiiOTEiRA Clciirv. Altera MacL., Lam.)Family PULICID^F.PULEX Linn. 17sp. P. irritans L. My fig. 11 4. 1.Labium developed, with articulated labial palpi.Obs. Ceratopsyllus Curt. (Ceratophyllus Curt. B. E.) consists of speciesin the type of which the antenna; are " inserted on each side of the crownLitera. CULICID.'E — TIPULIDiE. 125of the head, concealed in a cavity behind the eyes when at rest, andas long as the head, 4-jointed;" but other species introduced into thegenus are described by Curtis as differing entirely in this respect ; hencethe character, derived from the antenna?, appears to me to be merely specific.Some of the species, however (P. vespertilionis and elongatus),being of a much more slender general form, I have proposed for themthe generic name of Ischnopsyllus {Ent. Mag. No. 4.).Order XIII. Litera Aristotle. (Antliata Fahriciiis. HaltersClairvv.)Sect. I. Cephalota West. (See Vol. II. pp. 505. and 506.)Division 1. (Stlrps 1.) Nemocera Latr., MacL. (Tipularia; Meig.)Fam. 1. CULICWJE Leach. Suicides Macqq. H. N. Dipt.CULEX Linn. 20 sp. C. pipes Meig. Curtis, 537.Palpi longer than the'proboscis $ , very short ^ .ANOPHELES Meg. Culex p. Lin. 3 sp. Cut. bifurcated Linn. Curt. 210.Palpi of equal length with the proboscis in both sexes.ides Hoff., Meig. 1 sp. ^d. cinereous HofF. Meig. Abb. 3. f. 1.Palpi very short (J , pointed and thick at the base $ .Family 2. TIPULIDJE Leach. (Tipulides Macqq. H. N. Dipt.)Subfamily 1. Chiro?iomides West. {Culiciformes Latr., Macqq.)Urethra Me(9. Chironomus p. i^a&. 3 sp. Ch. plumicornisFab.Antenna; g plumose to the tip ; legs placed at equal distances apart ; sternumnot prominent. Stephh. pi. 42. f. 1.CHIRONOMUS*Mez>. Tipula p. Zmn. 91 sp. C. plumosus 1,. Curtis, 90.Four hind legs at a distance from the others ; sternum prominent ; last jointof (? antennae longest. (My fig. 124. 8.)TANYPUS Me/(7. Chironomus p. J'afc. 26 sp. T. otomzV/s Linn. Curtis, 501.Antennas 14-jointed in both sexes, penultimate joint longest; sternum prominent; four hind-legs wide apart.SPH^ROMIAS Stephh. 6 sp. Sph. alhomarginatus. Curtis, 285.Antenna slender, basal joint globular, eight following joints short, five terminaljoints long ; eyes emarginate ; trophi fully developed.CERATOPOGON Meig. Chironomus p. Fahr. 18 sp. C. Stigma Meig.Antennae <? plumose at the base, 5 terminal joints elongated, simple in '^ ; allthe femora simple ; second joint of palpi longest ; legs of nearly equallength; two submarginal cells. Meig. Zw. 1. pi. 2. f. 18.PALPOMYIA Meig. 9, Stephh. Ceratovogos B. Meig. 10 sp. C. spinipes Meig.Differs from Ceratopogon in having the fore thighs thick and spinose beneath.Pz. 103. 14.Our lakes and greater rivers yield a species remarkable for its wings incumbent,as in Ceratopogon ; but with the other characters of the genus, Chi. lacnstris,dilute prasinus horace vittis 3 ferruginous ; tibiis antics subfuscis (alls nudis ;alterius abides). Long 2 lin. S — '^k ?• (Holiday MSS.)126 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.PRIONOMYIA St. fS^^^OMyiAMeig.9 "1 6 sp Herat. fe,norafa F. Meg.Ceratopogon L. Meig. J Kl. pi. 2. f. 4.Differs from Ceratopogon in having the hind thighs thickened.Calicoes Latr. Ceratopogon p. Meig. 6 sp. C. pulicaris Linn.Femora simple, not spined ; one large imperfect submarginal cell. Meig. Zvv. 1.pi. 2. f. 17.(LABIDOMYIA St. Forcipomyia Meig. 9 2 sp. Cer. hi punctata lAnn. Meig.)ORPHNEPHILA Hal. Chenesia Macqq. 1 sp. O. devil Hal.Eyes confluent in front ; ocelli ; antennae very short, naked in both sexes ; baseglobose ; anterior tarsi elongated ; wings incumbent, parallel. Zool. Journ.vol. y. pi. 15. f. 2.Subfamily 2. Cecidomi/ides West. (Gallicoles Latr., Macq.')DIOMYZA Meig. Lasioptera A. Meig. 3 sp. D. fidiginosa Stephh.Wings with the costa thickened ; one longitudinal and furcate nerve ; tarsi verylong ; basal joint short ; antennas short, joints not verticillate. Stephh. pi. 42. f.4.LASIOPTERYX Stephh. Lasioptera B, Meig. 5 sp. Las. obfuscata Meig.Differs from Diomyza in having the basal joint of the tarsi elongate.CECIDOMYI A Zafr. Oligotrophl s Za^r. olim. 28 sp. Tip. Tritici K.Legs very long ; basal joint of tarsi very minute ; antennae long, especially in (J ;joints verticillate ; wings with two longitudinal, and one inner furcate nerve.My fig. 125. 3.PLANETELLA Wesftv. Planets Wlk. (G. Arab.) 1 sp. PL extremes Wlk.Antennae 9 12-jointed, half the length of the body, joints long, equal; twelfthconic, acuminate; thorax produced over the head ; legs thick, basal joint of tarsivery short.CAMPYLOMYZA Wied. Cecidomyia Meig. olim. 4 sp. C. /aiv>es Meig.Antennae short, not verticillate, 14-jointed; subcostal nerve furcate at tip, andtwo longitudinal furcate discoidal nerves. Meig. Zw. 1. pi. 3. f. 6.PSYCHODA Latr. Linaria Schill. 10 sp. T. Phalanges Linn. Curt. 745.Wings deflexed at the sides of the body with numerous nervures ; antennae vertus14 — 15-jointed.(S.G. A. Saccopteryx JTaZ., P. fuUginosa Meig., B. Psychoda, P. cellarsMeig. (my fig. 125. 9.), C. Trichomyia Hal., P. urhica, and D. Syco-rax Hal. , P. solace Hal. See Curtis. )ZYGONEURA Meig.? 1 sp. Z. sciatica Went. Meig. Zw. 6. t.65. f.l5.Antennae long, 14-jointed, verticillate ; legs long, slender ; first longitudinal discoidalnerve furcate ; upper branch of fork much curved.MOLOBRUS Latr.* Sciara Meig. 28 sp. Tip. Thomas: Linn.Antenna short, 16-jointed, filiform pilose; eyes reniform ; first longitudinal discoidalnerve furcate ; branches of fork nearly straight. Meig. Zw. 1. pi. 4. f.3." Chionea venetia Curt. Guide. 1164*'. 1. The insect I had here indicatedis a small apterous Molobrus, allied to M. longinus, but with icings and powersquite absent; the terminal spurs of tibiae obsolete: the thorax much compressedbehind, so as to seem conical from above ; the abdomen incrassate in the middle,the attenuate extremity recurved and furnished with the ordinary two linear obtusepubescent and free valves of ovipositor. I should not have hesitated to identify thiswith De Geer's Tipula atomaria, if the latter had not been represented as hairy.Litera. TIPULID^. 127LESTREMIA Macqq., Me'ig. DiAMESA Meig. 3*sp. L. leucophma M.Antennffi 15-jointed, joints globular, pedicellate (J, cylindric $; legs long;wings with a marginal cell divided by a transverse nerve. Meig. pi. 65. f. 16.A NA RETE ita?. 1 sp. A. candidate Yi.a\. PiniB.G.?Antennae short, 9-jointed ; eyes emarginate; ocelli three; eyes incumbent, naked ;a furcate nerve inserted in the middle of the costa ; tibia not spurred.Catch Hal. 1 sp. C. ladies Hal.Antenna porrected ; two basal joints thick, (^ 16-jointed ; joints globular, pilose ;antennae lO-jointed; ocelli three; furcate nerve inserted near the base of thecosta.Subfamily 3. MyceiopMlides West. (Fungicolae Meig., Macqq.Fungivores Latr. )Typhus Latr. Anisops Meig., olim. 4 sp, T. fenestralis Scop. Curt. 102.Antenna; short, jointed cylindrical ; wings with a central oblong cell ;second joint of palpi swollen; legs not spinose. (My fig. 125. 16.)Corcyra 71%. Odontophila il. 4 sp. C./?isca Latr. Macqq. pi. 3. f. 17.Body compressed; antennae short, 14-jointed, compressed; joints transverse;ocelli three, in a line ; nerves of wings simple.MYCETOBIA Meig. 1 sp. M. allies Meig. Meig. pi. 8. f. 10.Nervures simple; antennae with cup-shaped joints, much shorter than the body ;terminal joint of palpi elongated ; ocelli three, in a triangle.PLATYURA ilfe!>. SciARA p. Fab. 13 sp. So. linea ¥ah. Curt. 134.Antenna short, with transverse joints ; first longitudinal nerve with an obliquenervure at the apex ; palpi with oblong joints ; body generally depressed.SCIOPHILA i/q^/n. Platyura p. F. 17 sp. fmbriata Meig. Curt. 641.Ocelli apart, middle one small ; wings with a small sub quadrate cell betweenthe subcostal and longitudinal nerves ; antennae short.Leila Meig. 12 sp. L. nitidicollis M. Curt. 645.Ocelli three, distant, central one small ; wings without a sub quadrate cell ;antennas as long as the thorax, with cup-shaped joints ; palpi long.MYCETOPHILA Meig. Sciara p. Fab. 47 sp. Sc. lunata Fab.Ocelli two or ; wings without a sub quadrate cell ; trophi short ; antennarather short. My fig. 125. 1 1.LEPTOMORPHUS Curt. 2 sp. L. Walkerii Curt. BE. 365.Antenna with oblong joints ; terminal joint of palpi elongated ; ocelli three,central one very minute ; posterior tibia not externally spined.MACROCERA Meig. 9 sp. M. phalerata HofF. Curt. 637.Antenna much longer than the body ; second subcostal nervure continued to theapex ; ocelli three, close together.BOLETOPHIL A ifq^m. Message Cri. <? 3 sp. B. cinereaUoff. Ste.44. fel.Antenna nearly as long as the body ; second subcostal nervure terminatedabruptly; ocelli, three in a line. Curt. 581.As Chioneaappears to be one of the Terrible, I was clearly in error in supposingany connection with that genus." (^Halidaij Mss")" I find 3 sp. The c? antenna are as Chironomus, so that the additional transversenervure is the only generic character, the eyes being reniform in the commonestspecies, which I take for Ch. ohscurimanus ; even in D. Wallis, they are slightlynotched. A third species has an additional joint in antennae $ ." (holiday MSS.)128 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.Subfamily 4. Tipulides West. (Prostrate J\fetg. TricklesLatr., Macq.")TRICHOCERA Meig. Tipula p. D.G. 6 sp. Tij>. hicmaUs De G.'Antennae with the terminal joints exceedingly slender and indistinct ; legs verylong and slender ; palpi with five nearly equal-sized joints ; wings with fiveposterior cells. Meig. Zw, 1. pi. 7. f. 9.Dia Meig. 9 sp. D. aprilina IMeig. Curt. 409.Wings with the first and third apical nervures furcate ; antenna; very slender ;thorax projecting ; ocelli 0.PERONECERA C;/rt/s. 2 sp. P. fuscipennis Curt. BE. 589.Antennae not so long as the thorax, in the male 7-jointed, last joint small; shorter,and 8-jointed in female, fifth short, three following forming a mass ; wings withthree submarginal cells.NEMATOCERA Meig. Anisomera St. Cat. 1 sp. nigra Latr.Antenna; much longer than the thorax, slender, 6-jointed, four terminal jointslong ; palpi with a short terminal joint.PTYCHOPTERA 2l/e/(7. Tipula p. iinra. 5 sp. T. co)ita77iinata Ijmn.Palpi with the last joint very long ; antennae filiform, 16-jointed, third joint long ;wings folded at the anal nerve ; discoidal cell wanting. Meig. Zw. 1. pi. 6. f. 17.NEPHROTOMA Meig. Tipula p. Fab. 1 sp, T. dorsal F.Last joint of palpi elongate; antenna (J 19-jointed, fourth and following jointskidney-shaped. Meig. Zw. 1. pi. 5. f. 19-22,DOLICHOPEZA Curt. Letting Meig. pi. 1 sp. D. Syhicola Curt. 62.Antennae 1 2-jointed, slender, simple ; legs very long ; ocelli ; terminal joint ofpalpi long ; third discoidal cell wanting.PACHYRHINA il/acg. Tipula p. 5'<e;;A, 8 sp. Tip. croats L. Donov. pl.48. fel.Differs from Tipula in second posterior cell sessile, nasus thicker, and first jointof antennas shorter.TIPULA Linn. Livonia Meig. olim. 36 sp. T. gigantic F. Curt. 493.Antennas simple, 13-jointed, with whorls of hair ; last joint of palpi moderatelylong ; wings with seven apical cells.CTENOPHORA il/ef^r. Xiphura & Dictenidia 5r. 8 sp. Tip. pecfinicoi-nis Li.Antenna 13-jointed, pectinated in <? ; last joint of palpi elongate. Curt. 5.Pedicle Latr. Limkobia p. Meig. 1 sp. Tip. rivosa Linn. K. & S. pi. 4, f 4.Fourth joint of the palpi long and flexible; antenna 16-jointed, third and sixthjoints subglobose, seven terminal ones slender ; second posterior cell petiolated.SYMPLECTA Mdg. Zenobia Erie. Mtth. 5 sp. L. pHnctipennis M. .Wings with seven apical cells; anal nerve greatly bent; palpi short, with nearly equaljoints; eyes united in front; antenna filiform, 16-jointed. Macqq. pi. 2. f. 11.GLOCHINA Meig. ?/Siagona Meig m pl-)2 sp G. kucocephala Hal.^ (^ LiMNOBiA p. Macqq. J Meig. pi. 65. f. 5.Antenna 14-jointed; trophi greatly elongated; palpi long, 5-jointed.LIMNOPHILA Mace. Limnobia p. Meig. 10? sp. L. pictipeimis Meig.Joints of palpi of equal length; antenna filiform, ordinarily 16-jointed; thirdand following joints globular ; wings incumbent ; five posterior cells. Macqq.tab. 2. f. 5.CYLINDROTOMAil/aeg^. Limnobia p. l/e/(/. 8?sp. dislinctissima Macqq. t. 2. f. 9.Joints of the palpi nearly equal; antenna filiform, IS-jointed, cylindric ; wingsincumbent ; two submarginal cells, four or five posterior.Litera. TIPULIDiE. 129LIMNOBIA Meig. Livonia Latr. 28 sp. T. 3-punctata F. Macqq. t. 2. f. 7Antennae 15 — 17-jointed, filiform, terminal joints oblong ; palpi with the terminaljoint short ; wings incumbent ; four posterior cells.Obs. L. tenella, the type of Gonomyia Hgg., and L. lutea, modest, &c.,placed by Stephens in his G. Dicrunomyia, are united by Macquart toLimnobia.IDIOPTERA Macqqqq. 1 sp. /. pulchella Macqqqq. pi. 2. f. 3, 4.Nasus very short ; antenna; half as long as the body, with oblong joints ; basalinternal cell of wings divided by a transverse nerve.UIjA Hal. 1 sp. Ul. moUissima Hal.Antenna porrected, 1 7-jointed ; two basal joints short, thick, the remainderoblong, subequal ; palpi incurved, 4-jointed, last joint long ; wings Incumbent,pubescent.GERANOMYIA Hal. 2 sp. C. unicolor Hal. Curtis, 573.Antenna; 1 4-jointed ; trophi greatly elongated ; palpi very short, 2 jointed.RH AMPHIBIA Meig. Leptobhina Stephh. Cat. 1 sp. Rh. longirostris Died.Antennas 16-jointed ; clypeus greatly elongated ; trophi small ; palpi 4-jointed,last joint long ; wings with four posterior cells.RHIPIDIA Meig. 2 sp, R. maculata Meig. Zw. 1. t. 5. f. 11.Palpi with short subequal joints ; antennae 1 4-jointed, fourth, and following,globose, apart, and bipectinate in ^ ; four posterior cells.ERIOPTERA Meig. Eriopteryx Stephh. 30 sp. T.flavescens L. Curtis, 557.Wings rather long; veins hairy; legs rather stout; antenna 16-jointed, jointsoblong verticillate <? ; joints of palpi equal.Theophilus Curt. Ebioptera p. Meig. 1 sp. Er. atra Meig. Curt. 444.Wings very short, hairy ; abdomen of males terminated by two large lobes ;antennae short, raoniliform, 17-jointed; legs very long.Subfamily 5. Simonides West. (Muscaeformes Meig. FloralesLatr., Macq.^SIMULIUM Latr. Atractocera Meig., Kl. 13 sp. C. retains Linn. Curt. 765.Fourth joint of palpi slightly elongate; antennae 11-jointed; ocelli 0; basaljoint of tarsi very large ; wings large.Scat O Ipse Geq^r. Ceria ^-cojo. 8 sp. T. notatalAm. Meig. Z. 1. pi. 10. f. 13.Palpi hidden, 1-jointed; antennas cylindric, 11-jointed; eyes reniform ; secondposterior cell petiolated.DILOPHUS Meig. Bibio p. Oliv. 5 sp. T.febrilislAnn. Meig. Zw. pi. 11. f. 1.Antennae 11-jointed, four terminal joints united in a mass; fore tibia; terminatedby eight points ; tarsi 3-pulvillose, no discoidal cell.BIBIO Geq^r. Hirtea p. Fa. 19 sp. Tip. Marci law. Curt. 138.Antennae 9-jointed, cylindric, perfoliated ; eyes S occupying nearly all the head;fore thighs thickened ; fore tibiae terminated by a long spine.Assisted Hoffm. 1 sp. A. Haworthii Curt.Antenna 8-jointed, last joint very large, oval ; one basal cell emitting three longoblique nerves. Meig. Zw. 1. tab. 11. f. 16.K130 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.Division 2. Brachocera Macquart.Stirps 1. Notacayitha Latr.Family 1. (or 3.) STRATIOMWjE West. (StratiomydesLatr.)Paymaster il/e?>. Yafto Latr. 2 sp. V. ater Tai. Curt. 42.Third joint of antennae large, sub hemispherical, inarticulate, with a dorsalarista ; abdomen globose ; scutellum unarmed ; discoidal cell large.Argus Latr. Nemotelus p. D.G. 5 sp. M. cuprarius L. Curt. 305.Palpi indistinct, replaced by two points ; antennae with the third joint scarcelylarger than the second, and apparently composed of several joints united togetherwith a sub terminal seta ; scutellum not spined ; abdomen elongate-ovate.CHRYSOMYIAJl/acg. Chlorosis Z)mwc. 4 sp. M.poUtus'L. Donov. pl.l42. fel.Differs from Sargus in the eyes of the (J united, and the proboscis with shortpalpi.Remotely Fah. Musca p. Lint. 4 sp. M. panthtrinus L. Curt. 729.Third and three following joints forming an ovate-conic mass, with a terminalinarticulate style ; labium greatly elongated.CLITELLARIAil/ei>. Efhippium Zaifr. 1 sp. C. EphippiumV. Stephh. pi. 46. fel.Third and four following joints of the antennae forming a tabulated mass, witha terminal inarticulate style ; eyes villose ; abdomen very broad.OXYCERA Meig. Musca p. Linn. 9 sp. M. trilineata L. Curt. 441.Third and three following joints of antennas forming an oval mass, terminatedby a style composed of two terminal joints ; eyes ^ villose ; abdomen sub-orbicular.Stations Geoffrr. Odontomvia p. Sam. 5 sp. M. chameleon L.Proboscis very short ; basal joint of antennas much longer than second ; terminaljoints forming a fusiform club, without a style; scutellum spined. My fig.127. 1.ODONTOMYIA Meig. Musca p. Linn. 8 sp. M. Hydrogen L. Pz. 58. 19.Basal joint of antenna; shorter ; proboscis slenderer ; wings generally with fourposterior cells.Family 2. (or 4.) Beside West. (Decatoma p. Latr.Xylophagidffi Stephh. Xylophagi p. Meig. Xylophagii Macqq.)Sulla Meig. Xylophagus B. Meig. 1 sp. S. tnacuJata F. My fig. 127. ] 2.Scutellum unarmed; antenna; 10-jointed; eyes ^ apart.Bevis Latr. Stratiomys p. Geoffrr. 11 sp. M. clavipes Linn. Curt. 337.Scutellum 6- or 8-spined ; antennae 10-jointed; eyes contiguous (^ ; palpi obsolete.Acting Meig. Bevis p. Macqq. 1 sp. A. tibialis Meig. Stephh. pi. 46. f. 2.Scutellum 4-spined ; palpi long ; eyes apart in ^ .Family 3. (or 6.) C(ENOMYIDjE West. (Sicaril Latr.^Macqq. Xylophagi p. Meig.)Oesophagus iV/e2>. A. Nemotelus Z). G. 2 sp. A', ater Fab. Myfig. 127. 16.Antennae iO-jointed, basal joint long ; ovipositor of ^ elongated ; eyes distant (J.Litera. TABANID^ — Empire. 131Stirps 3. Tanystoma Latr.Family 1. (or 7.) TAB ANIDiE leach. (Tabaxm Latr. Hexa-charles Mcq.)TABANUS Lmn., Sc. 21 sp. T. hominis Lmnn. Curt. 78.Antennae 7-jointed, not longer than the head, third joint excised at base.HiEMATOPOTA Me!>. Tabanus p. i. 4sp. T. pluinaKsl.mn. Curt. 525.Antennae 6-jointed, longer than the head, third joint thickened at base.CIIIIYSOPS Meig. Tabanus p. lAnn. 4 sp. T. ccccutiens lAnn.Ocelli distinct; antennae long, 7-jointed. Donov. pi. 131.Family 2. (or 8.) BOMBYLIIDJE Leach. (Bombyliarii Meig.,Latr. )BOMBYLIUS item., §-c. 8 sp. B. major l My fig. 128. il.Terminal wing-cells terminated by nerves, parallel with the posterior margin ;basal joint of antenna long.Phthisis Latr. [Pleas St. Cat.] *2 sp. P. pulicaria Mik. Curt. 521.Terminal wing-cells extending to the hind margin ; basal joint of antennae short.Family 3. (or 9.) Anthracite Leach. (Anthracite Latr.Bombyliarii p. Latr. Nemestrinidae and Anthracite Meg.)Romania Meig. Stygian Meig. olim. 2 sp. An. Beelzebub F. Pz. 45. 16.Elongate ; antennae close together.ANTHRAX Fab. Nemotelus p. Z). G. 5 sp. M. Hottentoita'L. Curt. 9.Short ; antenna apart at the base.Family 4. (or 10.) ACROCERIDjE Leach. (Vesicles Mcq.Inflate Meig., Latr.)ACROCERA Mei^r. Syrphus p. Pz. 2 sp. S. globules. Pz. 86. 20.Antennae setaceous at tip, inserted close to the ocelli,HENOPS //%. Ogcodes Za<r. 2 sp. M. gihbosaL. Curt. 110.Antenna; subclavate, inserted close to the eyes.Family 5. (or 11.) Empire Leach. (Empidife Meig.)EMFIS Linn. 31 sp. E. tesselated F. My fig. 129. 2.Proboscis much longer than the head ; two submarginal cells.(PACHYMERIA a. Emfis B. p. Me2>. 2 sp. E . ruralis Meig. Harr. Exp.pi. 44. f. 4. )(PLATYPTERYGIA St. Platters Meig. olim. 1 sp. E. borealis Linn.Curt. 18.)RHAMPHOMYIA i7o^/n. Empis p. Fat. 24 sp. E. nigripes ¥ah. Curt. 517.Proboscis long ; one submarginal cell.(ENICOPTERYX 5<epA. Rhamphomyia p. Af«>. 3 sp. Rh. infuscata Meig.Zw. pi. 23. f. 4. )The second species of this genus, now first recorded as a native insect, from thecollection of Mr. Shuckard, is the Ph. fulva Latr. figured in the frontispiece toVol. L fg. 9.K 2132 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.Hilary Meig. Tachydromia p. Fah. 23 sp. T. fascines Fab. Curt. 130.Proboscis shorter than the head; third joint of the antenna elongate; styleshort.BRACHYSTOMA Meig. Baccha p. F. 2 sp. B. hngicomis Meig.Proboscis shorter than the head ; third joint of the antennae elongate-conic ; stylevery long. Meig. pi. 22. f. 8.GLOMA M«f/. 1 sp. G. fitsdpennis. Meig. pi. 22. f. 11.Proboscis shorter than the head ; third joint of antennas globular.Family 6. (or 12.) Tachydromiidce. (Tachydromii Meig. Empidesp. Mcq.)HELEODROMIA* i/«/. f Paramksia 71%. | ^ H. stigma BahL Hydrophobia Mcq. J ^Legs simple ; proboscis short, thick, somewhat exserted ; wings with an obliqueapical nervure ; antenna; 3-jointed ; seta 2 jointed. Curt. 513.SCIODROMIA Hal. MSS. Heleodromia Mcq. 1 sp. H. immaculate Hal.Differs from Heleodromia in the proboscis being perpendicular, longer than thehead ; palpi short, incumbent.ARDOPTERA Mcq. ( Leptosceles Hal "I 3 ^. .^^^^^^^ p^j^^ \ [Leptoscelis Latr. g. Hemiptera 'Very narrow ; eyes large ; hypostoma linear ; proboscis short, thick ; palpi incumbent; seta of antenna very long ; wings with a complete central cell.Mcq. pi. 8. f. 13.HEMERODROMIA i7o/: Sicus Za/r. 8 sp. Ta. Mantispapa. Pz. 103. 16.Anterior cork elongate ; fore femora incrassate ; fore tibiffi curved (j?^. 129. 9.).TACHYDROMIA Mcq. (1827). Tachypeza Meig. (1830\ 11 sp. M. arrogantL. Curt. 477.Anterior coxas short; fore thighs thickened, serrated; fore tibise spined on theinside ; wings veined, as in fig. 129. 8. ; antenna; 2 jointed, with a long seta.PLATYPALPUS Mcq. Tachtdromia Meig. V. 6. 40 sp. Cal. puritans F.Differs from the last in having the middle thighs thicker than the anterior, andspined beneath ; transverse nervures oblique. Meig. 3. t. 23. f. 23.ELAPHROPEZA Mcf?. Tachydromia-Fa//. 1 sp. T. epliipjiiata Fall.Wings without an anal or discoidal cell ; three posterior cells ; legs simple. Mcq.pi. 8. f. 14.Drapers Meig. 5 sp. D. evils Meig. Curt. 397.Short, broad ; legs long, simple ; antenna; as long as the head, 3-jointed, thirdovate-conic ; seta long, angulated at base ; no discoidal cell ; anal nervestraight." Macquart has divided Heleodromia into two genera, but the name should beretained for the second division ; the type illustrated by Curtis belonging to this,and the name applying to their aquatic habits: (has r\oX, Hydrophobia been employedamong Crustacea ?). I would propose to substitute Sciodromia as thegeneric name of the first division. Meigen is inclined to unite them to Branchy; but the nervure surrounding the entire wing sufficiently discriminates them,Paramesia Macqq. is synonymous with Heleodromia, and P. Rohcrti seems to be //.fontinalis. The two genera with Ardoptera form a small group between Hemero-dromia and the proper Empida:.'' ( Holiday MSS.)Litera. HYBOTID^ — ASILID^. 133Family 7. (or 13.) HYBOTIDJE. (Hybodna; Meg., Mcq.Asilidae p. Stephh.)H YB O S inc. Acromyia sore. 9 sp. Tab. febris F. My fig. 129. 10.Antennae apparently only 2-jointed ; seta long ; hind femora thick and spined.OCYDROMI A Hoff. 6 sp. Oc. ylahricula Fall. Meig. t. 21. f. 23.Antenna apparently only 2-jointed, second joint short; seta long; proboscisslightly exserted ; legs slender.CEDALEA M;i>, E m pis Fa?Z. 2 sp. E. hyhotina Va\\. Meig. t. 21. f. 27.Third joint of antenna long ; style very short ; hind thighs rather thick ; proboscisslightly porrect.SPANIA Mej^. 2 sp. S. nigra Meig. t. 66. f. 1 2.Proboscis slightly exserted; antennae apparently 2-jointed, second joint elongate-oval; style short ; legs slender; two submarginal, four posterior cells.Ohs. Mr. Haliday considers this g. to belong to the Leptidae. {^Ann. N. H.^MICROPHORUS Mcq. Trichina Meig. 6 sp. Tr. clavipes.Third joint of antennae long ; style rather long ; proboscis not extending beyondthe head. Meig. t. 66. f. 10.RAG AS Wlk. 1 sp. R. unica Wlk.Like Microphora, but with the longitudinal nerve emitting a branch at theapex.CYRTOMA Meig. 6 sp. C. atra. Meig. t. 33. f. 5.Proboscis very short, conic ; palpi very small ; eyes contiguous in both sexes ;antennae 2-jolnted ; seta short; hind tibi thick at tips ; basal joint of hind tarsibroad.OPETIA Meig. 2 sp. O. nigra Meig. Curt. 489.Proboscis very short ; antenna? 3-jointed, third joint long, subfusiform ; setalong ; legs simple ; wings with seven longitudinal nerves, the fifth furcate.Family 8. (or J4.) ASILID^ Leach. (Silica Meig., Mcq.,Latr. )Conies Latr. Leptogaster Meig. 2 sp. As. cylindrica D. G.Abdomen very long, cylindrical ; tarsi without any pulvilli ; antennae with a terminalstyle. Meig. t. 21. f. 16.Doctrina Me?>. Era p. sop. 12 sp. As. (Elandicalu. Meig. t. 1 9. f. 24.Style of antennae obtuse, 2-jointed ; tarsi with two pulvilli ; abdomen long, sub-elevate.DASYPOGON Meig. Era p. Scop. 2 sp. D. Diadems Fab.Style of antennae conical ; tarsi with two pulvilli ; palpi short, inarticulate. St.pi. 45. f. 1.LEPTARTHRUS Sfeph. Cat. Dastposon p. Curt. 1 sp. D. hrevirostris M.Differs from Dasypogon in having the basal joint of the hind tarsi J greatly elongatedand slender. Curt. 153.LAPHRIA Fab. Asilus p. Linn. 1 sp. L. nigra Meig. Curt. 94.Antennae without a terminal style ; thighs often thickened ; tibice curved ; fourthposterior cell of the wing closed, submarginal cell appendiculated.Sills Linn. 15 sp. A. crabronifurmis L. Curt. 46.Terminal style of antennas setaceous, naked ; tarsi with two pulvilli ; wings withtwo discoidal cells.134 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.Family 9. (or 15.) MTDASWyE West. ( Mydasii Z-a<r. My-david'sp. Leach.)There is no British species of this family.Family 10. (or 16.) THE RE Vide WesUv. (Xylotomjc Miff.,Mcq. Mydasida p. Leach. )THERE VA Latr. Nemotelus p. D. G. 11 sp. Mttsca plebeia L.Antennae as long as the head, terminal joints elongate-conic ; style 2-jointed.Meig. pi. 15. f. 8.Family 11. (or 17.) LEPTIDjE West. (Reptiles Meig.,Mcq. Rhagionida? Leach. )LEPTIS Aleig. Rhagio Fab. 8 sp. M. scolopaceu Linn. Curt. 705.Palpi incurved; style of antennae terminal.CHRYSOPILUS A/cg. Lpptis i^a6. 5 sp. L. Diadems Inn. Curt. 713.Palpi recurved; style of antennae terminal.ATHERIX M!2>. LEPTisp. Fa. 5 sp. L. Ibis Fah. Curt. 26.Palpi porrected ; third joint of antennae very short, semi globular ; style dorsal.Obs. Spania, referred to this family by Macquart and Haliday, differs inhaving only 2-jointed antennas.Family 12. (or 18.) DOLICHOPIDuE Leach. (Dolicho-potes Meig.)MACH^RIUM J/a7. 1 sp. M. maritime Hal. Z. I. pi. 15. f. 11.Third joint of antennae very long, excised beneath ; apex linear ; style short,2-jointed ; eyes apart ; wings parallel, incumbent.DIAPHORUS ilfe>. esp. D. favocinctus Ho ff.Antennae with third joint patelliform,'with a dorsal villose seta ; eyes confluent ;abdomen S with two filaments at the tip ; wings incumbent, parallel. Meig.pi. 34. f, 8.PSILOPUS Meig. Dolichopus p. Fab. 7 sp. D. platgpierus Fab.Antennae with third joint patelliform, villose, with a dorsal villose deflexed seta;eyes apart ; wings incumbent, parallel, with a curved transverse nerve at thetip. Meig. pi. 34. f. 14.CHRYSOTUS Meig. Dolichopus p. Fab. 9 sp. Z>. nigripes Fab.Antennae with third joint patelliform, villose, with an apical, villose, deflexed seta ;eyes apart ; abdomen $ with two filaments at the tip ; wings incumbent, sub-intricate.Meig. t. 35. f. 10.RHAPHIUM iV/ei>. 5sp. R.longicorneMeig. Curt. 568.Antennae approximate, with third joint in $ elongate, compressed ; style subapi-cal, 2-jointed ; eyes not confluent ; wings incumbent, parallel.Porphyries Meig. Dolichopus p. Fab. 28 sp. D. diaphanous Fab.Antennae, with third joint oblong-acute, with a villose deflexed seta ; eyes apart ;abdomen $ with two filaments ; wings incumbent, parallel. Curt. 541.Obs. Mr. Haliday retains P. diaphanous as the type of his subgenus Porphyries,but Macquart gives it as that of his genus Argyra. P. pallidusMeig. is the type of Haliday's subgenus Plenteous ; and P. riparius Meig.that of his subgenus Perishing ( Z. /. )Litera. SCENOPINID^ — SYRPHIDiE. 135MEDETERUSMejy. Hydrofhorvs Fall. 21 sp. M. regius Fab. Curt. 162.Antennae with third joint short, subovate, compressed, with a dorsal 2-jointedseta; eyes apart ; abdomen <J with two filaments; legs long and slender ; wingsincumbent, parallel.Obs. Macquart separates H. nebulous Fall, and some others under Fallen'sgeneric name Hydrophobia.SYBISTROMA Meic/. Dolichopus Ahr. 2 sp. D. disciples Ahr.Third joint of antennae oblong, compressed ; seta long, 2-jointed, basal jointlongest. Meig. pi. 34. f. 19.Delicious Latr. Satyrs Meig, olim. 52 sp. M. nobilltatus Linn.Third joint of antenna trigonate, with a pubescent dorsal seta ; eyes apart ; abdomen$ with two membranous ciliated plates. My fig. 130. 9.ORTHOCHILE Latr, 1 sp. O. nigroccerulea Latr.Proboscis exserted, perpendicular ; palpi acute, incumbent. Meig. pi. 36. f. 5.Family 13. (or 19.) SCENOPINIDuE West. (Scenopinii,Meigacephali, Platypezina, and Oxypterae Meig. )SCENOPINUS Za^r. Atrichia Schr. 8 sp. M. fenestralis "L. Curt. 609.Head moderate ; eyes confluent (J ; antennae 3-jointed ; third joint elongate-conic; seta O ; first longitudinal nerve emitting a branch at the tip ; legssimple.Ranunculus Latr. Cephalops Fall. 12 sp. P. campestris Latr. Curt. 757.Head large, subglobose ; abdomen small ; apex incurved in ^ > third joint of antennaeovate or acute, with a long basal seta.Calamus Wlk. Atelenevra Mcq. 2 sp. Pip. spurious Fall.Differs from Ranunculus in wanting the large sundial cell. Meig. pi. 33.f. 24.PLATYPEZA Meig. ] 1 sp. P. bolting Fall. Meig. pi. 33. f. 10.Last joint of antennae oval, with a long terminal seta; middle vein of wings emittingan oblique branch at the tip.CALLOMYIA Meig. 5 sp. C. amans. Meig. t. 33. f. 13.Head moderate ; third joint of antennae pointed at tip, with a long terminal seta ;middle longitudinal nerve simple at tip ; hind tarsi dilated.ATELESTUS Wlk. Ent. Mag. 18. 229. 1 sp. A, syhicola Wlk.Callomyice' et Platypezae similis, at alarum nervi aliter coUocati " !! ( Walker,I. c.)LONCHOPTERA Meig. Dips Fall. 8 sp. L. lutea Pz. Curt. 761.Wings long, pointed at the tip fig. 132. 13.) ; discoidal cell O.Stirps 4. Athericera Latr.Family 1. (or 20.) S Fit P H ID ^ Leach. (Syrphici Meig.)Cell A Far. Conops p. Schr. 1 sp. M. Cojiopsoides'L. Curt. 186.Head with a frontal horn supporting the antennae.MICRODON niig. Nephritis Latr. 3 sp. M. apiformis D. G. Curt. 70.Short, thick ; antennae frontal, long ; scutellum with two points.Chrysostom Mei. Milesia p. Fa. 8 sp. M.bicinctnml Curt.653.Abdomen ovate, subdepressed ; antennae frontal, second joint long; scutellumunarmed.K 4136 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.Parus Fah. ] sp. P. ahdoyninalis F.? Meig. pi. 27. f. 12.Antenna; inserted upon a short pedicle, second joint long; abdomen linear.Paratus Latr. Sc^va p. Fab. 6 sp, P. aratus Meig. Curt. 593.Antennae frontal, short, second joint short, third long ; face convex, without a protuberance; abdomen elongate-ovate.ASCIAMe;>. Milesia p. J'a//.- 6 sp. M. podagricaV. Pz. 59. 16.Abdomen subclavate ; first and second joints of antennae very short, third oblong-ovate; nose prominent.SPHEGINA Meig. Milesia p. Fall. 3 sp. M. chaises Fall.Abdomen clavate ; first and second joints of antenna; very short, third rounded ;hind thighs thick. Meig. pi. 28. f 5.Duos Meig. filling. Mag.) Milesia p. Fah. 1 sp. S. conopseus F.Abdomen clavate ; head obtusely conical ; antennae distant ; hind legs simple.Pz. 45. 22.BACCHA civic. 6sp. B. ehngataV. Curt. 737.Abdomen much elongated, clavate ; face obliquely truncate beneath ; hind legsthin.Humerus im'(>. Pipiza p. Pa//. 6 sp. E. ornatiis M. Curtis, 749.Abdomen elongate-ovate ; segments constricted ; hind thighs thick, spinose ;tibiffi bent ; scutellum subdenticulate.XYLOTA Meig. (A.) Syria Enc. M. §• Mcq. 1 sp. M. pipes L.Hind thighs elongate-ovate, dilated at tip ; basal joint of hind tarsi short, dilated ;face scarcely tubercled ; eyes with a large portion not united behind in J ;palpi conical. Pz. 32. 20.MICRAPTOMA west (J™^ ^^^^^ ^^^^ } 6 sp. M. segnis L.Differs from Xylota in the palpi being subcylindric, and in the transverse nervureof the middle of the wing being more or less oblique, and posterior conte tubercledor spined. Curtis, 425.MYOLEPTA Neicm. Xylota p. Mcq. 1 sp. M. lutea Gm.Differs from the last in the posterior coxa being simple ; hypostoma porrectedand notched.BRACHYPALPUS Mzcgr. Sfilomyia Stephh., Meig.? 1 sp. HI. femorata L,. ?Body villose ; palpi short ; posterior femora elongated, spined ; scutellum notmargined.CRIORHINA Hoff. Milesia B. Meig. 5 sp. Cr. silica F.tll. Pz. 91. 21.Robust, hirsute; basal joint of antennae sub elongate, third broader than long;.style naked ; submarginal cell foot-shaped.Milesia Fab. Milesia D. b. p. Meig. 1 sp. M. species Fab. Curt. 34.Abdomen cylindric, sericeous ; hind legs simple ; face with a frontal protuberance; antennae with the third joint large', round ; style naked.FIFIZ A Meig. Eristalis p. Paso. 22 sp. M. noctiluca 'L. Curt. 669.Abdomen elongate-ovate, pilose ; head with a slight frontal prominence ; noserounded ; third joint of antennae sub quadrate ; seta short.Pilot Meig. 1 sp. P. anthracite Meig. pi. 29. f. 20.Abdomen short, ovate ; legs slender ; antennas with the third joint oval ; facewith a frontal prominence ; nasus porrected, notched at tip.RHINGIA Scop. CoNOPS p. iz/jw. 3 sp. C. rostrata L. Curt. 182.Nose porrected, as long as the head, notched at the tip.Litera. SYRPHID^. 137BRACHYOPA ^q^m. Rhingia p. Fall. esp. M cornea Pz. Meig. pi. 30. f. 6.Wings large; abdomen short, ovate-conic; head with a frontal protuberance;nasus short ; legs simple ; third joint of antenna round ; seta pilose at base.CHRYSOGASTER*7l/ei>. Eristalis p. F. 13 sp. M. viduata h.Abdomen depressed, ovate ; antennae short ; face generally with a protuberancein ^ ; third joint of antennae rounded ; terminal nerve of the first posteriorcell parallel with the margin of the wings. Meig. pi. 30. f. 1 7.ORTHONEURA Macqq. Chrvsogaster Meig. 2 sp. C. nobilis Meig.Differs from Chrysogaster in the third joint of antennae elongate, narrow, and theterminal nerve of the first posterior cell perpendicular. Meig. pi. 30. f. 9.Syrups Ste., Met ff., nee Fab. Chtlilosia Enc. M., Macqq. 24 sp. M. niJicornis'L.Abdomen elliptic, depressed, not banded ; third joint of antennae oval ; legs slender; tarsi simple in both sexes. Curt. 753.Cs: V A Fab. , Ste. Cat. , Curt. Sy rhus Enc. M. , Macqq. 28 sp. ( Sp. typ. Fab. ) Pi/rastri L.Abdomen elliptic, depressed, banded ; tarsi simple in both sexes ; sexual organsof ^ concealed. Curt. 509.Obs. Stephens gives S. ornate and festival, as the types of a distinctunnamed subgenus (1244.); they form division 2. subdivision 1. A. ofSyrphus, in Enc. Methh. Macquart unites them with Doris.- . „ ^ f SphjEROphoria rac. il. "I 6 sp. M.scripta'L. Meig. pi. 30.CHEILOSIAiZ-q/f. |^^ ^242. St. Cat.] J f. 35.Tarsi simple in both sexes ; abdomen fasciated, linear, very long in ^ , in whichsex the sexual organs are exposed.PLATYCHEIRUS £wc.if. Cheilosia 7/^^. (5'^. Ca.) 17 sp. S. scufatus.Anterior tarsi dilated in the males ; abdomen linear, fasciated. Meig. pi. SO.f. 31.SERICOMYIA Latr. Musca p. Limi. 3 sp. S. Latona L. Meig. pi. 31. f 9.Broad, robust ; third joint of antennae orbicular ; seta plumose ; hind legs notspined.TROPIDIA Meig. Eristalis p. Fall. 1 sp. T. rufomaculata. Curt. 401.Elongate ; hind thighs thick, with a strong tooth near the tip ; third joint of antennalarge, rhomboidal ; seta naked ; nose keeled.Merton Fab. Milesia p. Latr. 2 sp. M. clavipes F. Curt. 98.Robust, hairy ; hind thighs with a strong apical tooth ; face without prominences,third joint of antennae oval.Theophilus Meig. Eristalis p. Fab. 8 sp. M. pendulum L. Curt. 429.Robust, hirsute ; fourth longitudinal nerve greatly curved before the apex ; posteriorthighs simple ; eyes $ not contiguous.ERISTALIS Fab. Theophilus Leach. 17 sp. M. tenax L. Curt. 432.Robust, hirsute ; fourth longitudinal nerve greatly curved before the apex ; posteriorthighs simple ; eyes $ contiguous ; seta of antennae naked or plumose."Chrysogaster. — Macquart has generically distinguished the species of Meigen'ssecond division. But there remains confounded a species of peculiar characters;viz. Chr. discicornis ( $ — Chr. metallicus ^ ), with the front broad in both sexes —the labrum, palpi, and maxillae all nearly equal in length to the labium. Chr.grandicornis, I suppose, is in the same circumstance. The broad front has misledMeigen as to the sex." (^Halidaijs MSS.)138 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.Wot TIPFT 1 A C ff" J" Pterocera Mig. olim 5 sp. M. mystacea L.^ "^^ | Syrphus sp. typ. Fab. J Curt. 452.Robust ; fourth longitudinal nerve straight ; nose porrected ; antenna; with thethird joint kidney-shaped ; seta very plumose.Family 2. (or 21.) C ON OPIDyE Leach. ( Conopsarii iWei^r.Contraria; and Myoiiariae Macqq.)Colors Linn. 7 sp. C. vesicular L. Curt. 377.Proboscis long, elbowed near the base, and porrected ; antenna long ; ocelli 0.ZODION Latr. Myopa Fah. 2 sp. M. cinereum F.Proboscis long, elbowed near the middle, and porrected ; antennae short ; ocellithree.Myopia Fah. Conops p. Linn. 10 sp. C. huccata L. Curt. 677.Proboscis elbowed near the base, and again about the middle ; ocelli three.Family 3. (or 22.) Muscle West. (Musica; and Leach. Muscides, Stomoxydes, and Trineurie Meig.Myodaires Rob. Desvv. Muscides Macqq.)Subfamily 1, CreophilcB Latr., Macqq. (Calypterata; R. D.)A. TACHijfARiiE Macqq.ECHINOMYIA Bum. Tachina p. Far. 10 sp. M. gross L.Broad ; face naked ; epistome prominent ; antennae deflexed, second joint elongated.My fig. 131. 11.Obs. M. ferox Linn, belongs to the s. g. Fahricia R. D., and E. ursinato Servile R. D.MICROPALPUS Mac?. Tachina p. Me/y. 2 sp. T. fidgets Me'ig.Broad ; palpi short, slender, and terminated by a seta ; face 'naked ; epistomeprominent ; second joint of antenna; elongated, but not longer than third.G ONI A Meig. Vagina p. FcZ/. 4 sp. M. capital !>. G. Curt. 533.Robust; head swollen; face vertical; tarsal claws and pulvilli minute in bothsexes ; seta of antenna; angulated, its second joint long.THRYPTOCERA R. D. Tachina p. Meig. 7 sp. T. stipends Meig.Narrow ; face vertical, naked, not swollen ; style of antennae elbowed ; proboscisnot elongated.SIPHON A Meig. Bucentes Latr. 4 sp. M. geniculata D. G.Style of antennae elbowed ; proboscis elongated (j^^. 132.8.). Meig. t. 37. f. 24.Tria Meig. Camera R. D. 4 sp. Tr. dorsalis Meig. p. 40. f. 16.Broad ; second joint of the style of antennae short ; proboscis short ; abdomenoval ; antenna; very short.Memories Macqq. Tachina p. Meig. 7 sp. M. modicum F.Broad ; second joint of antenna; elongate, third scarcely twice as long as thesecond ; abdomen oval.Obs. N. radical F. belongs to the s. g. Origine R. D. ; N. puparum Meig.to the s. g. Panzeria R. D. ; N. 4-pustulata to the s. g. Neinortea R. D.SENOMETOPIA Macqq. Tachina p. Meig. 5 sp. T. hortulana Meig.Broad ; second joint of antenna; short, third three times as long ; seta notelbowed ; abdomen oval.Obs. T. spinipennis belongs to the s. g. Pales R. D. (Triarthria St. Cat.)Litera. MUSCIDyE. 139EURIG ASTER Mzcg'. Tachina Me?>. lisp. T. palllpes FallBroad ; second joint of antennae very short, third joint four or six times as long;eyes often villose ; face oblique.MASICERA Macqq. Tachina Meig. 4 sp. T. pruinosa Meig.Moderately broad ; abdomen cylindric, rounded ; face slightly oblique ; thirdjoint of antenna? very long, front slightly prominent.Myopia Meiff. Arabs H. D. 2 sp. M. leucocephala Pz. 54. 14.Rather narrow ; face oblique, margined with sere ; abdomen more or less conic ;eyes generally naked ; forehead very prominent.EXORISTA Meig. Tachina p, Macqq. 12 sp. M. larvarum L.Third joint of antennae scarcely double the length of the second ; forehead narrow(? ; first posterior cell generally open, at a distance from the apex of thewing.Della Macqq. Tachina Meig. 8 sp. T. modest Meig.Narrow, or moderately broad ; face more or less oblique, margined with setae ;epistome not prominent ; third joint of antennae not more than thrice thelength of the second.Machine Meig. ' 4 sp. T. consoling Meig.(Cinereous); antenna; elongate, third joint of antennae not more than double thelength of the second ; eyes naked ; style naked ; abdominal segments withoutsetae in the middle.Chrysostom Macqq. Gymnoch^ta 7?. D. 1 sp. T. viris Fall.Moderately wide (golden green) ; face oblique ; eyes villose ; abdominal segmentssetose in the middle.CLYTIA Macqq. Musca p. Pz. 1 sp. T. continua F. Pz. 60. 19.Antenna short, third joint scarcely longer than the second ; facial sets short ;head broad ; epistome prominent.MILTOGRAMMA Meig. Tachina Fall. 2 sp. T. punctata M. Curt. 529.Abdomen without sette ; antenna short, drooping, third joint twice the length ofthe second ; head of moderate size ; fourth joint of fore tarsi $ with longcurved hairs.Myopia R. D. ExoRisTAp. St. 7 sp. T. pacific M.Narrow (yellow-coloured); style of antemicE pubescent; abdomen cyhndric ;head nearly hemispherical; face oblique, generally naked; epistome prominent.ZOPHOMYIA il/ac(7. Tachina p. Afe;>. 9 sp. M. ireful L,.Narrow (shining black) ; style pubescent, thick at base ; head nearly spherical ;face naked"; epistome oblique ; eyes mostly villose ; abdomen elongate-ovate.Obs. T. aeneas M. and chalybeate M. belong to the s. g. Macquartia R. D.CASSID^MYIA Macqq. Rhinofhora B. D. 3 sp. T. galatia M.Narrow (shining bhiek) ; style pubescent, thick at base ; abdomen cylindric,without setJe at the middle of the segments; antenna; short ; eyes naked.Delia Latr. Sericocera Macqq. 16 sp. O. volvulus Fab. Meig. pi. 43. f. 19.Narrow ; face vertical ; head hemispherical ; antennae long, third joint cylindric ;style somewhat villose ; legs rather long.Obs. D. volvulus belongs to the s. g. Phyllomyia R. D. ; M. compressaFab. (lateralis, Pz. 7. 22.) toMentho R. D. ; and D. leucozona, Pz. 104.19.,and nigripes, Pz. 104. 18. to Thelaira R. D.140 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.PTILOCERA Mcq. Photo B. D. 3 sp. meJanocephala Meig.Narrow ; forehead narrowed <? ; eyes naked ; abdomen cylindric ; antenna; short ;second joint hooked ; legs $ of ordinary length,MELANOPHORA Meig. Tephritis Fah. 2 sp. M. morals L. Donov. pi. 419.Narrow, small, shining black, face mostly naked, more or less elevated ; style ofantennae tomentose or slightly villose ; abdomen cylindric ; eyes naked.LEUCOSTOMA M«>. olim. Eugenia K. Z). 4 sp. M. /oraZ/s Fall.Abdomen ovate; two basal joints of antenna very short, third linear, long;wings as in Meig. t. 41. f. 24. ; eyes naked.ERIOTHRIX Meiff. Musca Fab. 1 sp. M. lateralis Fab. Donov. pi. 31. f. 3.Abdomen conic; eyes hairy; proboscis greatly elongated, slender (Meigen,t. 41. f. 17.) ; wings as in Meig. pi. 41. f. 26.B. OCYPTEEAT^ R. D., Mcq. RHIZOMYZiE Fall.PHANIA Meig. Tachina Fall. 3 sp. P. curvicauda. Meig. pi. 40. f. 10.First posterior cell open.OCYPTERA Latr. Musca L. 2 sp. O. hrassicaria Fab. Curtis, 629.First posterior cell closed.C. Gymnosomees Mcq. Gastrod^e R. D.GYMNOSOMA Meig. Tachina F. 1 sp. M. rotunda L. Pz. 20, 19.Abdomen globose.D. Phasianete R. D., Mcq.XYSTA Meig. Thereva Fab. 1 sp. A', cana Hal. Meig. 39. f. 5.Cylindric ; abdomen oval ; first posterior cell open at tip ; second and third jointsof antennae subequal.PHASIA Latr. Alophora R. D. 2 sp. Co. subcoleoptrata L.Broad, depressed ; abdomen rounded ; first posterior cell closed, with a shortpeduncle. Meig. pi. 39. f 13.ELOMYIA R. D. Phasia Meig. 1 sp. P. cana Hgg.First posterior cell closed, without a peduncle,HYALOMYIA R. D. Phasia p. Latr. 4 sp. P. semi cinerea Meig,First posterior cell closed, with a long peduncle. Curtis, 697.E. Stomoxydete West. Dexiaires Mcq.Present St. F. Sf Serv. Stomoxys Meig. 1 sp. .S", Siberia Fab. Curt. 665.Seta of antennae bipectinated ; proboscis thrice as long as the head, recurved.STOMOXYS Fab. Conops Li7in. 1 sp. C. calcitrans L. Sam. pi. 9. f. 7.Seta 1-pectinated ; proboscis twice as long as the head, incurved ; palpi very short,HiEMATOBIA Desvv. Stomoxys Meig. 2 sp. S. irritans L. Meig. t. 38. f 8.Proboscis twice as long as the head ; palpi as long as the labrum.Diner Macqq. Delia p. Meig. 1 sp, D. iridescent Meig.Cylindric ; proboscis rather short ; second joint of antennae hooked ; abdomencylindric-ovate ; first posterior cell closed,f "Dkxia Mcq. nee Latr. X D rustica MeW| Della West. J ' °Cylindric ; proboscis short and membranous ; abdomen cylindric-conic, with twoseta; in the middle of each segment. Harr. Exp. pi. 41. f. 43,F. Sarcophagus Mcq.Sarcophagi Meig. Myophora R. D. 11 sp. M. carrara L.Third joint of antenna; thrice as long as the second ; style of antennae setose ;seta; above and below of equal length. Shaw, G. Z. pi. 107. f. sup.Litera. MUSCIDiE. " 141CYNOMYIA R. D. Sarcophaga Meig. 1 sp. M. Mortuum L.Third joint of antenna; four times as long as the second ; upper seta of the stylelonger than the inferior. Donov. pi. 471. f. 2.G. Muscles Mcq.Sicilia E. D. McjscA Linn., Curt. 32 sp. M. Caesar. Curtis, 549.Metallic-coloured ; face rather oblique ; third joint of antennae four times as longas the second ; epistome not prominent.Obs. M. Caesar is the type of the s. g. Lucilia R. D., M. regina M. belongsto the s. g. Portia R, D., and M. clavering L. and serena Meig.to Fyrellia R. D.CALLIPHORA R. D. Musca L. 7 sp. M. vomitoria L. Pz. 10. 19.Head depressed ; epistome prominent ; third joint of antennas four times as longas the second ; style plumose; abdomen hemispherical.Ohs. M. vomitoria is the type of the s. g. CalUphora R. D., and M. ceruleanand azure M. belong to the s. g. Melinda R. D.MUSCA Z. ?sp. M. domestica Umn. Harr. Exp. pi. 41. f. 44.Epitome scarcely prominent ; third joint of antennae thrice the length of thesecond ; style plumose ; first posterior cell reaching the margin near the tip.06s. M. vitripennis Meig. belongs to the s. g. Placentia R. D. (P. R. D.)Pollen R. D., Mcq. Musca p. Meig. M. rudis Far.Thorax covered with down ; epistome scarcely prominent ; antennas short,second joint hooked, third twice as long as second ; wings almost incumbent.Ohs. M. Lanio Fui., atramentaria Meig., and varia Meig. belong to thes.g. NitelUa R. D.Resembling Meig. Musca p. Lii. 1 sp. M. Meridian L.Broad ; antennae with the third joint twice or thrice as long as the second ; me-deisticalcell far extending beyond the base of the first posterior cell. Donov.pi. 471. fig. 2.CURTONEURA Mcq. Muse, vagaries R. D. 8 sp. M. 7naculata Fab.First posterior cell but slightly narrowed at the tip, reaching the posterior margin ;style plumose ; epistome slightly prominent. Pz. 44. 23.Obs. M. maculata Fab., and meditabunda F. Pz. 44. 23., is the type ofGraphomyia R. D. ; M. capella Meig. belongs to the s. g. DasyphoraR. D. ; M. Hortorum and importuna Meig. to Corelli R. D. ; M. Pas-quorum,stabulans, and Pabulum, to Musing R, D.Subfamily 2. AnthomyzidcB Latr., Mcq. (Mesomydje R. D.)Alicia Mcq. Anthomyia Meig. 16 sp. M. lardaria Fab.Style of antennae plumose; abdomen oval, setose, alulets rather large; wings extended.Harr. Exp. pi. 36. f. 52.Obs. A. lardaria Fab. belongs to the s. g. Macrosoma* R. D., A. lucorumMeig. to the s. g. Medina R. D., A. incana Meig. to the s. g. Fellaa R. D.,I think Desvoidy's genus Macrosoma might be retained ; the other genera ofR. D, which Macquart has here united, were too intimately blended." ( HolidayMSS.)142 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.A. errand Meig. to the s. g. Tennis, A. signata Meig. to Phaonia R. D.,A. pallida Fah. and testacea Fab. to Rohrella R. D., A. pagan Meig. toMydcea R. D., A. urbana Meig. to Felice R. D., and A. impunctata M.and modest Af. to Alicia R. D.SPILOG ASTER iV/cg'. Anthomyia Meig. 8 sp. Tv, qiiadrwn Fab.Style of antenna; with short hairs ; abdomen ^ generally oblong and setose,second and third segments marked with four spots ; alulets rather large. Harr.Exp. pi. 43. f. 62.Obs. M. uliginosa Fall belongs to the s. g. Rohrella R. D., A. perusalMeig. to Helena R. D., A. quorum Meig. to Medina R. D.Hydrophobia Mcq. Aricin.e littorales R. D. 31 sp. M. nigra Fall.Style of antenna? setose ; abdomen cylindric-conic, penultimate segment armedbeneath with two elongate appendages ; alulets of moderate size.HYDROTiEA * Zest'. Anthomyia M«^. 14 sp. M. meteoric L. Curt. 768.Style tomentose ; abdomen oblong-ovate, without appendages ; anterior femora(J with one or two strong teeth, posterior with a strong spine ; middle legslongest.Obs. H. palate is the type of the s. g. Blainvillia R. D., having unarmedfemora.OPHYRA Mcq. Anthomyia Meig. 15 sp. A. leucostorna Meig.Style of antennae naked ; frontal setse short ; abdomen oval $ very setose, !Jnaked ; thighs rather thick ; alulets moderate-sized ; transverse nerves near together.LIMNOPHORA Mcq. Anthomyia Meig. 8 sp. M. conjunct Meig.Style of antennae tomentose ; abdomen oblong, not appendiculated ; alulets moderate; legs simple.LTSPE Meig. Musca De Geer. 3 sp. M. tentaculata D. G. Meig. pi. 45. f. 15.Head spheroidal ; palpi spatulate ; style of antenna with the upper setae longerthan the lower ; forehead broad in both sexes ; alulets moderate-sized.HYLEMYIA Mcq. Hylemyd^ R. D. 15 sp. A. hilary Meig.Amulets small ; abdomen cylindric ; penultimate segment with two appendagesbeneath ; style of antennae mostly setose ; wings with a stigma.Ohs. O. hilary belongs to the s. g. Delia R. D., A. Cardui Meig. to thesg. Egeria R. D.DRYMEIA Meig. Musca Fall. 2 sp. D. obscura Meig.Proboscis rather exserted, with long, slender, elbowed lips ; style of antennas tomentose; abdomen cylindric, villose ; alulets small.CHORTOPHILA Mcq. Anthem. herbicol^ R. D. 2 sp. A. Sepia Meig.Head thick ; antenna; not reaching the epistome ; style tomentose or naked ;abdomen cylindric ; alulets small ; wings without a stigma.ATOMOGASTER Mcq. Azehdje R. D. 19 sp. A. triquetra Meig.Antenna? not reaching the epistome ; style naked ; abdomen narrow, cylindric ;anus bicarbonate $ ; alulets small ; stigma wanting." Meigen is surely in error in attaching so much importance to the hairy eyesas to separate occulta from this genus, of which it has all the characters; even H.ciliata has eyes evidently pubescent in J." {Haliday MSS.)Litera. MUSCIDiE. 143ERIPHIA Meig. 1 sp. E. aterrima St. MSS.Cheeks swollen and setose ; abdomen with the fourth segment obliquely truncate; middle tibiae curved with curved bristles.HOMALOMYIA Bouche. Anthomyia p. Mcq. 6 sp. M. canicularis Linn.Style of antenna; tomentose or naked; alulets small ; abdomen narrow ; epistomenot prominent ; abdomen without appendages beneath ; larva; furnished withlong setose filaments. Harr. Exp. pi. 43. f. 69.Ohs. A. salaries Meig., §'c., belong to the s. g. Fannia R. D., A. calicutto Philinta R. D., A. floral, pratensis, &c., to Delia R. D.ANTHOMYIA* Meig., Mcq. p. Musca p. L. 5 sp. M. pluvialis L.Style of antennas tomentose or naked ; alulets small ; abdomen furnished withappendages beneath ; epistome more or less prominent ; larvae naked. Donov.pi. 372.Obs. A. radical Meig. belongs to the s. g. Eagle R. D.SCH^NOMYIA flat. ScioMrzAandOcTHiPHiLA p. l/ei^r. esp. S.fasciaf a Meig.Mouth mysterious ; antenna approximate at base, wide at the apex ; seta naked ;abdomen 4-jointed, pilose ; wings without any transverse nerve at the tip.CMNOSJ A Meig. Musc a p. Fab. 16 sp. M. tigris Yah.Forehead broad S ? ; alulets small ; stigma wanting ; abdomen elongated, compressed,thick at the tip.06s. C. tigris Meig. belongs to the s. g. Caprice R, D., C. nemoralisMeig. to Palus R. D., C. means Meig. to Mimosa R. D. ^PEGOMYIA il/cf?. Fegomybje R. n. 14 sp. A. fulge7is Meig.Style of antennae tomentose or'slightly villose ; abdomen mostly cylindric (),with appendages beneath in (J; alulets very small.Obs. A. fulness Meig. belongs to the s. g. Chorea R. D., M. diaphanaFall, to Phyllis R. D.Subfamily 3. Acalypterce Mcq. fA. SCATOMYZIDES.Cordillera I FaZ/. Ocyptera p. Fa. 9 sp. M. ribera Jj. Curt. 485." I suspect Macquart has gone too far in uniting here all the ChoreellEe ofR. D. ; the genus Homalomyia Bouche, which includes Fannia, Philinta, Aminta,and Delia of R. D., seems sufficiently characterised, though we are ignorant howfar the singular character of the larva (long since figured by Swammerdam) extends.I find two species, apparently undescribed, of a group, I think, requiring to be distinguished,viz.Colombia. Abdomen $ obovatum, ventre concavo toto membranaceous (absqueplica aut linea coriacea longitudinal). Facies brevis impressa. Persona oblong.Labium sub-elongated (membranaceous tamen). Calyptra jam minima (ut inHomalomyia, division 2. Delia R. D. ) Antennae, pedes, quaeque Homalomyice.Sp. 1. mollissima." ( Holiday MSS.)f I am indebted to A. H. Haliday, Esq., for the sketch of the following distributionand notes, upon the acalypterated MuscidjB. I have derived most of thegeneric characters from the work of Macquart, whose arrangement differs materiallyfrom that given below, as does also that of Fallen and other writers upon the musica;.I " The species with naked arista, dilated palpi, and somewhat bristly legs, formNupharia R. D., e. gr. C. fratcrna. J^e/iwa has the arista pubescent. Hydromyza(Fall.) the tibia; naked." {Haliday MSS.)144 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.Body setose ; seta of antennae feathered ; face rather inclined behind ; epistomenot prominent, having two setse ; third joint of antennae oblong, truncated.Obs. M. pubera L. is the type of the s. g. Mosina R. D., C. spinimanaFall, belongs to Novella R. D., and C. albipalpis to Persia R. D.S. g. Chigastra Mcq. Corcyra p. Curt. — ? Cord, apical Fall.Seta of antennae naked or slightly pubescent ; body setose ; palpi often dilated ;face rather inclined behind ; epistome not prominent.Obs. C. apical is retained as the type of Cleopatra, C. nigra Fall, belongsto Delia R, D., C. fraferna, &c., to Nupharia R. D., and C. livensFab. Curt. 485. to Hydromyza Fall.S. g. Myopia R. D. Caenosia Meig. 1 sp. C. myopia Meig.Body setose ; abdomen short, curved, terminal segments short, third segmentwith valve-like appendages beneath ; style of antennae distinctly 2-jointed.SCATOPHAGA Meig. Scatomyza p. Fall. 22 sp. M. stercoraria L.Third joint of antennae long ; anterior margin of wings not ciliated ; head spherical; body setose. Curtis, 405.Obs. S. stercoraria is retained as the type of Scatopliaga ; S. litre Fall.belongs to the s. g. Seating R. D., and S. decorum Fall, to HalitheaA. H. Hal. (2 spa), the last distinguished by "Arista subnuda ; also ; tarsi graciliores ; femora poetica $ tubercle villas," type H.maritima Hal.THYREOPHORA ia^r. Musca Pz. I sp. T. furcata Meig. Pz. 24. 22.Elongate ; palpi spatulate ; forehead very wide, advanced over the antennae ; thirdjoint of antenna lenticular ; seta naked ; hind femora thickened ; tibije tuberculated.ORYGMA Meig. PsALiDOJiyiA Down. 1 sp. O. luctuosa Meig.Head elongate, triangular ; face horizontal, with two impressions ; legs villose ;antennae short ; third joint oval ; style naked ; thorax elliptic.CuELOPA* il/ei^. CoPROMYZA Fa/Z. 6 sp. C. frigid. Meig. pi. 56. f. 1—6.Oblong ; head rather small ; proboscis thick ; face short, very concave, veryvillose ; forehead very broad, flat ; second joint of antennas thick ; thirdsmaller, lenticular ; tibiae villose.S. g. Fucomyia Hal. Copromyza p. Fall. — sp. ? C. frigid Fab.Differs from Ctelopa in having the face and bite clothed sparingly with sets.S. g. Malacomyia Hal. —^—^-^ 1 sp. C. Sciomyzina.Differs from Calopa in the arista being villose, and the epistome acutely produced.B. BoREORiDES. (See Haliday in Ent. Mag. vol. Hi., Jan. 1836.)BORBORUS Meig., Mcq, Mycetia R. D. 9 sp. C. equina Fall. Curt. 469.Winged ; arista with the basal joint scarcely distinct, pubescent.S. g. Spheerocira Latr. Borborus p. Meig. 5 sp. B. subsides Meig.Arista with the basal joint scarcely distinct, naked.S. g. Altering Mcq. Borborus p. Meig, 1 sp. B. pedestris Meig.Apterous ; arista with the basal joint scarcely distinct, pubescent." Macquart appears to be in error in identifying with this the Psalidomyia ofDormer, which I consider to be Orygma luctuosa." (Holiday MSS.)Litera. — MUSCID^. 145S. g. Limosina Mcq. Borbovus p. Meig. 22 sp, B. sylvanus Meig.Arista jointed at the base ; second transverse nerve perpendicular.S. g. Neuroptera Mcq. Borborus p. Meig. I sp. C. pusilla Fall.Arista jointed at the base ; second transverse nurture oblique.C Helomyzides.HELOMYZA Fallen. Sulla p. R. D. 18 sp. H. rufa Fall. Curt. 545.Wings with the anterior margin ciliated ; epistome and fore femora thick andhairy ; antenna with the third joint oval ; style villose.S. g. Blephariptera Mcq. Helomyza p. Curt. sp. ? M. serrata L.Differs from Helomyza in having the third joint of the antennae orbicular or lenticular,and the style long, naked, or tomentose.Ohs. Heroine R. D., (sp. H. Suilloidea R. D.), Feria R. D., (M. serrataLinnet), and CEcothea* Hal. (4 sp., type CEc. fenestralis and pallescensMcq. ), are given by Mr. Haliday as subgenera of Blephariptera.HETEROMYZAf Fall. Thei.ida R. D. 3 sp. H. oculata Fall,Differs from Blephariptera in having the fore margins of the wings not ciliated ;forehead narrowed in S •Obs. Mr. Haliday refers to this genus the subgenera Lentiphora R. D.,Thalia R. D. (H. oculata), Clusia Hal., (H. lava Meig. nearly alliedto Heteroneura), and Heteromyza, (type H. occulta Fall.)Actors Meig. Helcomyza Curt. 2 sp. A. Castrum Meig. Curt. 66.Elongate ; head rather large ; palpi large ; face naked ; forehead very broad, flat,obtusely advanced ; antenna? short, third joint lenticular ; legs, except themiddle tibia?, villose.DRYOMYZA Fall. Dryope R. D. 4 sp. M.flaveola Fab.Palpi rather large ; face short, concave ; epistome prominent, a kind of hood extendingover the epistome ; third joint of antennae oval ; style finely villose.LUCINA M. Vorticella R. D. 1 sp. L. fasciata Mg. Curt. 621.Face naked, vertical ; head broad ; antenna? distant, third joint oval ; style naked ;abdomen depressed, distinctly 6-jointed ; hind legs long ; thighs thick,spinose.SCIOMYZA Meig. Dyctia R. D. 12 sp. S. simplex Meig.Head rather broad ; face perpendicular ; epistome not prominent, naked ; foreheadbroader than the thorax ; antennae distant, third joint oblong, obtuse ; abdomendepressed.06s. The subgenera Chceiocera R. D. ( C. albocostata Mg. , §-c. ), AntichetaG^cothea Hal. " Antennae articulo tertio orbicular ; arista gracillima, long,nuda ; tibia medije spinosa ; alee costa distincte serrata ; areola mediating minute."(Half" Heteromyza Meigen is an incongruous mass. Some, as oculata, have the spinesof the costa, though few and minute, still visible towards the lower edge; these,therefore, differ not materially from Blephariptera (Feria R. D.). H. oculata formsR. D.'s genus Thalia H. furcata may be taken as the true type; it is allied toActors, and, with that genus, seems to come closer to the type of the Sciomyzides.H. flava M. has, I think, considerable affinity to Heteroneura, with which I onceplaced it. I have pointed out the principal differences in the Annals of Nat. History."(Haliday's MSS.)LJ4G GENERIC SYNOPSIS.Hal.* (A. vitiate), Pherhellia R. D. (S. nobilis Mg., §-c.), Dyctui K. D.(S. cinderella Fall), and Medina R. D. (M. virgata) are referred to thisgenus by Mr. Haliday.TETANOCERA Z»Mw. Euthycera Zair. 17 sp. M. Umhrarum'L.Antennae as long as the head, second joint equal in length to the third ; face notprolonged into a muzzle.Obs. The subgenera Tetanocera^. D. (T. elate Fall), Pherbina R. D.(T. Hieracii Fab., reticulated Fall., §-c. ), Thais Hal. (S. obliterate Hal),Mimosa R. D. (T. marginal Melg.), Hydromyia R. D. (dorsalis Meig.,astoria Meig.), Chief R. D. (or Elgiva Mcg.,M. cucuUaria, &c. ), andIlion Hal. (I. linea Hal.) are referred by Mr. Haliday to the genusTetanocera.Sarpedon Latr. Baccha Fab. 2 sp. 5. Spheres Fall.Antennae longer than the head, second joint longer than third; face perpendicular ;forehead rugose.D. Otitides ?.Trigonometry Mc. Tetanocera Mez^. 1 sp. T. frontalis Mg.Head long, triangular ; face long, horizontal, nearly naked ; second joint of antennasrather long, third conic ; style naked ; abdomen depressed. Curt. 689.DORYCERA Meig. Oscinis B. £>. 1 sp. D. Gramimim.Head elongate, obtuse ; face convex ; forehead much advanced ; second joint ofantennae long, compressed, third longer, multiform ; style lomentose. Meig.tab. 57. f. 1 — 5.OTITES Latr. Sciomyza Meig. 1 sp. ? O. bucephala Mg.Head rather larger ; face rather convex, carinated j forehead obtuse, flat ; antennashort, second joint conic, third oval, as long as the second ; style naked.Tetanus FaU. 1 sp. T. myopia Fall.Head conic; face much inclining, with two impressions; third joint of antennaoval, rounded beneath ; style naked ; abdomen long, depressed ; ovipositor incurved.E. LOXOCBBIDES.CHYLIZA Fan. Dastna R. D. 3 sp. C. lepfogaster Fall. Meig. t. 51. f. 23.Epistola rather prominent, naked ; third joint of antennae oblong, obtuse; styletomentose ; abdomen and legs naked ; mediastinal nervure simple.PSILOMYIA Latr. | ^BLitiW?. i). } ^ ^P' ^^" •/'"'*'«"« ^' ^^- ~^- thoraxnaked; abdomen thin, 6-jointed ; ovipositor long ; third joint of antennasoblong, compressed ; style finely plumose ; mediastinal nerve simple.LOXOCERA Meig. Musca p. Linn. 4 sp. M. Ichneumon L. Pz. 73. 24,Narrow ; face inclined ; antennae very long, third joint filiform, as long again asthe head ; style tomentose.• " Arista plumage ; tibiae cilia prasapicali gemini." (JTa?.)f The species referred to Chine by Macquart (tom. ii. p. 371.) form the genusHydromyia U. D. {Haliday's MSS.)DIPTERA.—MUSCIDiE. 147LISSA Meig. Chyliza p. Fall. 1 sp. L. dolium Fab. Meig. pi. 52. f. 1 — 4.Arista villose ; forehead tubercled ; face with a carina and two impressions ; hindthighs thickened; abdomen long, the terminal segment incurved,F. OSCINIDES.PLATYCEPHALA Fall. Tetanoceea Latr. 2 sp. M. planifrons F.Head nearly triangular, broader than the body ; forehead concave ; antennaeelongate, second joint obliquely truncate, third compressed, pointed ; hindfemora rather thickened. Curt. 725.EURHINA Meig. 1 sp. E. lurid. Meig. pi. 55. f. 12.Head elongate, triangular ; palpi short, cylindric ; face short, horizontal ; antennaedistant, second joint elongate, third oval ; style naked ; abdomen depressed,MEROMYZA Meig. Oscinis Fall. 5 sp. M. saltatrix L.Hind thighs thick ; tibia; curved ; marginal and submarginal nerves curved,transverse nerves contiguous; antennas porrected, third joint obovate; stylenaked.Chlorosis iWet>. Tephritis Fa. 24 sp. C. Pavilions 'L.Face naked ; forehead tomentose ; arista pubescent or naked, distinctly 2-jointed ;abdomen oval ; feet naked ; costal nerve extending to the tip of the submarginal.S. g, Oscinis Latr. Chlorops Meig. p. 13 sp. M. Frit L. ?Differs from Chlorops in being generally black-coloured, and with the costalnerve extending to the extent-medial ; abdomen oval.S. g. Siphonella Mcq. Madiza Pall. 1 sp. <S'. albipalpis.Rather broad ; head hemispherical ; terminal lips of the proboscis long, slender,and folded back; face short; forehead tomentose ; basal joints of antennae indistinct; legs naked ; tibise curved.S. g. Elachiptera Mcq. Chlorops p. Meig. 1 sp. C. brevipennis Meig.Wings in ,J short, ^ rudimental ; thighs rather thickened ; arista thick ; faceshort ; epistola with two setse.CAMAROTA Meig. — ■. 1 sp. C. auriferous Hal.Head oval, depressed ; marginal nerve united with the mediastinal.HOMALURA Meig. 1 sp. H. tarsata Meig.Antennae inserted beneath a frontal protuberance ; scutellum large ; abdomenoval, broad, depressed ; transverse nervures contiguous.G. PlOPHILIDES ?,GYMNOPA Fall. Eristalis Fab. 2 sp, G. glabra Fall.Rather narrow ; terminal lips of the proboscis long, slender, and recurved, setose,pointed in ^ ; first joint of antennae very short, second rather long, thirdobovate ; style naked.PIOPHILA Fall. Tyrophaga Kirby. 6 sp, M. Case Linn. Curt, 126.Face not prominent ; mediastinal nervure double ; body shining ; palpi clavate ;abdomen oblong, depressed ; third joint of antennae oval ; style naked.S. g. Castella R. D, Anisophysa Macqq. 4 sp. 5. nigripes R, D.Proboscis thick ; palpi very small, terminated by a seta ; face carinated ; thirdjoint of antennae long ; style naked ; scutellum $ elongated ; legs differing inthe sexes.Obs. Mr. Haliday refers his subgenus Pandora (characterised by the diff2148 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.terence in the nervures from Piophlla, and the more convex fiice andthicker legs, Ent. Mag. vol. i. p. 169.) to Castella R. D.H. Besides.(See Mr. Walker's monograph in Ent. Mag. vol. i. No. 3. April 1833).SEPSIS Fall. MiCROPEZA R. D. \\ sp. M. cynipsea Linn.Abdomen subpetiolate ; wings spotted ; anterior femora and tibia spinose <? ;palpi rudimental. Harris, Exp. pi. 35. f. 43.S. g. EnicitaWnstw. Episcopus Wlk. (g. Coleopt. Stephh.) 1 sp. S. annuUpes Meig.Abdomen subpetlolated ; wings not spotted ; anterior femora and tibias spinedin $ . Curt. 245.Obs. Mr. Haliday considers Sepsis Leachiiii (cylindrica Fall. ) as better placedin this subgenus than in Their.S. g. Nemopoda R. D. Sepsis p. Fall. 5 sp. Cal. cylindrica Fab.Abdomen subpetiolate ; wings not spotted ; legs simple in both sexes.S. g. Their R. D. Cheligaster Macqq. 5 sp. M. patris var. o Linn.Abdomen sessile ; palpi filiform ; wings not spotted.I. Pervades.CALOBATA Meig. Musca p. Linn. 5 sp. M. prunella L. Pz. 54. 20.Head spherical ; proboscis exserted ; oviduct broad.MICROPEZA Meig. Calobata p. Fab. 2 sp. M. corrigiolata L.Head elongate, cuneiform ; proboscis not exserted ; oviduct linear. Meig. pi. 53.f. 6.Tenura Fa/Z. 1 sp, T. pallidiventris Va\\.Abdomen clavate ; face carinated ; forehead setose ; third joint of antenna elliptic,compressed ; style villose central ; wings large ; legs rather long.K. Ortalides.PLATYSTOMA Meig. Dicta Fab. 1 sp. Z>. Terminations Fab. Curt. 505.Proboscis very thick ; palpi large ; epistome prominent, third joint of antennaeoblong ; style naked ; abdomen oval ; ovipositor not protruded.Nephritis Latr. Aciphor^ R. D. 50 Br. sp.See Mr. Walker's monograph, in the Entomol. Mag. vol. iii. (No. 11. April1835).S. g. Acinia Macqq. Trypeta p. Meig. — sp. T. Leontodontis. Pz. 20. 23.Proboscis with thick lips ; epistome not prominent ; antennae short, third jointtwice as long as the second ; wings reticulated ; ovipositor depressed, broad.Obs. The subgenera Noeeta R. D. (T. guttularis M.) and Trellis R. D.(T. radiata Fab. Pz. 103. 21.) are referred to this subgenus by Haliday.S. g. Trellis R. D. Tephritis p. Latr. — sp. T. serratula Linn.Wings not spotted ; transverse nerves perpendicular ; palpi exposed, thickenedat tip ; antennae short, third joint twice as long as second ; ovipositor long,depressed.S. g. Anomceia Wlk. Tephritis p. Latr. 1 sp. T. Gaedii Meig.Third joint of antennae long, cylindric ; lower transverse nervure longer andmore oblique ; ovipositor very short j abdomen short, broad.Litera. — MUSCID.E. 149S. g. Tephritis Latr. Trypeta Meig. — sp. T. Arctic. Pz. 103. 22.Proboscis with the lips thick ; epistome not prominent ; third joint of antennaethrice as long as second ; ovipositor depressed, broad ; wings banded.Ohs. The subgenera Corelli R. D. (T. Article Linn. Pz. 98. 22.),Acadia R. D. (T. cognate and two other species), Tephritis R. D. (T.Arctic, &c.), Trellis R. D. (T. Wiedemanni), and Stare are referred tothis subgenus by Haliday.S. g. Urophora R. D. Tephritis p. Latr. — sp, M. Cardui Linn.Proboscis with the lips thick ; epistome not prominent ; ovipositor convex, elongated,villose ; third joint of antenna? thrice as long as the second, Reaum. 3.pi. 45. f. 12—16.Obs. The subgenera Aciura R. D. (M, Lychnidis Fab., §-c,) Euleia (M,Onopordinis Fab), and Urophora (M, Cardui, &c,), are referred to thissubgenus by Haliday,S. g. Ensina R. D. Myopites De Remiss. — sp. T. Socii Fall.Proboscis long, slender, with two elbows ; palpi elongated ; epistome prominent ;third joint of antenna twice the length of second ; ovipositor depressed, short,broad.Obs. The subgenera Sphenella (T. marginal Fall), Oxyphora R. D.(T.Westermanni Mtig.), O.ri/na R. D. (T. parietina Linn), Sti/lia R. D,(T. Absinthii, &:c.), and Ensina R, D, (T. Socii), are referred to thissubgenus by Haliday.ORTATTSF7/ -T ^^^odina, &c. R. D. '] — ? sp. O. vibrate Fall. Donov.\ ScioPTERA Kirby J pi. 467. f. 1 .Oral prominence small ; epistome not prominent ; antennae not reaching theepistome, third joint oval, compressed, thrice as long as the second.S. g. Ceroxys Macqq. Ortalis p. Fall. — ? sp. 0. UrticcB Linn. Curt. 649.Face perpendicular ; third joint of antennae concave above, rounded below, andpointed at tip ; arista setose.Obs. O. Article belongs to the subgenus Mec/telia R. D., and O. crassusMeig. to Melieria R. D.S. g. Herina Macqq. Ortalis p. Fall. 1 sp. H. afflicts Meig. Curt. 649.Face mostly very convex ; forehead slightly widened ; third joint of antennasprismatic, elongate, four times as long as second, reaching the epistome.Obs. O. Crash, &c. are considered by Haliday as a separate unnamed subgenus,and O. Singleness belongs to the subgenus Rivellia R. D.XJ'LlTil k* Meig. CuRYSOMyzA Fall. 2 sp. T. demandata Fab. Meig. pi. 53. f. 12.Head wider than the thorax ; palpi dilated; epistome prominent, naked ; thirdjoint of antennae oblong; legs naked.S. g. Simia Meig. Ulidia p. Macqq. 1 sp. T. basaltes Curt. Guide.Differs from Ulidia in having the third joint of the antennae oval and the wingsspotted.Mr. Haliday considers that this genus should be restored to the group Orahides.L 3150 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.L. Sapromyzides.LONCHCEA Fall. Musca Fab. 8 sp. M. chorea Fab. Meig. t. 47. f. 31.Margin of the mouth setose ; forehead narrow in <J ; third joint of antenna;oblong ; style naked ; ovipositor $ exserted.P ALLOPTERA*F««. ( Sapromyza Meig. | „,„6eZ/a/ar«,« M.L Sulla R. D. J 'Head sub-hemispherical ; epistome not prominent, naked ; antennae short, thirdjoint oblong, compressed, obtuse at tip ; style villose, or tomentose ; wingsvibratile, spotted.S. g. Silva R. D. Sapromyza p. Macqq. 1 sp. S. ohsohta Fall. Tephr. flava Fab.Differs from Sapromyza in the yellow colour of body, tomentose style of antennae,third joint of antennae elongate, and obliquely truncate beneath.S. g. Lycia R. D. (and Serena R. D.) — ? P. rorida Fall.Differs from Sylvia in the third joint of the antennae obtuse, and the wingsnot spotted.S. g. PeplomyzaHaX. (Ent. M.i\. 148.) Phyllomyza jE. M. vol. i. 1 sp. S. lituraHgg.Thorax as long as the abdomen, the latter oval ; legs short ; wings with blacklines, deflexed at the sides of the body. Curt. 605.S. g. Minette R. D. Sapromyza A A. Macqq. 3 sp. S. rivosa Meig.Body generally obscurely coloured ; style of antennae plumose.S. g. Toxoneura Macqqqq. 1 sp. T. fasciata Macqqqq.Head nearly hemispherical ; face carinated, a distinct upper lip extending beyondthe epistome, and rounded; third joint of antenna; oval; style shortly villose,transverse ; nerves curved.Lax A NIAf Za^n Musca p. Fab. 1 sp. L. ci/lhidricornis Latr.Palpi rather thickened ; face with a transverse impression ; forehead setose, thirdjoint of antenna long; style villose ; eyes generally with purple lines." All late authors have overlooked the strong characters which separate Pal-operaFall, from this genus.Sapromyza Fall. Palloptera Fall.TibisB cilia praeapicali. Tibias absque cilia prceapicali.Abdomen ovatum, terebra; valvular ^ Abdomenapiceattenuatumet departsliberia obtuse pubescenti- pressed, terebra exert subulata,bus subverts. valvular cohaerentibus glares.Spp. Umbellatarum, ustulata, uni^^color = saltuuni L., arcana, 3-macula.Toxoneura Macqq. differs from Palloptera by the sinuate prae-brachial nerve.It is founded on Musca pulchella of Rossi. The Ortalis (or Otitcs) pulchella of laterauthors is a different species.It is not so easy to show any strong character of separation between Pallopteraand Concha.Palloptera. Lonchoea.Colour yellow or cinereous. Black.Wings spotted. Wings immaculate."Ilaliday MSS.f " Lauxania should probably comprise only the species which have the first jointlonger than second of antennae (L. cylindricornis) ; the others come too near toSapromyza, and consequently the Minette; of R. D. are placed partly in the former,partly in the latter genus by Meigen.Litera. — MUSCID^. 151S. g. Calliope Hal. MSS. Lauxania M. 1 sp. L. scutellum Meig. See note below.OCHTHEPHILA Fah. | Cham^emyia Pz. | ^ ^ ^^.^^^j^ p^U(^ Estella R. D. J ^Oral orifice small, round ; face flat, naked ; third joint of antennae oblong, obtuselypointed at tip ; style naked ; abdomen oblong ; mediastinal nervedouble.M. Phytomyzides.Militia Meiff. Argyrites Latr. 1 sp. M. species M.Abdomen broad, oval, depressed, 4-jointed, silvery in (J ; head depressed ; foreheadsetose ; antenna inserted beneath a frontal prominence.LEUCOPIS Mezj?. Akthomyza i^a/Z. 4 sp. L. puncticornisl M-eig,Palpi dilated ; face and forehead naked ; antenna; porrected ; body whitish ; abdomendepressed, oval, spotted with black.AGROMYZA Fall. Chlorops Fall. 24 sp. ^. nigripes Meig.Oral aperture small ; face and forehead setose ; antenna; deflexed ; style naked orpubescent ; abdomen oblong ; mediastinal nerve double at base.S. g. Phyllomyza Fall. Agromyza p. Meig. — ? sp. P. securicornis Fall.Oral aperture small ; palpi exposed, subclavate ; third joint of antenna; broad,square, depressed ^ , large and patelliform $ ; style of antennae villose.S. g. Odontocera Macqq. Chlorops p. Pz. 1 sp. O. denticornis. Pz. 104. 22.Antenna with the third joint furnished with a point on the upper side ; stylenaked ; mediastinal nervure short.The groups of Desvoidy may be thus distinguished : —Antennas with third joint oblong or ovate ; disco-recurrent nerve near margin ofwing ; mediastinal nerve free.Third joint above impressed - Sylvia.S. pallidiventris.not impressed.Arista feathered - - Mineffia.longipennis = luctuosa R. D. ; fasciata i^aZZ. = rivosa M. =nemorosa R. D. ;testacea R. D. ; flavipes R, D.; lupulina F.pallida M. ; ? inusta M. ; grisea M. =palustris R. B.Arista pubescent.Front with an impressed line above antennae. • ?(calliope A. PI. H. preoccupied in Ornithology.) Lax. nea — scutellum,&c.Front convex.Wings incumbent . Lycia R. D. and Serena R. D.S. 10-punctata; fausta ; interstices ; rorida ; 4-punctata, &c. &c.Wings deflected - . . - Peplomyza A. H. H.S. litera.Antennae with third joint orbicular ; disco-recurrent nerve remote from margin ;valves of ovipositor concealed (allied to Heteroneura ?) ; no arsenical bristle ontibiae.Eyes orbicular - . . Scyjiliella R. D. ; Lisella R. D.1. flava L. ; 2. lutea; 3. femorella Fall.Eyes transversely oval - - . . Chiromyza R. D.1. fenestrarum R. D.The character by which Robineau Desvoidy distinguishes Scyphella is accidental.The eggs are remarkably large in this insect, about CO in number, shaped like ahen's egg, and reticulated, except at the small end, which is smooth, and boundedby a raised ring. When a specimen with fully developed ovaries is dried, the skinsinking in the intervals between the eggs, the abdomen becomes covered with smalldepressions, ' petits reinforcement spheriques.' " {Haliday, MSS.)L 4152 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.S. g. Leiomyza Macqq. Agromyza Meig. 6 sp. L. scalophagina. "•Body polished ; abdomen elongate ; face and forehead naked ; mediastinal nerveshort ; transverse nerves close together.PHYTOMYZA Fall. 19 sp. P. lateralis Fall. Curt. 393.Oral aperture small ; antennae porrected ; third joint subovate ; first transversenervure close to the base of the wing, second obsolete.S. g. Napomijza A.H.H. MSS. 1 sp. P. f estiva.ASTEIA Meig. . 2 sp. A. ammia Meig.Head rather broad; basal joint of antennae minute, third joint broad; aristasetose above and below ; basal transverse nerve close to the base of the wing,second obsolete.N. Geomtzides.SAPROMYZA FaW. Scyphella i?. Z). 3 sp. M. cava L.Yellow coloured ; antennas short, third joint rounded ; arista naked ; abdomenwith spherical impressions.S, g. Chiromijza R. D. 1 sp. fenestrarum R. D.Yellow-coloured ; arista naked; epistome not prominent; fore thighs ratherlarge.HETERONEURA Fall. . 3 sp. H. alhimaim Meig. Curt. 721.Basal joint of antennae minute, second nearly square, as long as third ; aristalong, inserted in the middle of the third joint ; two transverse nerves closetogether.S. g. Clusia A. H. H. Heteromyza p. Meig. 1 sp. JJ. flava M.TibicBcilio preaeapicali nullo ; alarum nervi transversi, subremoti." Hal. (Peter.spurca Hal. dim).OPOINIYZA Fall. Tephritis p. Fab. 2 sp. M. terminations L,Antenna; deflexed, third joint oval ; style finely villose ; abdomen elongate, 6-jointed ; first transverse nerve medial, second subapical.S. g. Geomyza Fall. Opomyza p. Macqq. 5 sp. T. combinata Fab.Clypeus impressed, bearded ; antenna short, deflexed ; arista subplumose ; bodyoblong ; head rounded.S. g. Leptomyza Macqq. Anthomvza Fall. 4 sp. A. gracilis Fall.Slender ; antenna lenticular ; style naked ; abdomen filiform, with six distinctsegments ; fore thighs rather thickened.S. g. Retina A. H. H. 1 sp. T. illota Hal.Facies impressa ; episcopate prominulo nullo ; labium bigeniculatum ; antennaebrevissimffi, articulo tertio suborbiculato ; arista gracing, subnuda." (//n/. )AULACIGASTER Macqqqq. 1 sp. A. rufitarsis Macqqqq.Head hemispheric ; face with a transverse line ; arista naked ; mediastinalnervure short, doubled at the tip ; abdomen with impressed transverse lines.DIASTATA Meig. Geomyza Fall. 4 sp. D. obscurely Meig. pi. 59. f.^M.Face flat ; epistome setose ; third joint of antenna; long, obtuse ; style plumose ;transverse nerves wide apart.DROSOPIIILA Fall. MuscA Linn. 14 sp. M. cellars L. Curt. 473.Third joint of antenna oval ; style plumose ; palpi long, subclavate ; transversenerves wide apart ; thorax elevated ; colour testaceous.S. g. Camilla A. H. H. ■ 1 sp. C. glabra Hal."Tibiae cilia praeapicali nullo ; antennae documents, facie breviores, articulotertio oblong; arista pectinaUi ; labium incrassatura." (Hal.)Litera.— MUSCID^. 153Sterna Mei. Drosophila p. i^'aZ/. 1 sp. anmdata Hal Meig. pl.58. f. 22.Head hemispherical, depressed ; palpi very thick ; wings curved, marginal nervenearly reaching the apex ; first transverse nerve near the base of the wings.O. Hydromyzides.(See Mr. Haliday's monograph in Ami. Nat. Hist. June and August, 1839).TEICHOIMYZAil%. Ephydra p. J/cg. vol. vii. 1 sp. T. fusca Mcq. (R,longipennis Mff.)Head longer than broad ; face very prominent, as far advanced as the rest of thehead, setose on each side ; style of antennae naked ; abdomen elongate,6-jointed.OCHTHERA Latr. Tephritis Fab. 1 sp. O. Mantis Latr.Fore femora greatly thickened ; coxas elongate. My Ent. T. B. pi. 3. f. 7.NOTIPHILA Fall. Keratocera It. D. 3 sp. N. cinerea Fall. ■Legs subequal ; eyes glabrous ; second joint of antennae unguiculated ; costalnerve terminating at the apex of the wing ; abdomen (J unarmed.S. g. Dichaeta Meig. Notiphila Fall. 1 sp. D. cantata Fall.Differs from Notiphila in having the $ abdomen spinose.S. g. Discomyza Meig. Psilopa Fall. 1 sp. D. incur. Meig. pi. 58. f. 14.Differs from Notiphila in having the costal nerve carried round the apex of thewing, and the wings deflexed posteriorly.S g. Trimerina Mcq. Psilopa Fall. 1 sp. P. madizans Fall.Abdomen apparently 3-jointed ; proboscis unigeniculate ; wings flat.S. g. Hygrella Hal. Psilopa Fall. 2 sp. P. nitidula Fall.Third joint of antennae oblong ; abdomen 5-jointed ; wings flat.S. g. Discovering Mcq. Notiphila Meig. 4 sp. P. calcutta Fall.Antennae with the third joint sub orbicular ; abdomen 5-jointed ; proboscis1-geniculate.S. g. Hecamede Hal. 1 sp. A^. albicans Meig.Proboscis bigeniculate ; wings flat ; costal nerve running round the apex of thewing.HYDRELLIA R. D. Notiphila Fall 15 sp. H. flaviceps Meig.Legs subequal ; eyes pilose or velvety ; antennae with the second joint exun-guiculate ; wings exunguiculate.S,g. Hi/drellia R. T>. Arista pectinated above ; face convex. 13sp. N. Jlaviceps Meig.S. g. Atissa Hal. Arista pectinated above; face impressed. 1 sp. A. pygmaa Hal.S. g. Glenanthe Hal. Arista finely pubescent. 1 sp. G. ripicola Hal.Hydra Jlfez^f. Notiphila Ja//. 35 sp. E. riparia YaW. Curtis, 413.Legs subequal ; eyes glabrous ; antenna; with the second joint exunguiculate ;proboscis incrassate.The following Subgenera of Ephydra are described by Mr. Haliday in his monographon this group. Hydra Desvv. 7 sp. (not. punctato-nervosa Fall);Heading Hal. 2 sp. {E. gutta Fall); Axysta Hal. 1 sp. (£. viridulaDesv.); Pelina Hal. 1 sp. (A^. sea Fall); Napa-a R. D. 5 sp. (E.coarctata Fall.) ; Ilythea Hal. 1 sp. {E . pilot Han. Curtis, 413.) ; CiEniaR. D. 3 sp. {E. palustris Fall); Catella Desvv. 10 sp. (E. quadrate Fall);Teichomyza Mcq. 1 sp. ( T. fusca Mcq. described above) ; Ephydra. 2 spi?.riparia Fall); Canace Curt. 1 sp. ( C. Nasica.)154 GENERIC SYNOPSIS.P. Hypocera Latr. Trineur^ Meig.Hora Latr. Trineura Meig. 30 sp. P. incrassnta Meig. Curt. 437.Third joint of antenna; spherical ; margin of wings ciliated.S. g. Gymnophora Mcq. Trineura Fall. 1 sp. P. arcana Meig.Second joint of antenna spherical ; margin of wings not ciliated.S. g. Concern Meig. •^— — 1 sp. C, atra M.Third joint of antenna conical, elevated vertically.Family 4. (or 23.) (Astride Leach. ((Estracidas Meig.Automata Dum.)Oestrus Auct. Htpoderma Latr. 2 sp. (E. Bovis Fab. Curt. 106. nee Linn.Nerves not extending to the hind margin of the wing ; first discoidal cell extendingto the front apex of the wing.CEPHALEMYIA iaitr. Oestrus p. Clark. 2 sp. (E. Ovis L.Differs from Oestrus in the first discoidal cell closed. Meig. t. 38. f. 1 6.GASTEROPHILUS Leach. {StruTi!^' Meg.} ^ «?• ^' ^^^ F^'^"Nerves extending to the hind margin of the wing. Curt. 146.Sect. II. (or Stirps 5.) Thoracocephala JFesftv. (Pupipara Lair.Order Hymenoptera MacL. Omaloptera Leach.)Family 1. (or 24.)-^ HJPPOBOSCIB^ Leach. (Coriacea;Meig.) '■:,<':j*;^ 4HIPPOBOSCA L. Nirmomyia Nitzsch. 1 sp. H. equina L. Curt. 421.Wings full-sized ; nervures not extending to the apex.ORNITHOMYIA Wolf., Latr. Hippobosca p. L. 4 sp. H. avicularia L.Wings full-sized ; nerves distinct, extending to the apex ; antennae ciliated.Curt. 585.11 MMOBOR A Curt. Oknithobia Jl/ej>. ? 1 sp. H. pales. Curt. 14.Wings full-sized ; nervures distinct (fewer than in Ornithomyia), extending tothe apex ; antennae not ciliated.Criteria Offers. Stenepteryx Leach. 1 sp. H. Hirundinis L. Curt. 122.Wings long, very narrow, and accumulated (fig. 133. ].3.)OXYPTERUM Kirhy. Anapera Meig. 2 sp. O. Kirhyayium Leach.Wings short, triangular. K. & S. pi. 5. f. 1. ^^Oesophagus iai!r. Melophila Nitzsch. 1 sp. H. ovina L. Curt. refApterous. My fig. 133. 11.Family 2, (or 25.) NVCTERIBIIBjE West. (Nycteri-bids Leach. )N YCTERIBI A Za<r. f Ce^^iutes Mont. ^ ^ N. Latreillii leach.l Phthiridium Wolf. JApterous; abdomen $ simple. Curt. 277., and my fig; 133. 15.S. g. Stylidia West. Nycteribia p. Mont. 1 sp. N, inarticulate Herm.Differs in the abdomen of $ being furnished with two long styles (my fig. 133. 23.)ADDENDATO THE GENERIC SYNOPSIS OF BRITISH INSECTS.Page 3. line 23. for " Pcecillus " read " Precious."5. line 1 7. for " opus " read " Aepus."6. line 24. for " AlphcBUS " read " Alkaline47. " Ocys 3 sp."12. STRON.GYLUS 2 sp. type S. ferruginea Fab. Pz. 84. 2.Aristarchus ^M. Strongly p. Ste., §-c. 2 sp. N. striataF. Curt. 339.Differs from Strongly in the antenna being inserted beneaththe produced sides of the head, and the club compressed.ANOMiEOCERA Spry^Shk. p. 25., is identical with AnisocerusHewitt.Lips 4 sp. type S. 4-pustulata.PITYOPHAGUS-S/jA. Ips p. Curtis, Sc. 1 sp. D. ferruginea L,.Differs from Ips, in the elongate sub-cylindrical form of the bodyas well as in the tropic. Pz. 8. 15.13. After "COLYDIUM,* addNereus Dej.Cat. Lyctus p. Fab. 1 sp. L. nitidus F.Linear-cylindric ; antenna; 1 1-jointed ; club 2-jointed, obtuse ;thorax convex-cylindric, elongate, entire ; tarsi 4-jointed.Spry & Shk. pi. 34. f. 6.Before " Cones," addSYNCHITA Hellww. Lyctus p. Fab. 1 sp. L. Jiiglandts Fab.Oblong, sub-depressed ; club acute at tip ; thorax with elevatedmargins. Pz. 5. 17.Mr. Shuckard proposes fel. Brit. Ent. p. 173.) the characterisedgeneric name Hydrophytophagus for Cryptophagus caries,and C. Typha;.'JjHI^ Cujus. Retaining the reputed British species C. depressus as^^ the type ; C. dermcstoides forms the genus PEDIACUS Shk.(sel. Brit, Ent. p. 185.), or the characterised genus of Dejean's Catalogue, whilst C. piceus, and all theother British species, form the genus LiEMOPHLiEUS. (La-portaJ list. Nat. An. Art. 1. 384.)P;!ge 14. line 22. read " TYPH^A and Pe>tafhyllus."After " Typhaa," addSpinous X»f;. . 1 sp. N. nubia GyW.Oblong, ovate, convex; thorax margined; club of antennae large,heart shaped, 3-jointed ; tarsi 5-jointed, according to Gy lien-hall.Spr. and Shk. pi. 53. f. 1 .15. line 4. Eutheia scydmoenoides Water, is Scydmoenus abbreviations i?r/c/is.(Sturm, pi. 264, B.) I possess a second British species of this genus.156 ADDENDA TO THE GENERIC SYNOPSIS.Page 16. After « OXYPORUS," addEURYPORUSi?r«c^s. Pelecyphorus TVorifw, 1 sp. S.picipes'Pk.Antennae short, filiform, distant at base; maxillary palpi filiform;labial securiform ; mandibles acute. Spry and Shk. pi. £0. f.6.After " GYROHYPNUS," addLEPTACIN US £:r?c/(s. Gyrohtpnus p. S'^e. 4 sp. S. BahjchrusKn.Antenna; elbowed, approximating, terminal joint acute; palpi withlast joint subulate ; head moderate ; elytra flattish ; sutureimbricated ; fore tarsi simple.17. Menon Stephh. is LITHOCHARIS Erichs. (2 Br. sp.)After " HESPEROPHILUS," addPhys OS\J S Rudd. 1 sp. P. spinster Add. Curt. 718.Elongate, sub-convex ; antennae elbowed, two basal joints equal ;thorax flattish, not channeled ; fore tarsi 4-, posterior 5-jointed.18. After "ANTHOBIUM," (11 Brit, sp.) addDELIPHRUM incas. Astuobivm Tp. St. 1 sp. St. rectus Fk.Mandibles simple ; maxilla; with membranous lobes, the outerdilated ; last joint of maxillary palpi longer than the preceding; tibias spinulose. Oliv. 42. pi. 3. f. 21.LATHRIMiEUM £^r/c^s. Anthobiump. /S^ 6sp. Om. atrocephalumGyll.Mandibles entire ; last joint of palpi longer than the preceding ;tibiae not spinulose.OLOPHRUM Erichs. Anthobidm p. St. 4 sp. Om. jiiceum Gyll.Mandibles entire ; maxilla with elongate corneous lobes ; last jointof palpi twice as long as the preceding ; tibia? simple.After " ACIDOTA,"addDELEASTER ^WcA«. Lester p. Cur 1 sp. 5. f7/c/(roa Grav.Differs from Lester in wanting ocelli and maxillary palpi sub-abominateat the tip. Curt. 303.19. After « TACHY^PORUS," addHABROCERUS £rjc/is. Tachyporus b. 5"^ 1 sp. T. nodicornis K.Differs from Tachyporus in having the antennas nodose andclothed with verticillate hairs.19. After "ISCHNOPODA," addTACHY'USA Erichs. 2 sp. Aleoch. atra Grav. jflKTHead exserted ; thorax sub quadrate or ovate ; abdomen ratherbroad ; legs moderate ; anterior tarsi 4-, posterior 5-jointed,basal joint slender. Spry and Shk. pi. 24. f, 2.OCALEA Erichs, Aleochara p. St. 1 sp. A. picuta K.Elongate ; head exserted ; thorax rounded behind, anterior anglesacute ; abdomen linear ; legs long, slender ; tarsi 5-jointed.Spry and Shk. pi 24. f. 4.After " Gymnasia," addSills Erichs. 1 sp. S. ruhiginosa Er.Head sessile ; thorax short ; elytra transverse ; anterior tarsi4-, posterior 5-jointed, joints equal ; labial palpi inarticulate.20. After « ALEOCHARA," addCERANOTA St. Aleochara p. St. olim. 1 sp. A. Dalton St.ADDENDA TO THE GENERIC SYNOPSIS. 157Page 20. Head small, subsessile ; thorax convex, broad, rounded ; elytravery short ; four basal segments of abdomen $ tubercled onthe back ; tarsi 5-jointed.LOMECHUSA marginal Grav. is " not truly indigenous," Steiph.21. After " PSELAPHUS," addCLAVIGER Preys. 1 sp. C . foveolatus 'MxxW.Tarsi with one unguis ; eyes wanting ; antennae 6-jointed.See Vol. I. p. 1 76. note*, and App. to Vol. I. ) My fig. 1 7. 6.22. After « DENDROPHILUS," addEpirus £nc/is.(Ja/(r6.) Dendrophilus p. 6V. 1 sp. I).14-st>{-anus St. Spry and Shk. pi. 41. f. 3.Oval, flattish ; mandibles not prominent ; prosternum truncatebehind ; anterior tibiae serrated with spines ; 4 posteriorrounded with a row of scattered spines.TERETRIU S Erichs. Hister p. Fab. 1 sp. H. picipes Fab.Elongate, flat ; mandibles not exserted ; prosternum rounded behind; elytra not striated ; tibia; broad, compressed, toothed.Spry and Shk. pi. 41. f 6.line 24. for " Theophilus " read " Theophilus."23. line 40. for " sohtitialus " read " solstitialis."26. Stephens gives Hypolithus and Cryptohypnus as distinct in his Manual.28. Ptinus imperial belongs to Latreille's subgenus ^edoftta. (See Vol. I.p. 271.) ^,30. After « SCYDM^NUS," addMEGALADERUS ^^e. f Tyttosoma 7?^.«. 1 1 sp. ThoracicLap. J cus Kirby.Denny, pi. 11. f. 3. (Vide Vol. I. p. 281.)Laporte also separates S. tarsus, ruficornis, and Hellwigii underthe name of Eumicrus.35. line 36. for " Elytra rostrated " read " Elytra stated."37. After " Typhus," addMICCOTROGUS Sita. TvcmvsB. St. 2 sp. H. picirostris Fab.Differs from Typhus in the funiculus being 6- and not 7-jointed ; rostrum filiform ; body slender, sub-squamose ; thighsand tibiaj unarmed.|M| 39. After " Topics," add^^ (Hypotheses JFestw. in Trans. Ent. Soc. 1. pi. 7. f. 4.1 sp. H. erudite West. See Vol. I. p. 353.Antennae with the second joint large, third and fourth veryminute, remainder forming a thick club ; elytra roundedbehind. )40. Serville has divided the genus Palladium into two sections, thesecond consisting of the typical species C. Paulus, for which hetherefore inappropriately suggests the name of Hylotrupes. (Ann.Soc. Ent. Fr. 1834. p. 77.), adopted by Stephens and Shuckard.42. 43. The genera Baltic, CHRYSOMELA, PHiEDON, andCochineal, have been greatly cut up by Chevrolat intocharacterised subgenera in Dejean's Catalogue, and which havebeen partially adopted as divisions by Mr. Stephens.158 ADDENDA TO THE GENERIC SYNOPSIS.Page 43. After " Triplet," addECANUS Rudd. MSS., Stephh. 1 sp. T. glacier Pk.Sub-hemispheric ; antennae with an elongate, 3-jointed, acuteclub.47. After » LACHESILLA," addFlotilla West. 1 sp. C. studies West.Antennae long, more than 25-jointed ; tarsi 3-jointed ; wingsobsolete.Obs. Atropos and Lachesilla form the genus Traces Biirm.OXYCYPHA Burm. is synonymous with Brachycercus and Cenis.A mark of doubt should be added to the name E. bioculata Linn.(?), and E. venosa Fab. given as the type of Baetis.Ephemera horrid Linn, is the second species of Burmeister's genusPALINGENIA. Stephens gives this species as British, butwith a doubt as to the name. The type of this genus is the E.Swammerdamiana.47. After " Cleon," addBRACHYPHLEBIA West. Vol. II. p. 25. note*. Close B.Burm.Two caudal setae, four wings ; posterior very minute, withonly two longitudinal nerves ; front margin angulated.Obs. I cannot cite E. halterata of Fabricius as the typeof this genus, as he expressly says that that species hasthree anal seta.48. After " HEMEROBIUS," addSisera Burm. Hemerobius C. Stephh. 3 sp. H. fuscus Fab.Anterior wings with the costal nervures simple, few in number ;discoidal nervures not arising from the longitudinal rib, butparallel thereto. St. pi. 30. f. 4.79. After " Sect. II." addSubsection I. Prcedones. Vide Vol. II. p. 184.Division 1. Insectivora.84. After " Andrea," addME GILL A Fab. Andrena p. Latr. 1 sp. M. habita F.Dufour in Ann. Soc. Ent. Fr. 7. pi. 9. f. 3.Two submarginal cells ; spur of fore legs simple ; ocellijjpiastraight line.END OF THE GENERIC SYNOPSIS.