THELIFEWILLIAM WILBERFORCEBY HIS SONS,ROBERT ISAAC WILBERFORCE, M. A.VICAR OF EAST Harleigh, LATE FELLOW OF ORIEL COLLEGE ;ANDSAMUEL WILBERFORCE, M. A.RECTOR OF Brimstone.IN FIVE VOLUMES.VOL. III.Happy is the stateIn which ye, father, here do dwell at ease,Leading a life so free and fortunateFrom all the tempests of these worldly seas.SPENCER.LONDON : / ^JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET.-MDCCCXXXVUI.IC wOAJOHN Child AND SON, BUNGAY.THELIFE OF WILBERFORCE.CHAPTER XVII.JANUARY 1801 TO DECEMBER 1802.Change of Ministers Distress of the poor King's recoveryLetter to Pitt Peace made Yoxall Lodge BathGuarantee of Turkey prevented Pitt's support of AddingtonHis own feelings Contemplates a general convention forAbolition Letter to Addington Opposes settlement ofTrinidad lands by newly imported negroes Abolition motiondelayed Dissolution of parliament Unanimouslychosen a fourth time member for Yorkshire SpeechBroomfield Private reflections Society Parliament meetsSpeech against foreign connexions.THE opening of the nineteenth century was dark andthreatening. " What tempests," says the Journal ofJanuary, 1801, " rage around, and how are we urgedto seek for that peaceful haven, which alone can insurereal security and happiness ! "VOL. III. B2 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1801TO LORD Lancaster.Near London, Feb. 7, 1801.My clear Lancaster,I have strange tidings to communicate. TheKing and his Cabinet have quarrelled concerning theemancipation (as it is called) of the Irish Roman Catholics,and Pitt, Dundas, Lord Grenville, Gingham,and probably Lord Spencer also, arid Lord Camden,are to go out of office. I think you will guess who is tosucceed the Speaker, with Pitt's friendly concurrence.Grant is to be Attorney General 1 the main pillar,Hawkesbury, Secretary of State Milford, Speakerand of the younger or inferior, as many continue asMr. Pitt can prevail to stay in. He has acted mostmagnanimously and patriotically.The Speaker, we know, is a man of talents and integrity,and of generous feelings, but not qualified forsuch rough and rude work as he may have to encounter,but if peace be made the government may last.I am so pressed for time to-day, that I cannot writefully ; but I could not leave you uninformed on a pointof such importance. It is strange, and certainlyargues great precipitancy and want of foresight, thatthis was not settled one way or other last year whenthe Union took place, or at least agreed on so far asto preclude all difference at St. James's. These particularsare not yet known, so do not talk of them Sir Edward Law, afterwards Lord Ellenborough, was made Attorney-general;Sir William Grant continuing to be Solicitor-general.1801. NEW MINISTRY. 3less they are come out otherwise. But I fear thedeed is done. The King and Pitt part on affectionateterms. The King saying, that it is a struggle betweenduty and affection, in which duty carries it. I amvexed that some of the Cabinet whom I least affectare to continue. But it is so uncertain whether youwill not have left Lancaster before this reaches you,that I am the rather disposed to break off.Yours ever affectionately,W. Wilberforce."It was well understood that more pacific counsels wereto be expected from the new administration, and manyof his friends hoped therefore that Mr. Wilberforcewould be included in its number. He himself just feltthe influence of the eddy which was sweeping by him.I am too much for a Christian, yet not greatly, intrudedon by earthly things, in consequence of theselate political changes, and all the considerationswhich they call forth. I was for a little intoxicated,and had risings of ambition. Blessed be God for thisday of rest and religious occupation, wherein earthlythings assume their true size and comparative insignificance; ambition is stunted, and I hope my affectionsin some degree rise to things above." 2 Hisviews upon the Slave Trade differed too decidedlyfrom those of the new Cabinet to allow him to takeoffice with them, and he continued therefore with unbrokencheerfulness his independent labours. His2 Journal, Sunday, Feb. 8.B 24 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1801.great present object was to relieve that distress, whichthe failure of the harvest, and the continuance of thewar, had produced in the manufacturing districts.Indifferent health alone prevented " him " fromgoing down into the West Riding, to ascertain facts "for himself ; 3 and his private aid was given soliberally, that he speaks of having " spent this yearalmost 3000 more than his income ; " 4 and as " thinkingin consequence of giving up his villa for a fewseasons." 5 "I should thus save 400 or 500 perannum, which I could give to the poor. Yet to giveup the means of receiving friends there, where byattending family prayers, and in other ways, an impressionmay be made upon them, seems a great concession.And with Broomfield I can by management give awayat least one-fourth of my income. O Lord, guide meright. But there or wherever else I am, O Lord, doThou grant me Thy Holy Spirit to fill me with everyChristian grace ; love, joy, peace, long-suffering." 6From Palace Yard, he writes in February to Mr.Hey.House of Commons, Feb. 25.My dear Sir,I have been sending a supply of money to afew friends, in different parts of the manufacturing3 To William Hey Esq. Jan. 21.4 "Of the above large sum," is his remark at the close of the year'saccount-book, " much not recurring expenses, and charity muchincreased by the distress of the times." The sum of 3J73 is accountedfor as bestowed during this year in charity.3 Diary, Jan. 21, 1802. 6 J our al, Sunday, Feb. 28, 1802.1801. DISTRESS IN YORKSHIRE. 5districts of the West Riding, conceiving that in thesetimes of extreme pressure, though an individual pursecould do but little, yet that it might effect something ;and that it was well to enable the clergy to be activeand assiduous in the relief of the general distress. Ihave sent to Mr. Cowley and Mr. Wilmington ; they, Ithink, will relieve their own country poor. I sent atrifle to Mr. Miles Atkinson, but I have thought thatLeeds would be likely to fare better than almost anycountry place, from the number of affluent residents,and therefore that I had better direct my little streamtowards a different spot. I have heard however thatPudsey and its neighbourhood are in extreme distress,and that scarcely any merchants or gentlemen live inthat parish. I have therefore resolved to beg you toapply any sum not exceeding 50 for their relief. Icannot get any bill to-day, but I will send you oneshortly.What is to be done ? I own I think that governmentshould relieve, privately, some of the mostdistressed of the poor districts, afterwards allegingthat they did not do so publicly for fear of producinga mischievous effect abroad. I must break off.Yours very sincerely,W. Wilberforce."Some such measure he continued earnestly to press,deeming it " hard to call on the land alone to pay forthe subsistence of the manufacturers, if they shouldbe thrown out of employment for some months by the6 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1801.continuance of hostilities." 7 " Much busied aboutthe manufacturers in the West Riding. The committeeabout the poor makes no progress. Peoplehard-hearted in general." 8 " Addington waveringabout plan, and not for giving public money." 9 " Ourdear and benevolent friend," writes Dr. Milner 10 fromPalace Yard, " absolutely exhausts his strength onthis subject. He is the most feeling soul I everknew ; and also the most patient and indefatigable inendeavouring to lessen the miseries of the people :and how he does get misrepresented and abused ! Butyou may kick him as long and as much as you please ;if he could but fill the bellies of the poor, he wouldwillingly submit to it all." " I find more persons approvingmy idea about the poor. I am nearly resolvedto move for a million for their relief." n " Poor reliefput off most shabbily till after Easter sad workwhilst we hear of increasing distress, and even tumultand insurrection. Much hurt by the coldness anddilatoriness of government." 12 " At last, got measurethrough of allowing parishes to borrow on theirrates." 13 " Doubtful what course to pursue, for wantof support, except to the plan of lending to the parishes,which I abhor." 14Throughout this spring his Diary contains manyinteresting notices of passing events. " Feb. 23rd.Heard in the House of the King's being ill in the old7 To William Hey Esq. April 7. 8 Diary, March 19.9 Diary, March 10. 10 To William Hey Esq. March 18.Diary, March 31. l2 Ib. April 1.Ib. March 20. " Ib. April 20.1801. DIARY.way from Thursday evening ; yet next evening so wellas to attend council." The King's agitation at beingurged to grant power to the Romanists, was not unlikelyto expose him to such an attack. " At theLevee, on Wednesday the 28th of January, the Kingsaid to Dundas, ( What is this that this young Lordhas brought over, which they are going to throw atmy head?' . . . Lord C. came over with the plan inSeptember . . . ' I shall reckon any man my personalenemy who proposes any such measure. The mostRabbinical thing I ever heard of.' ( You'll find,'said Dundas, ' among those who are friendly to thatmeasure, some you never supposed your enemies"" 5Colour of tidings from Prussia unpromising. Feb.24th. Pitt's reading the correspondence. 27th.House suddenly up from Nichols's absurdity and Pitt'sextreme eloquence too much partaking of stageeffect ; but Pitt sincerely affected. 28th. To BuckinghamHouse, to inquire after the King, who better.To Addington's for an hour, about the mode of relievingthe poor, and the King's state : highly pleasing account.Saturday, March 7th. To Speaker's Leveechanged to Saturday night. Shows the good of all suchattempts carried only half way at first. Much talkthere, and home late. The King gradually getting bettervery calm and resigned, on religious grounds. Kingof Prussia requiring us to resign Danish and Swedishships, and resolved to assert by force armed neutrality.Lord St. Vincent talks openly that we must haveDiary.8 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1801.peace. 12th. House martial law in Ireland. Irishmembers spoke well Lee French Fitzgerald.13th. House Poor Bill. Addington's, who has beenill of rheumatic fever. Fleet sailed for North Seasyesterday. Alas, the pride of man ! how boastful weare! 17th. Dundas well deserves his pension, thoughat first honestly refused it. The King recommendeda nobleman for office Dundas refused, saying, ( nonebut who fit could be placed in those offices ; ' and nowtrying hard to persuade Charles Grant to go to India.Highly disinterested. 20th. Heard from Leeds ofintended insurrection, and went to Addington. TheKing complaining that government not spirited enough.Forced by suspension of Habeas Corpus Act expiring,to let out some dangerous men. Debate on Lord Darnley'smotion for a committee on the state of thenation Lord Westmoreland coarse but able Aucklandruining himself by over-refinement. How strikinglycunning men defeat themselves ! Marquis ofBuckingham in opposition. The new governmentfairly and honestly bent on peace. 22nd. With Addingtonby his desire for an hour or more long talkpoor, and other subjects. 25th. Grey's motion on state ofnation Pitt and Fox former excellent. Addington'sfirst appearance as minister took his seat, Monday.A set of dinners for Pitt declined them all. Heardof swearing in against the constitution in West Ridingconferred with York e and Mulgrave received a copyof the oath. The clouds blacken around no thoughtsof God.1801. KING'S RECOVERY.April 15th. We hear of the Emperor of Russia'sdeath by apoplexy supposed violence ; and of theastonishing success of our attack on the lines ofdefence off Copenhagen. 19th. Nelson's generosityand humanity justly praised. Dined early, refusingRussia company, because of its being wrong to exulton victory rather humble rejoicing. 17th. Saw LordEldon, and long talk with him on the best mode ofstudy and discipline for the young Grants to belawyers." The Chancellor's reply was not encouragingI know no rule to give them, but that they mustmake up their minds to live like a hermit and worklike a horse." " Eldon had just received the great seal,and I expressed my fears that they were bringing theKing into public too soon after his late indisposition.4 You shall judge for yourself he answered, ' from whatpassed between us when I kissed hands on my appointment.The King had been conversing with me, andwhen I was about to retire, he said, f Give my remembrancesto Lady Eldon.' I acknowledged his condescension,and intimated that I was ignorant of LadyEldon's claim to such a notice. ' Yes, yes,' heanswered, ' I know how much I owe to Lady Eldon ;I know that you would have made yourself a countrycurate, and that she has made you my Lord Chancellor.'" 1620th. " No public news. Emperor Paul's deathdoes not seem so decisive for us as was hoped. 28th.Heard to-day of our troops bravely landing in Egypt,16 Con. Mem.B 310 LIFE OF Wilberforce. 1801.May 15th. Heard accounts from Egypt, of the actionof the 21st of March. Abercrombie dead of wounds :240 killed, 924 wounded. All fought most bravely.June 12th. Sad foolish work about the motionconcerning clergy sitting in parliament. More stir atCambridge than on any former occasion, about clergy'sineligibility to parliament. First time St. John's andTrinity agreed. The dispute with the northern nationslikely to go off well. Friends uneasy about myhealth say I am worn and thin ; they think too muchof this. Alas, I do nothing : it is my grief and burthenthat I am so unprofitable. 18th. (14) 17 notgiving so much satisfaction in the House of Commonsas were to be wished. Awkwardness about Abbot.French official paper speaks with great civility ofAddington, as if meaning to gain on him by courtesy,or as meaning to smooth the way to peace.July 4th. Our ministers I fear trifling about peace.King going to George Rose at CuffnelPs. Duke ofPortland at last out : Addington forced to compel him.13th. Northern affair made up by Lord St. Helen's,who made a British Peer. Invasion apprehended bygovernment strange folly not to be better preparedagainst it. Grain still very high, though falling much.Dundas gone to Scotland. I fear negociation withFrance gone off, though all kept profoundly secret."This persuasion gives me great pain on many accounts.I really see not what benefit we can derivefrom the war, unless some unexpected turn of affairsi7 Mr. Pitt.1801. STATE OF FRANCE. 11should take place, on which we have no right toreckon ; whilst on the other hand the state of warlikea bad habit of body, exposes us to unforeseen andnameless dangers of the most fatal tendency. Thereis good reason to believe that the French have been,and indeed still are, meditating an invasion of thiscountry. I have myself been slow to believe it, butam at length almost forced to yield my assent." 18Before our fleet came from the Baltic, this attemptwas more seriously in view. A Swiss gentlemanjust from France, says that the people are full ofthe invasion of England ; grounding hopes on thehigh price of provisions here, and inadequate wagesof labour. No scarcity, but government unable toprotect the poor from sharpers. Gala not spiritedMoreau not present strong indications of bad termswith Buonaparte. Articles dearer than formerly inFrance. People wish for peace. Country people sulky.No gentry's houses to be seen. Country more cultivatedthan formerly, but ill to Swiss eye." 19TO THE RIGHT HON. WILLIAM PITT.Broomfield, Aug. 17, 1801.My dear Pitt,I returned home last night, and though it willbe a very great disappointment to me not to see youbefore my departure, I must go immediately to myfriend Gisborne's, whom I have long kept waitingfor me18 Letter to F. Hare Naylor Esq. July 30. > 9 Diary, Aug. 1.12 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1801.Amongst other things I wished to have someconversation with you concerning the state of thecountry, as it bears on the question of peace. You, Iam sure, (indeed you have proved it by your conduct,)recognise the extreme importance of government retainingthe good-will and confidence of the bulk ofthe people. I am deeply hurt by the apprehension,which is so strongly pressed upon me that I knownot how to deny its solidity, that a rooted disaffectionto the constitution and government has made someprogress among the lower orders, and even a littlehigher ; and when it is not quite so bad as this, thereis often, especially among irreligious men, an abominablespirit of indifference as to our civil and ecclesiasticalinstitutions, instead of that instinctive loveand rooted attachment to all that is British, whichone used to witness (and this sort of regard, thesame as a child has for a father, is injured when it iscalled, as it is by Burke, a prejudice). I myself haveobserved a calculating, computing principle, consideringwhat would be gained and what would be lost ifthere was to be a new order of things; confessingthat our government was an old one, and had thevices and defects of age, &c. I assure you, I haveheard this, from warm friends of government too, inprivate : and though whilst things go well, several ofthose who use it would fight manfully for our constitutionand laws, yet when there is any pressure, themischiefs of such hollow attachment will abundantlyshow themselves.1801. LETTER TO PITT. 13The long scarcity, and the temporary stagnationof trade, with what I shall ever think ill-judgedparsimony in not granting a liberal supply out ofthe public purse, (though I am far from not seeingthe magnitude of the evils consequent on such amode of relief,) have done most harm among thelower orders, and I hope the return of good seasonswill in part at least cure the disease ; also our navalsuccesses excite and revive the old British spirit inmany hearts. But I assure you that in Yorkshire, inthe manufacturing parts I mean ; in London, and inits neighbourhood, (I only speak of what I know, butI do not see why the same causes, so far as they haveoperated in other places, should not produce the sameeffects,) and in parts of Essex, all the lower orders aretainted. I say all this to you, because I have anopportunity of hearing facts which may not fall inyour way ; you will yourself apply them.I own I am disappointed that the negociationshould have dragged on so long without coming to aconclusion ; and I am much disposed to think, thatwhen government had made up their own minds whatit was necessary to our interests and our credit that weshould retain, they had better have frankly declaredsto the French government that thereabouts was thelimit they were resolved not to pass. I think theywould have gained more in effect, both in France andin England, than they would have lost of what mighthave been got by treating in detail. Also, I am farfrom thinking, as some of our friends do, that after14 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1801.peace shall have been made we may sit down withthe same security as after other wars. Still the greatquestion recurs, shall we probably be in a better oraworse situation by persisting in the war, than bymaking peace on any given terms and in any given circumstances? I will honestly confess to you also, that Iam extremely pleased with the new naval system inwhich Lord Nelson is employed. It comes in connexion,in my mind, with the very point of the continuanceof the war, inasmuch as it is a cheap, and Ihope with the aid of our navy, effectual offensive instrumentof defence. There is something dampingand dispiriting in waiting to be invaded ; and thevery suspense becomes harassing. Whereas thisingenious mode of giving to a war, in its principledefensive, the spirit and energy of offensive operations,just supplies what we want. Yet we must also seethat it is what the enemy may avail themselves of,more easily than they can of the activity and espritde corps, &c. which belong to our seamen.I have said enough to suggest to your mind someof the ideas which are uppermost in mine, and youwill put them together. I have probably tired youas well as myself. I will only add therefore my earnestwish that you would this summer run over thehistory of the last nine or ten years, I mean of theFrench Revolution. There is an account of it in theEncyclopaedia Britannica, (the Scotch one, thirdedition,) and in the supplement ; a publication wellworth your having. I should like to know what1801. YOXALL LODGE. 15you think of this little summary. I have been consideringa little how far matters have turned outagreeably, or contrary, to my expectations.Another thing. Is Marsh employed on a historyof the last twenty years ? It is reported he is so engaged; but if not, and he will not, do let some oneelse undertake the task. There is no publication(except this Encyclopedia, of which I never knew tilllately) which gives you the events of the last tenyears, except the new Annual Register and others ofthe same school ; and they are more prejudicedaccounts than so many of Fox's speeches would be.I must break off. Farewell, my dear Pitt, I am notwithout hopes of catching a glimpse of you in theWest of England, if I go to Bath ; but I supposeparliament will meet early in November. I hadthought of meeting you at Lord Camden's, who hadkindly asked me, but I find I must set out immediatelynorthwards. You will be very glad to hear thatRyder mends solidly and rapidly.Believe me, my dear Pitt,Yours ever,W. Wilberforce."Shortly 'after this letter was written he set ut upona visit to the midland counties. " About ten daysago," he writes to Mr. Bankes in September, " Ibrought Mrs. Wilberforce and my three children tothese my old bachelor quarters in Redwood forest ;Gisborne my host. This you may remember is the16 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1801.forest which we devoted to the axe and the ploughsharea few months ago. I confess I have been not alittle provoked to see such extents of miserable hopelesswastes suffered to continue in their present state ofunprofitable nakedness, whilst these beautiful retreatsare sacrificed. However, if wheat be pulled down oneshilling a quarter, it will be a reimbursement."He was still at Mr. Gisborne's when he " heard "upon the 2nd of October, 20 "from Pitt and Addington,that Lord Hawkesbury and Mr. Otto had signedpreliminaries of peace the evening before. Pitt callsthem on the whole highly honourable and advantageous,though, in one material respect, different fromwhat might have been wished." Upon the 6th therewere " fireworks at the Lodge for the Peace. Thechildren were delighted : " and the next day he " setout most reluctantly from his kind host," on his roadto Bath, where by a course of the waters he wasto refit for the ensuing session. Here he found alarge party of political acquaintance, and as usual hadhis time little at command."Bath, Oct. 12, 1801.My dear Gisborne,******* This isa sad place for visitors ; and as I cannot think itright to say, through my servant, ' not at home,' 2l90 Diary.21 He was brought to this conviction by the bluntness of a faithfulnorth-country servant, to whom he had carefully, and as he believed successfully,explained the true meaning of this conventional refusal. A1801. BATH. 17and am not allowed to tell people so myself, I maybeinterrupted before I have done writing the letter Ihave promised you. Before I enter on my task letme only assure you, as the best thanks I can offer foryour hospitality, that I do not know when we havespent our time so happily as under your roof. I couldenlarge, but time must be economized. Let us in sucha world as this maintain between our families a closealliance, that by mutual aid and countenance we andthey may the better, through God's help, stem thetorrent in some degree, or at least (a rap at the door)stand our own ground. Kindest remembrances. Godbless you.Ever affectionately yours,W. Wilberforce.P. S. Windham I hear is to lead a troop of opponentsto the Address, and be very strong against thepeace."From Saturday, the 10th," he says, 22 " to Tuesday,27th, at Bath. Queen's parade. Molested withcallers and calling. Lord Camden down to mayor'sdinner where dined next to Bob Steele. Lordtedious visitor had been suffered to intrude upon his busiest hours, andwhen he asked, " Why did you show him in ? why did you not say that Iwas not at home ? " the answer he received convinced him that hecould not lawfully employ this convenient phrase. " So I did, sir," wasthe reply, "but he looked so hard at me, as much as to say, I know that youare telling a lie, that I was ashamed to stand to it, so I e'en let him in."Diary.18 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1801.Rosslyn here. Grenville, Lord Spencer, against thepeace, and Windham strong. The people intoxicatedwith joy here and every where. Grand illumination."" God has, of His mercy to this sinfulnation, allowed a suspension of the work of deathand desolation. Oh that His alternate scourge andmercies might dispose us to seek Him whilst Hemay be found, to humble ourselves before Him, andto confess, praise, honour, and serve Him with ourwhole heart: but I dread the worst." 23 " Dined atLord Rosslyn's before I left Bath. He decidedagainst the terms of peace : could not have agreed tothem. If ministry had not been changed, the peacewould never have taken place ; not one member ofthe Cabinet would have approved. The war wouldhave gone on, and God alone knows what might havehappened. Invasion was certainly intended Mas-sentwith 40,000 men on the Essex coast. I musthave been in opposition." 24My days," he complains, 25 " at this place rollrapidly away, in a most unprofitable and laborioussuccession of frivolities. Yet I know not how thiscould be avoided. I am returning soon to the bustleof London and political life. May God protect meby His grace, and enable me to stand the fiery trial.I shall if I honestly wait on Him." On the 27th heleft Bath, " with a heart heavy from the prospect ofreturning soon to parliament; from the fear of the23 Journal, Oct. 15. 24 Diary, Oct. 27.2* Journal, Oct. 25.1801. GUARANTEE OF TURKEY PREVENTED. 19war's going on ; from the bustle, turmoil, and contentionof my parliamentary life."We set out this morning," he tells Hannah More,and are now on our way to the great city. I goEke school-boy, though not creeping like snail, unwillinglyto school. We shall have a scene of strangediscordance. Lord Grenville is to oppose in theHouse of Lords, and Lord Spencer also ; and Wind-hamstill more warmly in the House of Commons ;but Pitt will support with all his might : his characternow appears in its true light."On the 28th he " travelled on to town. TheHouse met. No need to have come up so soon, as itappeared on trial. In town till November 24th.Bankes a good deal with us. Lancaster in town, andSpencer Stanhope. Northern convention question,and much work about the guarantee of Turkey ;Bankes staying in town for it. By our interferencewe have at last, I trust, carried our point quietly ;Lord Hawkesbury engaging to give way, and all therest of ministers, as well as every individual, understandingthe fifth article in the way we wish. Discussionabout Trinidadaa with Addington and Pitt. Iwish that we had not retained it." 26 In answeringMr. Windham, when the Address was moved uponthe second of November, he had declared to theHouse his apprehensions, lest our keeping Trinidadaashould lead to an extension of the Slave Trade, andnothing prevented his bringing this subject directlyDiary.20 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1801.forward, but the certainty of failure in the House ofCommons, and the hopes of meeting with success elsewhere." I am promised," he tells Mr. Stephen,that there shall be a pause as to the appointment ofcommissioners for the sale of the Trinidadaa lands." 27As the session advanced, the popularity of the peacegave firmness to the^new administration. " Oppositionis melting away manifestly. Grey gone out oftown. Tierney has declared himself friendly. Erskineand Lord Moira ditto. Only Fox and Sheridan stillwhere they were ; probably because Addington couldnot receive them. Pitt supports most magnanimously,and assists in every way. Addington goeson well, is honest and respectable, and improves inspeaking. Little or nothing to do in the House." *Pitt and Rose dined with me quietly to-day. Pittvery pleasant, and we staid chatting politics. Whatwonderful magnanimity ! wishing to form for Addingtonthe strongest and best possible administration." 29Opposition," he tells Lord Lancaster, 30 " are layingaside their unreasonable prejudices against Addington.I should not wonder if several of them could sofarconquer their repugnance as to accept office underhim. You know I was always sanguine as to this administration,knowing Pitt might be depended on. Hehas really behaved with a magnanimity unparalleled inapolitician; new instances of it are daily occurring.""I do not wonder if it be misunderstood," is the*" Letter to J. Stephen Esq. Diary, Nov. 20.89 Diary, Dec. I. *> Dec. 10.1801. HIS FREEDOM FROM AMBITION. 21remark in one of his memoranda ; " this may be owingnot merely to prejudice, but to natural incapacity.Little minds cannot receive the idea ; it is too grandfor their comprehension. But to any one who fairlyconsiders it in all its bearings, and who estimates itsfull worth, it will appear one of the noblest instancesof true magnanimity that was ever exhibited to theadmiration and imitation of mankind."The estimate he here forms of Mr. Pitt may betransferred not unaptly to himself. It is a rare andmost instructive sight which his private Journals ofthis date exhibit. There have been many whom thelove of ease has shielded from every temptation of ambition; and not a few in whom waywardness of temperhas nourished a fierce and untractable independence ;but it has seldom happened that one who was possessedof every quality of mind and fortune whichcould most encourage and reward ambition, has beenseen to put away soberly and quietly its utmost offers.This he now did. Those who saw only the result,would never have suspected that his easy course wasthe result of any struggle yet so it was : his freedomfrom ambition was no natural immunity, but a victoryof Christian principle. "I have of late," he says,perceived on looking inwards, the workings ofambition, of love of this world, its honours, riches,estimation, and even of worldly desires for myfamily, of which before I do not recollect that I wasconscious. The settled judgment of my mind I wouldhumbly hope is right. I trust that I am comparedLIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1801.lively indifferent in my cool estimate of things tothe goods of this life : but, alas ! I become soiled andworldly-minded." " That our feelings do not correspondwith our judgments, is one of the strongestproofs of our depravity and of the double man withinus. I believe that retired, domestic life is by far themost happy for me, blessed as I am with affluence, &c.Yet when I see those who were my equals or inferiors,rising above me into stations of wealth, rank, &c. Ifind myself tempted to desire their stations, whichyet I know would not increase my happiness, or evenbe more truly honourable. I speak not of the desireof an increased power of usefulness. That is anotherand a right feeling. Mine, against which howeverin its risings I straggle, and which I strive to suppress,is a sadly depraved appetite, rooted in an inordinatelove of this world. Oh may the compunctionI now feel be the blessed operation of the Holy Spirit.I suspect I have been allotting habitually too littletime to religious exercises, as private devotion, religiousmeditation, Scripture reading, &c. Hence I am lean,and cold, and hard. God, perhaps, would prosper memore in spiritual things if I were to be more diligentin using the means of grace. And though in themain I have thought myself pursuing the coursechalked out for me by Providence, and with a diligenceprompted and enjoined by the injunctions ofScripture, yet I suspect that I had better allot moretime, say two hours or an hour and a half, to religiousexercises daily, (besides Sundays,) and try1801. JOURNAL. 23whether by so doing I cannot preserve a frame ofspirit more habitually devotional, a more lively senseof unseen things, a warmer love of God, and a greaterdegree of hunger and thirst after righteousness, a heartlessprone to be soiled with worldly cares, designs,passions, and apprehensions, and a real, dissembledlonging for heaven, its pleasures, and its purity.I know that all external means are nothing withoutthe quickening Spirit : but the Scripture enjoinsconstant prayer, and the writings and exampleof all good men suggest and enforce the necessity ofa considerable proportion of meditation and otherreligious exercises, for maintaining the spiritual lifevigorous and flourishing. Let me therefore makethe effort in humble reliance on Divine grace. God,if He will, can turn the hearts of men, and give mefavourable opportunities, and enable me to use them,and more than compensate for all the hours takenfrom study, business, or civility, and devoted to Him.O God, give me a single heart and a single eye, fixedon Thy favours, and resolutely determined to live toThy glory, careless whether I succeed or not in worldlyconcerns, leaving all my human interests and objectsto Thee, and beseeching Thee to enable me to set myaffections on things above ; and walking by faith, towait on Christ, and live on Him day by day here, tillat length, through His infinite and wholly unmeritedmercy, I am taken to dwell with Him hereafter ineverlasting happiness and glory." 3131 Journal, Sunday, Dec. 20.24 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1802.He was now at Broomfield, whither he had escapedto spend the holidays out of the "bustle of London ;yet he was too near town to be undisturbed. " Timerolls on most rapidly, and I seem even here to getlittle done. Captain D. with us. It is plain to seethat since the mutiny, naval officers do not love thesailors : fear destroys affection. Mr. Hughes of Batterseadined with us Dissenting minister. He is asensible, well-informed, pious man ; strongly dissentingin principle, but moderate in manner. . He confessed,not one in twenty of Doddridge's pupils butwho turned either Socinian or tending that way;(he himself strictly orthodox ;) and he said that allthe old Presbyterian places of worship were becomeSocinian congregations." " Miss Schimmelpenninckcame to-day. Lord Castlereagh called and staid anhour and a half about the state and prospects of Irelandand policy to be observed. Four or five thousandannually emigrate from Ulster to America. Lessalarming to them than going to the south of Ireland,having so many friends and relations in America.Little farmers, 10 to 20 per annum, with largefamilies. Strong Americans in American war after,strong liberty men then strong for French revolution."" I fear my time is not enough improved.Writing on Bible paper credit. Miscellaneous reading.At work on paper for Christian Observer aretrospect of the last year. Clearing away arrearof letters writing them busily."1802. TO LORD MUNCASTER. 25Broomfield, Jan. 15, 1802.My dear Lancaster,I am vexed with myself for having sufferedJanuary 1st to have passed away without my sendingyou some mark of friendly remembrance. But havingcome into the country for quiet, I have found,like the fox in the fable, a new set of flies fasteningon me, fresh, active, and hungry. You present to meapicture I love to contemplate, a house not so liableto occasional incursions, but where, with your friendsand family about you, you enjoy domestic and socialcomfort yourself, and dispense comforts to otherswhose characters you know, and whose claims youcan justly estimate.It is one of the grievances of a great city, thatone is often, not without reason, doubtful whethermoney given away is not on the whole more injuriousthan beneficial. I was talking lately withone of the distributors of the Maundy money, whichwas given in shillings (five shillings each to poorhousekeepers) fresh from the mint ; and he toldme that a friend of his, a receiver of the money foradmission at the play-houses, said, they always knewwhen the Maundy money was distributed by the newsilver which was paid in to them at the theatre. Iwonder whether any of it was traced through Mr.Sheridan's hands, and where it would go in its progress.By the way, were you not amused with theaccount of Sheridan's and Lord Eldon's speeches?VOL. in. c26 LIFE OP WILBERFORCE. 1802.I was peculiarly impressed by Sheridan's appearingto think that being to live on 2000 per annumcertain for some years, would be absolute poverty.Parliament is to meet for the despatch of businesson Thursday next ; and I mean in about a fortnightafter to bring forward the Abolition. I have muchto tell you on that head, and I wish you had been inLondon to second some attempts I made in DowningStreet.I am ever, my dear M.affectionately yours,WILLIAM WILBERFORCE."These " Downing Street attempts" had been forAbolition objects. He had confined himself in thepreceding session to a declaration of his unalteredfeelings on the subject, without bringing on his usualmotion. The prospect of peace had suggested tohim a " grand Abolition plan," and he was " tryingat a general convention." 32 This scheme would havebeen impeded by a fresh defeat, upon which he couldnot but calculate in the existing House of Commons.He thought it better therefore for his cause toletthe session pass in silence, and exert his chiefstrength in private with the government. To thisattempt he was now urged afresh. He learned fromOtto, the French minister, " that if our governmentwould propose to negociate for the Abolition, theirswould probably consent to it." 33 The perilous state32 Diary, Nov. 22, 1801. 33 Ib. Jan. 3.1802. STATE OF THE WEST INDIES. 27of the West Indies might have its effect, he thought,in this country. " La Crosse's attempt to subjectblacks, produces rising in Guadaloupe ; and theblacks imprison the whites one white man beingkilled. Our islands in extreme danger Buonaparte'sexpedition, with strong French force, (25,000 troops,and sixteen sail of line, and transports,) sailed tendays ago for West Indies, to settle St. Domingo, asthey say : Windham and Co. (Cobbett) affirm, thatprobably meant against our islands. Cobbett hasbeen again abusing the Abolitionists. They say thatLord Cornwallis may be forced to surrender when weareso circumstanced that a rupture would be fatal toour West Indian possessions. Perhaps the step showsthat the French are easy enough about the peace.They probably would not have taken it, if as earnestabout peace as we are." MUnder these circumstances he was " busy writingAddington a letter on negociation for general Abolition,"begging him to allot to it a quiet half hour assoon as he was able. ef It would make, as I havesaid in my postscript, a short speech though a longletter. I bar Lord Champion's joke, which justoccurs to me, but yet I'll allow you to say it (don'tspeech me and letter me too) if you will but read.Strike, but hear me. The matter presses for immediatedespatch."34 Diary, Jan. 3.C 223 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1802.TO THE RIGHT HON. HENRY ADDINGTON, &C. &C.Private.My dear Friend,Though I have ever found you kindly willingto converse with me freely on that most importantsubject, the setting on foot a negociation with foreignpowers for a universal Abolition of the Slave Trade ;yet, whenever we meet, our conversation naturallyturns on so many topics, and those often so interesting,that this great question appears to me not toobtain that paramount consideration which it deserves; and I am always dissatisfied with myself afterhaving been with you, for having thus as it werediluted and weakened its impression and effect onyour mind. After much very serious, therefore, andanxious reflection, lest this momentous business, whichProvidence seems in some sort to have committed tomy care, should suffer from my mismanagement, Ihave determined to lay before you in writing a fewthoughts, for which I claim your grave and deliberateconsideration. By being committed to paper, theywill not be of the fugitive and transitory nature ofopinions communicated, however earnestly, and heardhowever attentively, in conversation, but will be asolemn and lasting record of my sentiments, and ofthe proposal I found on them ; a proposal, in whichare involved the temporal and eternal interests of alarger proportion of the human species, than probablyin any proposition which ever was submitted to any1802. LETTER TO ADDINGTON. 29minister. Let me implore and conjure you, my dearfriend, not to satisfy yourself with a hasty and superficialview of this question, but to weigh it seriously,and to form your decision on principles, to which, inthe hour of calm reflection, (if a prime minister inthese busy times ever can have such a thing,) you canlook back with satisfaction and complacency.It would be a task as unnecessary, I trust, as it wouldbe painful, to remind you in detail of the abominationswhich, in 1791-2, were charged on the Slave Trade,and of the facts and reasonings by which they wereproved. I have lately been looking over the debatesof 1792, and would to God, (I say it with solemnity,not vainly,) that it were possible to revive in theirfull force the emotions which were then excited **#***###*#Now, my friend, let me candidly appeal toyou : with such a recognition of principles which Ihad for years been labouring to establish, and with suchsteps proposed for carrying them into effect, haveI not just cause for grief and bitter disappointment ?That nothing has been since done, though we arenow near the year 1802, while the Slave Tradehas been carried, especially of late years, to a greaterextent than at any former period of our history, needsnot, I hope, trouble my conscience. I am too wellaware of my own infirmities not to know that an unwillingnessto differ from my friends (in the degree inwhich I feel it and suffer from it) is one of them ; butI can solemnly declare, that the subject has never30 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1802.been many days absent from my mind, nor should anymotives or considerations have prevented my takingany measures which were likely to promote this greatobject of my desires. I have all along asked myself,and consulted friends who were not liable to thebias of friendship by which I might possibly be misled,what it was best for effecting the Abolition formeto do in the circumstances in which I have beenplaced. The state of affairs last year rendered it prudentto forbear bringing forward the question in anyform ; but towards the close of the session I gave notice,that as early as possible after the Christmas recess,(i. e. about February next,) I would again lay thisgreat subject before parliament. I have stated to thefriends of the cause in private, that if defeated in themain question, I would try the subordinate ones ;such as, abolishing the trade for supplying foreignerswith slaves ; exempting from the Slave Trade a certaindistrict round Sierra Leone ; and, above all,prohibiting the Trade in slaves for clearing and openingnew lands, a motion which the acquisition ofTrinidad renders peculiarly necessary ; and, finally,the instituting of a negociation for effecting a generalAbolition of the Slave Trade.I own to you however that I shall go to the performanceof this duty with a heavy heart ; for I am notsanguine in my hopes of effecting much through themedium of parliament, whatever part you may take inthe House ; though I am more sanguine in my hopes ofgradually opening the eyes of the people of England1802. CONVENTION FOR ABOLITION. 31to the ruinous impolicy of our West Indian system.But I must do my duty and acquit my conscience.Yet what neither I, nor possibly even you, can effectthrough parliament, you may accomplish far moreextensively in another manner. And let me franklyput the question to you, Can any thing be morereasonable than to expect, now that our islands havebeen saturating themselves with slaves for near sixyears longer than you consented to fix, and two yearsbeyond Dundas's period . . than to expect, I say, thatyou should now adopt that measure which he (whosesentiments, you will admit, were at least not morefavourable to Abolition than yours) publicly recommendedin 1792. This measure gets rid of the mostoperative of all the objections urged against theAbolition, on which Lord Hawkesbury, I remember,chiefly rested his opposition, that of other nationscarrying on the Trade if we should discontinue it. Iscarce need suggest that all the European powers bywhom the Slave Trade has ever been carried on, willbe engaged in the negociation at Amiens ; and that theascendency possessed by Great Britain and Franceover their respective allies, affords means and facilitiesfor effecting the desired object, which may neveragain occur. It may also be justly urged, that theother European powers can never be induced to actin concert for a purpose like this, except under theimpulse and leading of a power, such as Great Britain,of acknowledged naval superiority, and which,on the common supposition of the value of the SlaveLIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1802.Trade, would be confessed to make a larger sacrificethan any of them. I have good reason to believethat America would gladly unite in the engagement.If the present opportunity of effecting a generalAbolition be suffered to pass away unimproved, is itprobable that any other will occur ? Yet it will beconceded to me, We of this country are not to carryon the Slave Trade much longer. But whenever wedo abolish for ourselves, and alone, we leave ourshare of the Trade to be seized on by other countries; and though we shall have then done our duty,(however tardily,) the benefit to Africa will be infinitelyless than if all the European powers were toabolish by common consent, and to agree to set onfoot (an idea of Pitt's, I think) a judicious systemfor repairing the wrongs and promoting the civilizationof that much injured continent. I must add, thatthe other powers cannot be expected to follow ourexample, when it shall be at last set, because theywill have to say, that we did not abolish till all objectionson grounds of policy had been done away. we, who had inquired laboriously, and must haveconsented to abolish earlier if we had believed theSlave Trade to produce all those evils to Africa whichAbolitionists at first charged on it, and anti, or atleast gradual, Abolitionists confessed. The proposalwill with far more propriety be made by us to France,than by France to us, for many reasons ; but especiallyfor this, that we alone of all the Europeannations know any thing of the real nature of the .LETTER TO ADDINGTON. 33grievous effects of the Slave Trade. France mostlikely conceives, as I myself thought before I hadgone into the business, that the condition of the slavesin the colonies is the grand concern, (as it was of theirsociety, called Amis des Noirs,) and not the detentionof Africa in barbarism and misery.I will only add a few words for myself. It is not(to a friend I may make the avowal) without emotionthat I relinquish the idea of being myself the activeand chief agent in terminating this greatest of allhuman evils ; but you will readily believe me when Isay, that any unpleasant sensations on this headvanish at once before the prospect of effecting thedesired object far more radically and completelythan by any springs I could set in motion. I hope Ican truly assure you also, that it helps to reconcileme to my loss on this occasion, that it would be yourgain; and I should look on with joy, if the Disposerof all human events, who has already rendered youthe instrument of good to mankind in the terminationof one of the most bloody wars that has raged inmodern times, should further honour you, by makingyou His agent in dispensing to the world this greatestand most extended of all earthly benefits. To yourserious consideration I submit these reflections. Ithas been my object, not to state the chief argumentson which rests the propriety of the measure I recommend,but merely to lead your mind to the subject.You will to yourself, better than I could do it for you,suggest, apply, and enforce, as may be needful. Letc334 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1802.me only subjoin, that if the magnitude of the presentobject did not supersede all personal considerations,it would be, to me, no slight relief (here I feel buttoo sensibly) to get rid of almost the only question ofimportance on which we have differed ; much more,to get rid of it by your even exceeding the utmostamount of good I had ventured to indulge the hopesof obtaining.I have left altogether untouched ( one line of argument,that I mean which rests on the critical state ofthe West Indies in the present moment, increased asI believe a thousand-fold by La Crosse's late attemptsin Guadaloupe, with the issue of them, andby Buonaparte's expedition. But I am sure yourown mind must be well exercised on this topic. AsCharles the First's last word was, ( Remember,' somine, and the sum of all I have been saying, is, Consider.I am ever, my dear Addington,affectionately yours,W. WILBERFORCE.Palace Yard, Jan. 2, 1802.P. S. The matter seems to me to press, or thereare some parts of this letter I might wish to alter.Do not call it long when the slave coast extends3500 miles on the shore of Africa ; and this, thougha long letter, would be deemed a short speech."If Mr. Pitt had been minister when this peacewas negociated, the question would have come into1802. ABOLITION PLANS DEFEATED. 35discussion;" 35 but Lord Hawkesbury and Mr. Addingtoncould not be persuaded. " I think ourgovernment favours the French expedition, under theidea of its being to restore the West Indies to order.I have been trying, in vain, to induce Addington andLord Hawkesbury to negociate for a general Abolitionof the Slave Trade. At last I wrote to both ofthem very serious letters, telling them I so did toleave it with them solemnly." MYet, though unsuccessful, he was not disheartened.Within a fortnight he was again in correspondencewith Mr. Addington. Ever since our occupation ofTrinidad and the Carib lands in the island of St.Vincent, speculation had been clamorous for theircultivation. Twice already he had defeated these attempts; and greatly was he now alarmed at hearingthat the commission for their sale was making out.During the preceding year he records " a long discussionwith Pitt and Addington about Trinidadaa ; " 37and he now writes to the latter ** " I do not recollecttouching upon the question of St. Vincent's when weconversed concerning Trinidadaa. But it falls underthe operation of the same general principles, and Iconjure you seriously to consider before you aredrawn into any concessions which you might hereafterdisapprove. You perhaps may not know thatfor several years past Pitt has been assailed by sapand by storm, in all directions and from all quarters,35 Letter from W. Wilberforce Esq. to H. R. H. the Duke of Glaucus,ter, June 9, 1806.36 Diary, Jan. 21. * Ib. Nov. 24, 1801. * Jan. 27.36 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1802.to induce him to consent to the selling of theselands ; but he never would give way. . . I have heardvarious rumours about Trinidadaa and St. Vincent,which would have sadly discomposed me but for ourlast conversation. I own to you however that mymind grows very heavy on the near approach of mybringing the great subject into discussion. And Ican truly say, that the not knowing what line youwill take, or whether we may not differ, gives memore pain than I ought to feel on any such account.Yet as it results from the esteem and affection I entertainfor you, I flatter myself you will put a kindconstruction on it, and on any effects it may produce.Public men should be made of harder materialsthan I am, to go through such work as they maybecalled to."He wrote at the same time to Mr. Pitt, and onthe 3rd of February " went to him and talked a gooddeal about the Slave Trade. He firm to preventimportation for cultivating new lands. Walked withhim. Introduced to Mrs. Trimmer. Talked withLord Camden about Lord Castlereagh's going to India. Pitt seemed to prefer forhim Presidentship of the Board of Control. WereLord Hawkesbury to be removed by his father'sdeath to the House of Lords, then the governmentwould sadly want House of Commons' talent. Yetthe idea of bringing forward Tierney into high officeis shocking. That the factious line he has pursuedshould be the shortest road he could have taken to1802. INCREASED IMPORTATION OF NEGROES. 37political eminence, is really too bad. I am grievedat Addington's not at once recoiling from the idea ofsettling Trinidadaa with imported slaves, of which itwould take a million. 4th. Pitt has had a longconversation with Addington, and says it was satisfactory."39TO W. WILBERFORCE ESQ.Park Place, Thursday, Feb. 4.My dear Wilberforce,I have had a long conversation with Addington,and have great reason to hope from it that hehas in no degree committed himself on any pointthat can lead to an increased importation of negroes ;and he is quite open, and even in many views favourableto all the powerful considerations which we haveto urge. I am sure he will settle nothing finally tillI have seen him again.Ever affectionately yours,W. PITT."He was not sufficiently satisfied with the conductof the government to leave the matter absolutelyto them. " The Slave Trade," he tells Lord Lancaster,40 "will, in some shape or other, be one ofthe first questions brought before parliament. PerhapsCanning will bring forward a motion for preventingthe importation of slaves for clearing newlands. I am happy to tell you that I think Pittremains firm. Oh what an eternal blot would itDiary. < Feb. 4.38 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1802.be on the character of parliament, if, after havingresolved by an immense majority that the SlaveTrade should be gradually abolished, we should enteron the cultivation of a new settlement, the completepeopling of which with negro slaves, reckoningthe number always lost in opening uncleared lands,would take near a million of human beings ! "Over this business he now watched carefully.Feb. 8th. Went after Canning. Dined at Stephen's,to meet and secure Dr. Lawrence andFarquhar about question of opening new lands ;having declined dining at Mons. Otto's, to meetAddington and Lord Glenbervie, &c. 11th. Longtalk with Canning about his motion against openingnew lands by imported Africans staunch and warmfor Abolition. Babington was strongly impressed theother day with Addington's not defending Pitt uponthe army extraordinarily, and said a few more suchdays would infallibly break up their friendship. Itwas but two hours after, that Courteney, in the House,animadverted on Addington's losing his regard for hisold friends, out of deference to his new allies. I mentionedit to Addington, who took it properly."London, Feb. 16, 1802.My dear Lancaster,I cannot tell you all that has passed, or ispassing, about Canning's motion, but I am in greathopes it will be carried. And it seems the persuasionamong the friends of Abolition here, that my general1802. TO LORD MUNCASTER. 39motion had better follow his. I will frankly own toyou I am not so clear of this ; but I am unwilling tofollow my own judgment in such a case. MeanwhileI am urging Addington.I was pleased, my dear Lancaster, at the ebullitionof honest indignation which escaped from youin your last, when speaking on this subject ; andI own to you that when I suffer my mind to dwellon the various horrors of which that accursedsystem of wickedness and cruelty is the author,there is something in its being permitted withso much sang-froid in this benevolent age, as itaffects to be called, which quite overcomes my patience,and sickens me of public life and public men.But the real fault is our thinking better of them ingeneral than they deserve. Alas, my friend, whenmen do not act from religious principles, little dependenceis to be placed on them : I am glad whilethey travel the same road with me, but I am not muchsurprised when they part company.The scene in the House on the discussion on thearmy extraordinarily, the other night, was one inwhich a person of your speculating turn would havehad much food for reasoning and conjecture. Thereare those who would rejoice in separating Pitt andAddington. But they have both generous minds,and I trust all the efforts of the shabby will be exertedin vain. Believe me, my dear Lancaster, to beever yours very affectionately,W. Wilberforce."40 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1802.His Diary proceeds to the other business of thesession. " Feb. 17th. House Civil List debateSutton Prince of Wales's claim. 18th. Board ofAgriculture. Dined Lord Camden's Lord Eldon,Pedestal, Pitt, Villiers, Castlereagh, and others.Pitt very clever. Long talk with G. How adroitare people of inferior capacities in defending themselves! I hear a shocking account of French moralsfrom Paris. Masses says he stays there to be e poeta tout ce qui peut arriver.' People shown throughfourteen rooms before they get to Buonaparte, andofficers with pass-words, without which the FirstConsul not approachable. Bread 14 sous per Ib.The people on the Pont Neuf said we brought theking in slavery to Paris when bread was 9 sous, nowwe are quiet when it is 14. Lord Sheffield gives amost pleasing account of Toussaint, of his generous,amiable temper and disposition ; but in the fielda rigid disciplinarian he has 60,000 men trainedunder him he behaved with the utmost kindness tohis old master. 25th. Sitting in Civil List Committee.Bankes and I had doubts, but upon talkingwith Addington we agreed we might be left on the list.March 1st. Morning, Proclamation Society meeting.Then Civil List Committee considering Report.Extremely uneasy about the advances to the Princes.Deviation from Burke's Bill as to classification, andyet I trust I did my duty, and will do it, not with amorbid irritability, but as a Christian ought to do,with a spirit of power and love, and of a sound mind.1802. CIVIL LIST COMMITTEE. 41There is much in the Committee which is too obsequious."He makes the same complaint a few dayslater to Lord Lancaster. 41 " There have been advances,as you will know, to the Prince of Wales,Duke of York, and Duke of Clarence ; and surely if aCommittee of the House of Commons suffers such aconcession to pass without animadversion, no ministercan ever refuse the authority, ascendency, and importunityof a king.I have been a good deal embarrassed whetherto bring on my general question before Canning's,and have been strongly disposed to do so ; but Ihave at length nearly determined to let Canning'shave the precedence, on the ground that I really believewe have a good chance of carrying his motion, orof prevailing on Addington to give up the settling ofTrinidadaa, or to impose such conditions as may preventthe importation of Africans for that purpose.Canning thinks that by bringing on my general questionfirst, I should cement together all the WestIndians, whereas he has now the hope of prevailing onseveral Jamaica planters to join him."His chief employments at this season may be seenby occasional extracts from his Diary.March 9th. By Lady S.'s desire called on her.Affecting account of her situation cruel treatment byher sons. How awful to remember them very good-naturedyoung men ! How little can one depend uponnatural temper, which may be soured as life advances !<i March 1.42 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1802.Evening, went to Royal Institution lecture thewhole sight interesting. 13th. Of late much on CivilList Committee. Occupied all this morning by Sir SidneySmith. There appears a probability of a renewalof the war shocking. We have not been thankfulenough to God for the prospect of peace. At Paris,Buonaparte now unpopular, and said, since this Lyonsexpedition, and becoming King of Italian Republic, tohave lost his head. The Duke of Bedford suddenlycut off amidst all his prosperity. Alas ! 16th. Dinedat Wilbraham Bootle's meeting Lord and LadyAlvanley, Lord and Lady Belgrave, Bishop of London.A good deal of talk about the Duke of Bedford,&c. Fox had that day spoken his funeral oration inmoving writ for Tavistock ; speaking of him as one ofthe best of men. 20th. Morning, Proclamation Society.Dined Stephen's. Much talk about WestIndies' state and Abolition conduct at home. Newsof French fleet's arrival in West Indies. Resisted byToussaint's order. Massacre of whites in Guadaloupereported. All people siding with Buonaparte andwishing his arms success over Toussaint's, as the onlyway of preventing Black empire in the West Indies.Stephen's contrary system, I believe, right in the main.Windham strongly prejudiced against Hannah Morein the Blade affair. 22nd. Called Pitt's, and muchpolitical and Slave Trade talk earnestly wished himto move a suspension, or question about Abolition onground of imminent danger to West Indies from stateof St. Domingo, and necessity of not letting disproveDR. CARMICHAEL Smith. 43^portion of blacks to whites be increased. 23rd. Evening,to Lady Alvanley's music party. Mrs. Bates,Miss Anguishes, Dean of Rapine and daughters, sang.Much entertained. 26th. Dined at home. Ludlam,Henry Thornton, Stephen, &c. Talked about SierraLeone, and in the evening about Christian Observer.Fixed Macaulay should take management. He,Pearson, and Babington with us. April 2nd. Morning,busy, Society for Bettering Condition of the Poor.Dr. Carmichael Smyth's petition. House."Dr. Carmichael Smyth had discovered a safe andsimple fumigation, which had been found to arrest theinfectious influence of the most malignant fevers.The discovery was brought under the notice of Mr.Wilberforce, who thought it worthy of a parliamentaryreward. He had transferred to other hands theconduct of Dr. Jenner's application, 42 because " hewas a common hack in such matters ;" but for Dr.Smyth he could find no other patron, and he thereforeundertook the task himself, and devoted to itmany hours in every week throughout the session.Canning moved for Trinidadaa papers. Stephenpublished his pamphlet 43 on West Indies. Buonaparte'sexpedition landed in St. Domingo, and claimingvictories. I am busy trying to effect legislativelessening of number of oaths. I do not like the advancesto the Princes. Ludlam writes home to state4i Vid. Life of Jenner.45 The " Crisis of the Sugar Colonies," the first of a series of masterlypamphlets by which Mr. Stephen most effectually promoted the interestsof the negro cause.44 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1802.to us the melancholy condition of our Sierra Leonecolony, and to recommend its relinquishment. Definitivetreaty came, on Monday. Busy about cottonmills' regulation. Doubtful in my own mind whetherwould continue member for Yorkshire. My days aresadly cut up. People with me at breakfast afterwardstill one and again sometimes broken in on inthe evening. 7th. Breakfast Dean of Rapine, &c.Small Debt Society's committee. House till half-pasteight. Sir. William Scott's speech, moving for leave tobring in Clergy's Non-residence Bill curiosa felicityof language. Sir Robert Peel's Bill motion well receivedfor morals of apprentices, &c. in cotton factories."On this subject he had written a few daysbefore,TO THOMAS BERNARD ESQ. FOUNDLING HOSPITAL.Palace Yard, Wednesday morning.My dear Sir,I so much respect the judgment of the Committee,44 and I think so much weight is due to the considerationssuggested by Sir Robert Peel, and even tohis feelings, (when our success in the excellent measurein contemplation will be in so great a degreeowing to his benevolent and public-spirited exertions,)that I will not press any ideas of my own, as to theextension of the plan to any others than apprentices,contrary to what may be the general opinion whichthe gentlemen of the Committee may form on full4t Of the Society for Bettering the Condition of the Poor.1802. FACTORY CHILDREN. 45consideration. I cannot however but earnestly recommendit to them, to consider of some way ofsecuring to the children some religious instruction,more effectually than by the plan as it at presentstands ; and I trust that this subject, on which it mustbe confessed there are difficulties, will be understoodto be reserved for further consideration.It has happened somewhat remarkably, that whilstwe have been engaged on this subject, I have receiveda letter from a poor but honest and hard-workingcouple, whose child was barbarously torn from them,and sent down to a distant cotton mill. I have sinceconversed with these people, and seldom have hearda more artless, affecting tale than they related. Theletter they wrote me I send, as perhaps the gentlemenpresent may like to hear it. I am very sorry tobe prevented by a House of Commons' committeefrom attending you as I had wished this morning.But I am persuaded I shall not be wanted. I begyou however to explain the cause of my non-appearance.I remain, my dear Sir,Yours very sincerely,W. Wilberforce."April I Both. Recovering from an attack of feverlittle done all day. Evening, a long and interestingconversation with W. Smith about Unitarianism andorthodoxy. Morning, long talk with Lord Belgrave,Parke, and Babington about Sunday Bill. Glad to46 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1802.hear from Parke that many young rising legal menreligious Sunday consultations becoming far rarerlawyers attending public worship. Poor LordKenyon dead, and Ned Law succeeding him. I havehopes Perceval will still prove a public blessing in ahigh station : he is to be Attorney General. 15th.Stephen, morning. Dr. Carmichael Smyth's petition.House on Slaves. Canning's motion fixed for 13thof May."The lateness of the day 5 he tells Lord Lancaster,45 <f will render it next to impossible for me tobring forward my motion afterwards with any effect.Yet it would have been clearly wrong in me not tohave allowed him to take the first move under all thecircumstances. If his motion be carried it is a capitalstep gained, though I am sick, as well as you, of half-measures,and am filled with indignation whenever Ithink of what is going forward all the while we aretrifling and trimming between our consciences andour purses. Have you seen ' the Crisis of the SugarColonies ? ' Hawkesbury owns it is extremely able."April 22nd. Still busy as usual. Dr. C. Smyth'scommittee. At the public offices. Sir R. Buxtonmentioned Pitt's birth-day dinner. 27th. To town.Kept long in Dr. C. Smyth's committee. House till ten.28th. Town early. Proclamation Committee. Busyon Sunday Bill. Definitive treaty came over. 29th.To town. Illumination for the peace. Cobbett'swindows broke. The mob very good-natured."** To Lord Lancaster, April 14.1802. DIARY. 47The poor Porcupine's windows have been smashedfor not rejoicing as you and I do' writes Mr. Bankes; 46' people are shocked by a want of sympathy licentiousaccident. However he was not bound to rejoice,but he should have illuminated."May 3rd. To town early, to see Addington aboutHull dock. Then Proclamation Society. Then dockmeeting, and nine or so delegated. Then Housetill late. Windham's preparatory speech about definitivetreaty. Addington declared our interest concernedin the French West Indian expedition torescue St. Domingo from the blacks, who hadusurped it, &c. I was shocked. ( Whatever personsmight have thought before,' he said, ( theymust think this now.' 6th. I find it is too late toget through Sunday Bill, or Oath measure. I cannotget people to act. Windham, Dr. Lawrence, TomGrenville, Lord Temple, Elliot, move papers, 'andspeechify; all to prove articles of peace disgraceful.7th. House, on Nicol's motion, to censure, andBelgrave's amendment, to thank Pitt, till six in themorning. Good debate Fox excellently pleasant.15th. Definitive treaty discussion. Windham movedAddress by long and able speech. Lord Hawkesburythree hours in answering very able. In the House tillfour adjourned the debate. 14th. House till near fouragain Sheridan infinitely witty, having been drinking.20th. To town, to meet Pitt upon the SlaveTrade."4(i Letter from Henry Bankes Esq. to William Wilberforce Esq.48 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1802.Mr. Canning's promised motion had been repeatedlydeferred, and was now again postponed. "Itwould be so very little in the spirit of the times,"says Mr. Canning, 47 " to refuse any concession toregicides, that I am afraid I must, though multuminvites, agree to the request of William Smith," (thenknown by the soubriquet of king-killer,) " and putoff Trinidad till Tuesday.""24th. Town after breakfast, to which Mr. Mason,a minister at New York, came, and much talkabout religion, &c. in America. House on BullbaitingBill Windham's speech aimed expressly atme, though I had not spoken quite prepared. Itoo little possessed, and having lost my notes, forgotsome things I meant to say, but was told I didvery well. Bull-baiting Bill lost, 64 against 51. SirRichard Hill's foolish speech. Windham's malignity'against what he calls fanaticism. What causehave we for thankfulness that we enjoy so much civiland religious liberty ! 26th. Town. Called on LordCastlereagh and Forster, about Abolition. Dr. C.Smyth's committee. House, and saw Canning abouthis motion balancing whether to bring on question,though so late. French accounts from St. Domingoabuse Toussaint in the grossest terms ; they have beenstoutly resisted. 27th. Canning's motion Houseflat the' motion sadly too short. No division onAddington's sad speech : only holding out hope of inquirynext year, when in 1792 he voted for Abolitionv Letter to William Wilberforce Esq. May 19.1802. DIARY. 49in 1796, against Hawkesbury, even when Dundashad thrown up his resolutions. I grieved to the heart.28th. Consulting friends about my proper part as toAbolition. At Merchant Taylors' Hall grand celebrationof Pitt's birth-day Lord Spencer chairman823 tickets and people near 200 more asked for.I withdrew, after walking about for an hour andseeing every body, just as dinner going on table. Allwent off well. Pitt not there. 29th. Talking withBankes and Lady Auckland times very dissipatedmasquerades the rage. Dined with General Ross, tomeet Lord Cornwallis, Lord and Lady Chatham, andothers. Lord Cornwallis very civil, and unaffected,and pleasing. Talked about India in pleasing terms,and the happiness we diffused there, and the equityof our government. He spoke with great apparentpleasure : gave great praise to Barlow. Afraid ofSir William Jones ; and always found him much todo,and took him into his council ; where otherwise hemight have thwarted. Lord Chatham very friendly.Both talked of West Indies, and of slaves' ill treatment,and West Indian character, in strong terms.31st. Town. Proclamation Society meeting. HouseNon-residence Bill, till half-past eleven. Wind-ham,Addington, and Sir William Scott, and Grant,earnest for giving to bishops unqualified discretion,and power over their clergy. Attorney-general Percevalcontra. Simeon long, but good and spiritedspeech. Long talk with Grant and Babington onSlavery Abolition conduct."VOL. Ill, D50 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1802.The adverse temper of the existing House ofCommons had been shown too plainly to be doubted.Mr. Addington had coldly and reluctantly engaged topause before he opened St. Vincent's and Trinidad forthe reception of another million of Africans ; whilst thefierce conflicts of St. Domingo, and the insurrectionsof Dominica and Tobago, had brought general reproachupon the negro name. " The Morning Chroniclehas been putting in lying accounts of negro crueltyin St. Domingo, evidently to create an odium againstthe blacks." 48 To all this was added the miserablestate of Sierra Leone, which having struggled throughexternal difficulties was now threatened with destructionby the rebellious spirit of the Nova Scotia negroes.Yet upon the whole he resolved to bring his motionforward, and introduced it upon the 3rd of June,though ' ' not able to get it on till too late, when theHouse was almost empty." 49 But a dissolution wastoo near to allow him to bring his motion to any practicalconclusion, and upon the 14th he felt " compelledto give it up for this year." 50 The session lingeredon another fortnight, during which he " got throughBill for Hull docks," 51 and moved and unanimouslycarried a grant of 5000 as a national reward for Dr.C. Smyth's discovery. " This affair has ended wellandI have cause for thankfulness."Parliament was prorogued upon the 28th of June,and dissolved upon the 29th. Upon the 30th, he wasDiary. Ib. *> Ib.A Diary, June 24.1802. GENERAL ELECTION. 51off before nine from Broomfield," on his journeyto the north. The " Beverley, Hull, and Yorkelections " were already " raging ; " but " no opposition" was " talked of for the county." 52 Early in thespring there had been some rumours of a contest, butthey had " now vanished." He had, of necessity,been more than ever absent from the county sincehis last election ; and this had given rise to a report,that he intended to retire from its representation.I have been strongly urged," he told Mr. Hey, 53to advertise my intention of offering my servicesin the ensuing general election. But I pause. Nordo I think it probable, unless something happens inthe interval, that the peace of the county will be disturbed.I fear my pride would be wounded were I tobe turned out ; but after the risings of this badpassion should have been conquered, I own I shouldrejoice in my liberty. However, I would leave mycontinuance in public life to Providence, and notretire till its signal be given for my release."fe I can scarcely enough impress you with a senseof the degree in which I shrink from the very idea ofa parliamentary struggle. Whether it be the effectof my being so much older, or from some other cause,I quite abhor the prospect of a general election ; andto be active in preserving my situation seems likelabouring to be permitted to tug at the oar like agalley slave with fetters on my legs and the lash atmy back. I pant for quiet and retirement ; and what52 Diary, June 24. S3 Feb. 24, 1802.D 252 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1802.is more, I entertain serious doubt whether I shouldnot act wisely in retiring from my public station,whether I should not be able to promote the glory ofGod and the good of my fellow-creatures more inprivate. My pen might then be employed regularlyand assiduously. But I am deterred from yieldingto the impulse I feel thus to secede, by the fear ofcarving for myself." 54He reached the West Riding upon the first ofJuly, and after a hasty canvass, was at York uponthe election day, July 12th. Got up earlyish tothink of speech. To tavern by ten, and mounted athalf-past ten Pulleys's horse. People quiet, till atlast, when attacked the horse to get at the ribandsSir R. Hildyard moved my election; Sir M. Sykesseconded me. Bacon Frank moved Lascelles; Morrisseconded. I pleased people in speaking, and didwell. Crowded hall, and castle yard immenselyso." 55 " It was, indeed," says a by-stander, 56 "anaugust and interesting scene ; not one hand was liftedup against him, and the surrounding countenanceswere expressive of the greatest delight and esteemtowards him."I trust," he said, " that I have not been inattentiveto the local concerns and particular interestsof my constituents. Owing chiefly to a weaklyconstitution, which after the labours of a session ofparliament requires to be recruited by rest and quiet,** To W. Hey Esq. April 14. Diary, July 12.*> William Gray Esq. to Mrs. Wilberforce, July 14.1802. SPEECH AT YORK. 53I have been less personally present among you thanit was my wish to be ; but I have trusted that youwould prefer the solid substance of diligent attentionto your public and private concerns, before thosepetty personal assiduities in which they must needsabound, who by them would compensate for thescanty performance of more important duties. Isee with pleasure, gentlemen' he continued after theinterruption of an acclamation of assent, " that Ihave not erred in the judgment which I formed ofyour sentiments and feelings ; I have not calculatedamiss upon the liberal spirit with which you think,and feel, and act towards your representative in parliament."He noticed next, the " difficulty of judgingaright in complicated cases, which should teachthose who think differently on political subjects,mutual moderation, forbearance, and candour. Wecannot expect that even our constituents shouldapprove of every particular of our conduct. Theymay, indeed, and ought to require that their representativeshould agree with them in great principles,and likewise in the general line to be observed in anygiven conjuncture of affairs. But provided there bethis agreement, they ought not too scrupulously tolook for an exact coincidence in every individual vote,and on every particular occasion. I rejoice to findthat you approve of these principles ; they are principlesworthy of the rank you hold and of the placeyou fill in our national representation. They send54 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1802.your member to parliament the free and liberal representativeof a free people, and not your slave,fettered and shackled, a character which I shouldfeel degrading, though it were to be the slave evenof the county of York itself. Suffer me to say, (asentiment, the avowal of which, remarks that havebeen elsewhere made render not improper,) that Iconsider the honour of being your representative, asone of the highest dignities I could enjoy. Great ismy respect for hereditary honours. It is still greaterfor those which have been granted by the well-judginghand of our sovereign, for brilliant exploits renderedto the public by our great naval and militarycommanders, or for long and faithful services inpublic offices of high trust and laborious duty. Buthe must have a mind constituted very differently frommine, his estimate of things must be formed on verydifferent principles, who could account as morehonourable that nobility which should be grantedfrom motives of political interest or personal favour,than the dignified and exalted station to which he iselevated, who by the free and united voice of thefreeholders of Yorkshire, is selected to be the depositaryof their interests, and the guardian of theirrights."On the following Wednesday, he set " off from "Mr. " Gray's house, where" he had been " mostkindly received," and had met Mr. " Richardson, aplain man of God, truly edifying," and " got to Dun-combe'sto dinner." " I came yesterday," he tells1802. Congreve. 55Mrs. Wilberforce, 57 " to this place, (Copgrove,) theseat of my late colleague, Buncombe. He is sittingby me, and desires his best respects to you. It isjust such a place as you and I should like to live in ;quiet and beautiful, without pomp. I am goingthrough Harrogate to Harewood, and wish you werewith me, seeing these pretty rural scenes." " Youhave made your old colleague very happy," he hearda few days afterwards, from Lord Lancaster, 58 " bygoing to him at Copgrove. He has written to mequite a letter of satisfaction and delight at seeing you,and has sent me your speech on the election, which Iwas most glad to read. Nothing I think could bemore open and judicious ; and as you felt your wayyou pushed the points on admirably, and must foreverhave done away with those little pitiful objections,grounded on your necessary absence from thecounty, with which disinclined persons were endeavouringto undermine your popularity. I never readany thing better calculated for the purpose."Leaving Copgrove on the 15th, he proceededthrough Knaresborough to Harewood. Repton, thelayer out of ground, there. Music in the evening ;I reading also at will. All quite easy and obliging,perfect liberty. The next day I drove out Repton inasingle-horse chaise, to survey the grounds." 59 " Thisis really one not only of the most magnificent, but ofthe finest places in England. Great natural beauty,July 15. * To W. Wilberforce Esq. July 22.49 Diary, July 16.56 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1802.vast woods, expanses of water, a river windingthrough a valley portioned into innumerable enclosures.Within the house, perfect ease and greatgood-humour without the smallest mixture of pompand parade, except in the rooms themselves, whichare too gaudy for my taste." 60 " Strolled out witha book. William Hey dined, and in the evening Iwent with him to Leeds." Upon the 21st, " Thebirthday of my two eldest children, reached Broom-fieldsafely, I thank God, and found all well, andjoyful to see me. I have been received in Yorkshirewith the utmost possible kindness, and even zeal.Yet even this shows how uncertain (as we say) is allpopularity. God alone can turn the heart. Thosemost kind whom I had no reason to expect so. SirChristopher Sykes, &c." 61He now returned at once to the labours of thathonourable post which he had occupied for eighteenyears. " The event," writes his cousin, Lord Warrington,62 (in a letter, pocketed, " kind condolence onmy re-elections") " which has given your other friendsso much pleasure, has filled me with sentiments of anopposite nature. No constitution can stand, during theordinary period of active life, such exertions as yourshave been in the service of the county of York. Itwould have been better if, like Windham, but withouthis struggle and defeat, you had taken refuge in aclose borough, the means of which I should havebeen proud to have afforded you."so To Mrs. Wilberforce, July 16. ^ Diary. <* j u i y 15.1802. REFLECTIONS IN " THE REED HOUSE." 57A period of unusual leisure seemed now before him,and he entered on it with a degree of deep and seriousreflection, for which few find opportunity in the middleof a busy life. He took a calm and thoughtful estimateof his situation and his faculties, inquiring wherethey were most capable of employment and improvement.The result of these reflections in " the reedhouse," (a favourite arbour in his garden,) he " putdown on paper, that they might not be the fugitivethoughts of the moment, but the deliberate conclusionsof his judgment recorded for his own use ; orpossibly, that my dear wife, for the benefit of mychildren, may know the considerations by which I amguided in the direction of my labours and the employmentof my time.When I look into my own mind, I find it a perfectchaos, wherein the little knowledge which I dopossess is but confusedly and darkly visible ; andwhere, from the want of classification and recapitulation,and from having satisfied myself with a superficialacquaintance with things, and having propositionsbrought into and left in my mind, withoutsettling the result, discriminating the true from thefalse, the certain from the uncertain I am in truthshamefully ignorant of many subjects which I seem toknow, and should be thoroughly acquainted with.What has brought me into this state is a treacherousmemory, and my having from nature a quick perceptionand lively imagination, with an understanding(either naturally or from bad habits) defective inD 358 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1802.the power of steadily contemplating many objectswithout confusion. This is really weakness of intellect,but it might have been lessened by early andhabitual efforts. The mathematics and algebra wouldhere have been eminently useful to me ; method toomight have been highly beneficial in keeping me froma habit of half attention. Alas, these remedies wereneglected, and from 17 to 21, when I ought to have beenunder that strict and wholesome regimen which thepeculiar diseases of my intellectual powers seemed torequire, I was strengthening these natural maladies :and this till set. 26. And though since that time Ihave been endeavouring to employ my talents, in thelargest sense, to the glory of God, and the good of man ;yet, alas, how ineffectually ! and my peculiar situation,and the great variety of things and persons with whichit renders me conversant, has kept me sadly back,I am tempted to think that it is now too late tomend my plan practically, with any effect ; yet as it haspleased God to call me again to parliament, and asthe greater my natural infirmities the more every aidis wanted, I am resolved to enter on a course ofmore systematic retention of the little I know or canacquire, and I mean to note down roughly the schemeof study it will be best for me to pursue. I would notoverrate knowledge, or proficiency in any humanpursuits or acquirements ; but inasmuch as God worksby human means, it seems to be our duty to labourdiligently in the pursuit of those qualifications, whichappear to be the instruments of usefulness for our1802. DIRECTION OF HIS STUDIES. 59particular station and occupation in life. Eloquencein its right sense is of great effect in every free community; and as it has pleased God to endow me witha certain natural turn for public speaking, and by Hisprovidence to place me in a situation in which there isroom for the use of that talent, it seems to be my dutyto improve that natural faculty, and cultivate that trueeloquence which alone is suitable to the character ofa follower of the Saviour, who was full of love, truth,and lowliness. Besides, the very basis of eloquence, inthe sense in which I use it, is wisdom and knowledge,a thorough acquaintance with one's subject, the surepossession of it, and power of promptly calling up andusing it. But let me ever remember here what causethere is for continual watchfulness and godly jealousy,lest the pursuit should lead to an inordinate love ofworldly estimation, to vanity, and pride ; and if tothem, in its consequence to the malignant passions."I have been thinking seriously," he says a few dayslater, 63 " and praying to God for direction as to theright employment of my time and direction of mystudies : and I put down such propositions as arepretty clear All this suggests that I should misapplymy few remaining years, by devoting my wholeor even my chief time and efforts to oratory. This mayjustly occupy some degree of them, especially so faras concerns, first, the invigorating the powers of mymind, and fixing my attention, and exerting at onceattention, memory, and invention ; and, secondly, the63 Aug. 17.60 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1802.fixing, securing, and retaining necessary knowledge ofdifferent kinds, and bringing it forth for use." But hisgeneral conclusion was, " to make the cultivation ofthese powers his secondary object," leaving as hismain " object " the promotion of his moral and religioususefulness." " Besides," he adds, " whateverdreams of ambition I may have indulged, it now seemsclear, that my part is to give the example of an independentmember of parliament, and a man of religion,discharging with activity and fidelity the duties of histrust, and not seeking to render his parliamentarystation a ladder by which to rise to a higher eminence.What has passed of late years, (the number of countrygentlemen made peers, &c.) renders it particularlynecessary to give this lesson ; and from whom can itbe required, if not from him who professes to have sethis affections on things above, and to consider himselfas a stranger and a pilgrim on the earth ? If itshould ever please God to call me to any situation ofpower, or to any higher eminence, which I do notexpect, He would furnish me with the talents necessaryfor the discharge of its duties. But as this is highlyimprobable, I should do wrong to sacrifice an opportunityof usefulness which is within my reach, inorder to qualify myself for a station I am not likelyever to fill."The recurrence of his birth-day (aet. 43) led himagain a few days later to review his situation and employments.He had of late found more time thanusual for general reading. To this he was so much1802. JOURNAL. 61devoted, that he found it, he has often said, likely toencroach more than any press of business upon thehours allotted to devotion. " I find books," he says, 64alienate my heart from God as much as any thing.I have been framing a plan of study for myself, butlet me remember that one thing is needful, that if myheart cannot be kept in a spiritual state without somuch prayer, meditation, Scripture reading, &c. asare incompatible with study and business, I must seekfirst the righteousness of God. Yet, O Lord, whenI think how little I have done, I am ashamed andconfounded, and I would fain honour God more thanI have yet done. Oh let me record His signal merciesduring the past year. My health has been uniformlygood till lately ; and now I suffer no pain. Manyinstances of mortality around me of younger andstronger men, and I am spared. My children, whowere all ill last winter, have enjoyed remarkably goodhealth. And can it be aught but the mercy of Godwhich overruled the hearts of my friends in Yorkshire,and rendered them all so kind and zealoustowards me, though I had never been there since theformer election ? All went off well.Indeed, who is there that has so many blessings ?Let me record some of them : Affluence, without thehighest rank. 65 A good understanding and a happytemper. Kind friends, and a greater number than64 Journal, August 24.65 Looking over this passage on his 71st birth-day, he added as a noteto the last two words, " This a great blessing."62 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1802.almost any one. Domestic happiness beyond whatcould have been conceived possible. A situation inlife most honourable ; and above all, a most favourablesituation for eternity the means of grace in abundance,and repeated motions of conscience, the effect,I believe, of the Holy Spirit. Which way soever Iturn I see marks of the goodness and long-sufferingof God. Oh that I may be more filled with gratitude !How merciful that I was not early brought intooffice, in 1782-3-4 ! This would probably have preventedmy going abroad, with all that through the providenceof God followed. Then my having such kindfriends, my book, &c. All has succeeded with me, andGod has by His preventing grace kept me from publiclydisgracing the Christian profession. O my soul,praise the Lord, and forget not all His mercies. Godis love, and His promises are sure. What thoughI have been sadly wanting to myself, yet we are assuredthat those that come unto Him He will in nowisecast out. I therefore look to Him with humblehope, I disclaim every other plea than that of thepublican, offered up through the Redeemer; but Iwould animate my hopes, trusting in Him that He willperfect, stablish, strengthen, settle me."I fear," he says in the course of the next month, 66that I have not studied the Scriptures enough.Surely in the summer recess I ought to read Scripturean hour or two every day, besides prayer, devotionalreading, and meditation. God will prosper me betterJournal, Sept. 19.1802. PRIVATE DEVOTIONS. 63if I wait on Him. The experience of all good menshows, that without constant prayer and watchfulnessthe life of God in the soul stagnates. Doddridge'smorning and evening devotions were serious matters.Colonel Gardiner always spent hours in prayer in themorning before he came forth. Bonnet practisedprivate devotions largely morning and evening, (Life,129,) and repeated Psalms, dressing and undressing,to raise his mind to heavenly things. I would lookupto God to make the means effectual, but let me usethem with humble thankfulness, and bless God for thealmost unequalled advantages and privileges I enjoy."Again he says, " Is it that my devotions aretoo much hurried, that I do not read Scriptureenough, or how is it, that I leave with reluctance themere chit-chat of Boswell's Johnson, for what oughtto be the grateful offices of prayer and praise ? Yetif any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is noneof His. I must then grow in grace. I must loveGod more. I must feel the power of Divine thingsmore. Whether I am more or less learned signifiesnot. Whether even I execute the work which I deemuseful is comparatively unimportant. But beware, Omy soul, of lukewarmness. 1 feel it difficult to adjustthe due degree of time to be allotted to prayer,Scripture reading, and other religious exercises. Godloves mercy better than sacrifice, and there is a dangerof a superstitious spirit, of being led to dependon the forms of religion. Yet the experience andexample of good men seems a fair guide. At all64 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1802.events however, some way or other,, my affectionsmust be set on things above. God is willing to supplyour needs. They who wait on Him shall renewtheir strength. I humbly trust in His promises."And again, " I am this morning deeply impressedwith a sense of the importance and reality of Divinethings, and I have prayed with more fervour thanusual that God would increase in me His love, andthat Christ may dwell in my heart by faith, that Imay pass the day in His fear and love. Alas ! somethoughts have shot across my heart as if it were aslavery and galling restraint thus to have God alwaysover me. I hope the suggestion was grievous tome;but how much more, even against my clearjudgment, do I find myself affected by earthly thanby heavenly things political topics, House of Commons'treatment, &c. : alas, that these trifles of a dayshould interest my feelings so warmly ! I ought indeedto engage in them ' fervently in spirit,' but yetwith a heart conscious that it is discharging a duty,not as if it were to my taste. Oh how sadly I feardoes love of human estimation still subsist within me !How little do I love my fellow creatures, especiallymy enemies, with the love of a real Christian ! Howlittle am I duly affected with the sad state of carelessor ungodly acquaintance ! 1 have lately been led tothink of that part of my life wherein I lived withoutGod in the world, wasting and even abusing all thefaculties He had given me for His glory. Surely whenI think of the way in which I went on for many years,1802. ABBE" Gregory. 65from about sixteen to 1785-6, I can only fall downwith astonishment as well as humiliation before thethrone of grace, and adore with wonder, no less thanremorse and gratitude, that infinite mercy of Godwhich did not cast me off, but on the contrary, guidingme by a way which I knew not, led me to thosefrom whom I was to receive the knowledge of salvation,(not more manifestly His work was St. Paul'sinstruction by Ananias,) and above all, softened myhard heart, fixed my inconstant temper, and thoughwith sad occasional relapses, and above all, shamefulunprofitableness, has enabled me to continue untilthis day. Praise the Lord, O my soul ! "The whole of this autumn was spent at Broomfield ;and his plans of study were often interrupted by itsneighbourhood to London. " I have found myself soincessantly worried here with company, that I ammeditating to retire to some other place for quiet. Iknow too well ( coelum non animus mutant,' &c.Yet much company is the bane of grace in the soul,and my time withheld from the best of worldly societyis worn away by ( the minor poets.' " 67Yet he thus " saw some interesting people, and gotthrough a good deal of reading, and occasional composition.Aug. 25th. Abbe Gregory and Smith thechemist breakfasted. I do not much affect theAbbe ; < La Religion, Humanity, la Liberty. That ismy object." 3 " Montagu called ; fresh. from France.The face of all in Paris military, soldiers with naked<* Diary, Sept. 12.66 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1802.bayonets in the gardens, streets, &c. Men of letterspatronized ; handsomely lodged, boarded, &c. Montagusaw Buonaparte at the Institute, attending adebate concerning a canal's course ; and he spoke foraquarter of an hour or twenty minutes, recapitulatingthe arguments, &c. talking of the ( gouvernement,'what it would do, Sec. He seemed nervous at firstcare-worn also. Was dressed plainly ; no honours ordistinction in his dress, seat, &c. He went away inacarriage, with one footman. He had been fourhours at a council, and came to this meeting andstaid two hours. The philosophers, even the greatestin mathematics, &c. appeared extremely ignorant inpolitics. Several churches converted into stables,public store-houses, &c. Many noblemen's housesrazed to the ground; Chantilly entirely, yet thebuyer got nothing by it." "Mr. Lancaster came tothe door, and I too lightly asked him to come in ;but when in, treated him kindly. Talked much onQuakers' opinions he pretty orthodox teaches 280children of his own collection elder boys teach, hesuperintends." " My books have been Gibbon's Declineand Macartney's China ; also Edwards Onthe Religious Affections an excellent book. It discoversclose scrutiny into the heart, and accurateobservation of its workings. The reasoning is sosimple and clear that it would, in that view only, beuseful to a young man. Writing a paper for theChristian Observer ; and letters many."1802. CHRISTIAN OBSERVER. 67TO MRS. HANNAH MORE.Broomfield, Sept. 7, 1802.My dear Friend,It has, you know r been matter of controversy,what degrees or kind of resemblance in the thoughtsof different writers are proofs that the one has borrowedfrom the other. You may perhaps at firstsuspect some laying of heads together, wren you readwhat I am about to propose to you that you shouldlend your aid a little to the cause of the ChristianObserver. I called on Henry [Thornton] last nightto state to him this my opinion, when I found thathe had already written to you on the same subjectBut as, where there is no servile imitation, as thecritics hold, there will be diversities, so here I findHenry and I, agreeing in the main idea, had differedin the next link of the chain. He wished you, I find,to send us an account of Miss H. Bird's last hours.Nothing on that subject can at all equal the simpleexpression of your feelings on the spot. Nevershall I forget the impression which it produced onmy own heart when I first read it on a Sunday, theday after its arrival, at Mr. Grant's house in JohnStreet. We, some of us, have that very paper, which,with a little explanation and supplement, would bethebest mode of sending it forth.But my idea was, and is, that you should write somereligious and moral novels, stories, tales, call *em whatyou will, illustrative of character and principles. The68 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1802.Cheap Repository tales, a little raised in their subjects,are the very things I want ; and I am persuaded, if youwould thus give your aid, and I join mine, (which Iwill if you will agree to furnish your complement,) wemight at once greatly raise the character and increasethe utility of the work. The truth is, it is heavy, andit will be heavy from the very nature of the case. Ifit be not enlivened it will sink, and you will hereafterregret that you refused to lend a helping hand tokeep it above water. Do therefore think of what Isay, and fall to work. Notwithstanding your illhealth, you have no valid excuse for not taking up thepen, because you write with such facility. I who,without any false humility, must say the very oppositeof myself, will yet fall to work when I knowyou have agreed to contribute. You must not refuseme.I have just looked at the last number of theAnti-Jacobin. They are sinking fast, and alreadyhave such marks of death about them, that theHumane Society itself would scarce undertake torevive them. Every blessing attend you.I am ever affectionately yours,W. WILBERFORCE." *His Diary proceeds to notice other visits. " Venncalled ; kept him to dinner. Most interesting conversation;telling us many most affecting incidentsabout his father, displaying especially his zeal and sue-seethe answer to this letter, Life of Mrs. H. More, vol. iii. p. 208.1802. DIARY. 69cess in God's cause, his powers of conciliating peoplewho were prejudiced against him. Mr. Kershaw andanother going over from Halifax to laugh, Kershawcompletely conquered, and to his dying day devotedto Mr. Venn. Mr. Venn's trust in Providence, andone singular interference : when all gloomy for wantof means to pay the butcher, a 50 note came ; fromwhom he never found out. At Lancaster the ministerreally proposed to him to drink a glass of brandy,and when he refused, said he would do the duty himself."69"Mr. Hardcastle with me going to France toinquire, &c. with a view to the diffusion of theBible. Assured by Douche that he would assist'them gladly. He quite arbitrary at Paris sent for aloose gambling fellow, and threatened him with imprisonment; and when he resented it, told him thathe would imprison him for six weeks, unless he wassubmissive, to show him that he had the power. Thesplendour very great in Paris in some things, but veryunequal. Perhaps a room which has cost 20,000,and an immensely fine dinner, and only two or threeservants to wait; valets de place, shabby fellows,being brought by every man. Buonaparte goes tothe play every night, but cannot be seen in his box.Land well cultivated, and sells high. Much privatesociety now, and universal extravagance continuedfrom Revolution, when profuseness natural. No talkabout politics, except in perfectly confidential parties.09 Diary.70 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1802.Espionage universal, and men of all ranks employedin it. Fox said to be favourably received in Parisby the First Consul." 70 " They have dined togetherin great friendship. One cannot well conceive twopeople with fewer points of accordance. I know notwhether you have kept your eye on the French WestIndian proceedings, but there is scarce any thing tobe found equal to them in the annals of human villany."71 " I am instigating Fox to urge Buonaparteon the Abolition, of which probably he knows nothing,and confounds it with Emancipation." 72 " Themorning slid away in writing to Fox on Abolition.Yesterday Bowels Johnson detained me in chit-chatalmost the whole evening, so my morning must paythe debt."Another service was now before him. " I feelstrongly impressed on reflection, with a persuasionthat a good Abolition pamphlet is wanted, and as Ido not know any body who will write it, I fear I musttry my hand at it." 73 " I am afraid it would be avolume. The subject has never been discussed since1792; since that era more than half the House ofCommons is changed, and a new generation hassprung up in the world. I fear there are very fewindeed, who know at all the grounds on which thesubject rests. They adhere to the party, . . not all ofthem, alas ! . . be it what it may, which they originallyjoined, and give a languid support, as if by prescript70 Diary, Sept. 17. ?i Letter to Lord Lancaster, Sept. 7.79 Diary, Sept. 11. 73 Ib. Sept. 19.1802. CONCLUSION OF THE RECESS. 71tion. All the Irish members, to a man, are whollyignorant on the subject. I quite shrink from thetask; for it would completely occupy me for three orfour months, and I am pretty clear that in that timeI should not satisfy myself or do justice to thecause." 74He could not find leisure at present for this work.The last fortnight " (he says at the close of therecess) " has run insensibly away. My letters are anincessant toil and trouble to me. My mornings arecurtailed, and I cannot compose in an afternoon orevening. Ran over lately Man of Feeling, and of theWorld mischievous-principled works ; part of Boswell'sJohnson ; Ferguson's Roman History ; a littleof D'Arnay's Private Life of Romans ; Epistle to theRomans, with writing ; newspapers take time ; Bettering[of the Poor] Reports ; Goldberry's French Accountof Africa.Public events. Our government seems to havebeen remonstrating against Buonaparte's scandalousinvasion of Swiss freedom, but the issue not yet clear.I think Buonaparte will give way in some degree, withoutowning it. Pitt still kindly helping Addington.Came to London and visited him at Richmond Park,just after Logwood sold. Pitt called, and spent a dayand a quarter at Sir Charles Middleton's, going theretostudy farming. Sir Charles astonished at hiswonderful sagacity, and power of combining andreasoning out. Says he is the best gentleman farmer7* To Rev. Thomas Gisborne, Sept. 20.72 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1802.he, Sir Charles, knows, and may he the best farmer inEngland. Bernard and I busy together about educationplan for children of lower orders." 75TO THOMAS BERNARD ESQ. FOUNDLING HOSPITAL.Broomfield, Nov. 2, 1802.My dear Sir,I have only received your letter this morning,and I hasten to assure you that if you prefer bringingforward the paper on Friday, I will certainly attend ;and I beg you will tell me without reserve what youreally wish. The truth is, that with friends I am perhapstoo open, but then I depend on their being equallyopen with me ; and unless they are so, I may notact as they would wish me, from believing that theywould have expressed all their mind. I assure you,sincerely, that I am always most gratefully employed,as well as in my own judgment most usefully, when Iam engaged in supporting your benevolent exertions ;and I beg you will always call on me when you haveoccasion for me, doing me the justice, for it is nomore than justice, to believe that I shall answer toyour summons. Having some morning business toget through, I am very unwilling to go to town till Ifix there, but if you think that measures cannot begoing forward without talking the matter over, Iwill sacrifice a morning ; for it is an entire morning'ssacrifice to me to be at all in London, where I am7* Diary.1802. TO THOMAS BERNARD ESQ. 73always in the situation of a horse in a summer day, onwhom the flies settle the instant he stops.May it please God, long to continue to us yourvaluable labours, and bless you, as He has hithertodone, with the invention, the judgment, and thevarious powers of execution required for enablingyou to discharge with effect your difficult services.Accept all this warm from the heart. And if youwish me to attend on Friday, believe me that I shalldo it, please God, with great pleasure.Yours, my dear Sir,Ever affectionately,W. Wilberforce."Parliament met on the 16th of November. "Were-elected Abbot to-day without opposition, after amost characteristic speech from Sir William Scott,who moved his being replaced in the chair. Nothingcould be more appropriate than his language. As Iwas coming out of the House, Canning accosted me,telling me that he had a violent quarrel against me ;and when I stared, Nay, says he, on public grounds ;and then explained that it was on account of myspeech at York on my re-election, against continentalconnexions. I told him that certainly it was a questionin which much must depend on circumstancesand degrees, but that generally I was less friendly tothem than many men ; and that having been so ten yearsago, I had not of course become less diffident of myVOL. III. E74 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1802.doctrines from the treatment we had received from ourallies. From Canning's warmth you will guess a gooddeal, remembering that partly from constitutionaltemperament, partly from opposition feelings, he maycarry his principles further than some other of ourgreat political men. But I own I dread getting intoa war. Above all, I am anxious that if we are to gotowar at all, it may appear plainly to have been forcedupon us, and not to have been resorted to as a measureof choice, as the result of closet reflection, andpolitical calculation.O my dear Babington, how little is all this variedscene of things regarded as the stage on which theSupreme Being is exhibiting His attributes, and guidingall the movements, however complicated, howeverminute or obscure, and causing them to effectthe purposes He has foreordained ! How thankfulshould we be, that He has pointed out to us themeans whereby, whatever may become of our temporalinterests, our eternal concerns may be placed beyondthe reach of danger." 76At the very commencement of the session, hedeclared his views upon our foreign policy. " Nov.24th. Address moved. Opened debate. Spokestrongly against engaging in continental alliances asprincipals." 77 And again, " Spoke, having been muchurged by Canning and Ryder, on continental alliances."78 " Our national integrity and good faith76 To Thomas Babington Esq. Nov. 16.77 Diary. ?s Ib. Dec. 9.1802. SPEECH ON FOREIGN CONNEXIONS. 75renders us unfit to enter on them. We cannot keep orbreak engagements as it suits the convenience of themoment." He went on to urge upon the governmenta due employment of the present time of peace.Buonaparte," he admitted, " has doubtless muchwithin his power, but what was quaintly said by myLord Coke, 79 as to limitations of the power of parliament,may not unfitly be applied to him. TheAlmighty has placed His moral no less than Hisnatural ordination of things beyond the reach ofhuman interference. Is Buonaparte formidable as amilitary despot ? He cannot also reign in the heartsof a free people, and command those ample resources,which liberty, well regulated liberty, canalone amass, or having amassed, will alone employwith spirit in its country's cause."The part he took in these debates attracted muchattention both in and out of parliament. " We heara great deal of a famous speech of yours and Sheridan's,"writes Mrs. Hannah More, 80 " so much thatwe regret that our economy had cut off the expenseof a London paper." " You talk of my speech," heanswers; 81 "whatever it was, the newspapers wouldhave given you no idea of it. Never was any onemade to talk such arrant nonsense, and on a subjecttoo on which I wished not to have been" mistake."Dec. 11th. Bankes and I called on St. Helen's for~ 9 "The House of Commons can do every thing, but make a man awoman, or a woman a man."To W. Wilberforce Esq. Dec. 23. * Jan. 5, 1803.E '276 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1802.three quarters of an hour, and had much talk with him.He agreed with us on continental alliances, and warand peace. The Windhamites make a great stormabout continental alliances, and force ministry toabjure our doctrine. Canning plainly condemningministry I defended them, and condemned f men notmeasures,' which proclaimed hy Canning, and stronglyaffirmed by Fox, who very uncivil to me." 82 Hehad intended to publish the substance of thesespeeches, but gave it up " from want of time. I regretit, because the newspapers made me talk suchegregious nonsense, and I may be unjustly exposedto the charge of inconsistency. Still more, I thinkit might have done some good. For, in spite of somuch bitter experience, there is still a proneness instatesmen to form grand schemes of complicatedpolicy ; and there is in the people of every country afatal facility of entering into wars, though they soontire of them.I own that I more and more think that it is ourtrue policy to cultivate our own internal resources ;to gain the hearts of our people, and especially of oursailors ; to economize in our expenditure, while welighten the pressure of taxes on the lower orders, andlay them, if needful, even more heavily on the higher.Endeavours should be used also to revive and excitepublic spirit, for in this, as in many other cases, it isdangerous to have people in a state of cold neutrality ;they must be warmly your friends, or they will be82 Diary,1802. RETROSPECT OF THE YEAR. 77your enemies. Above all, the interval of peaceshould be used as a golden period, to be diligentlyimproved for the reformation of our morals, by trainingup the children of the lower orders in virtuoushabits, and in dispositions friendly to the peace ofsociety, and to the maintenance of religious and civilinstitutions, Hae tibi grunt artes." 83The year concludes with some striking secret meditations." How many and great corruptions doesthe House of Commons discover to me in myself !What love of worldly estimation, vanity, earthly-mindedness! How different should be the frame of areal Christian, who, poor in spirit, and feeling himselfa stranger and a pilgrim on earth, is looking for thecoming of his Lord and Saviour ; who longs to bedelivered from the present evil world, and to see Godas He is ! I know that this world is passing away,and that the favour of God, and a share in the blessingsof the Redeemer's purchase, are alone worthy ofthe pursuit of a rational being : but alas ! alas ! Iscarcely dare say I love God and His ways. If I havemade any progress, it is in the clearer discovery ofmy own exceeding sinfulness and weakness. Yet Iam convinced it is my own fault. Let me notacquiesce then in my sinful state, as if it were not tobe escaped from. Thanks be to God, who giveth usthe victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. Yes, wemay, I may, become holy. Press forward then, O mysoul. Strive more vigorously. God and Christ willw To Thomas Babington Esq. Dec. 29.78 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1802.not refuse Their help. And may the emotions I havebeen now experiencing, be the gracious motions of thedivine Spirit, quickening my dead heart, and bringingme from the power of Satan unto God." 8484 Journal.CHAPTER XVIII.JANUARY 1803 TO MAY 1804.New-year's day Finley British transports for St. DomingoMotion against the Slave Trade delayed by King's messageon National Defence Bible Society founded Visit to WildernessPark Wilberforce opposes the renewal of warWeakness of ministers Volunteers York meeting BathEaston Fast day Remarkable escape State of parties atthe meeting of parliament Christmas recess Breach betweenPitt and Addington Pitt's motion on-naval inquirySunday drilling Political negociations Pitt comes intooffice.THE new year began with his receiving the HolyCommunion, and forming vows of more devoted service." I will press forward and labour to knowGod better, and love Him more assuredly I may,because God will give His Holy Spirit to them thatask Him, and the Holy Ghost will shed abroad thelove of Quod in the heart. Oh then pray pray beearnest press forward and follow on to know theLord. Without watchfulness, humiliation, andprayer, the sense of Divine things must languish, asmuch as the grass withers for want of refreshing rainsand dews. The word of God and the lives of good80 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1803.men give us reason to believe, that without thesethere can be no lively exercise of Christian graces.Trifle not then, O my soul, with thy immortal interests.Heaven is not to be won without labour.Oh then press forward : whatever else is neglected,let this one thing needful be attended to ; then willGod bless thee. I will try to retire at nine or half-past,and every evening give half an hour, or an hour,to secret exercises, endeavouring to raise my mindmore, and that it may be more warmed with heavenlyfire. Help me, O Lord without Thee I can donothing. Let me strive to maintain a uniform frameof gratitude, veneration, love, and humility, not un-elevatedwith holy confidence, and trembling hopein the mercies of that God, whose ways are not asour ways, nor His thoughts as our thoughts. I shouldalmost despair of myself, but for His promises. Strive,O my soul, to maintain and keep alive impressions,first, of the constant presence of a holy, omniscient,omnipotent, but infinitely merciful and graciousGod, of Christ our Almighty Shepherd, of the HolySpirit, of the evil one, and the invisible world ingeneral. Secondly, of the real nature and malignity ofsin, as a holy curb on my inclinations, which willcheck me and keep me from evil. Thirdly, of my ownvileness and unprofitableness. And to these let meadd a fourth, a sense of the multiplied blessings ofmy situation. Surely never cup was so full. Oh that Iwere more thankful ! My ingratitude should humble1803. DIARY. 81me in the dust." l He was spending this vacation atBroomfield, though often called to London by theclaims of charity and business.Reading Annual Register, History, and Gil Biasvery hastily. Letters innumerable. Correcting HenryThornton's, and revising other papers for the ChristianObserver. Much occupied in D.'s affairs. Satisfiedmyself that he has no bad meaning a lesson tobe moderate and candid on the one hand, for howsure was S. that he must have had roguish intentions !and to be careful not to give needless offence on theother, which D. has eminently done. Tired andharassed with this matter I am grieved at the ideaof hurting him, yet should be sorry to lose 4000 andwaste such means of usefulness through false delicacy.I commit the matter to Carcase, and write to tell D.so, believing it to be the most likely way of preventinga breach between us in the long run, though I fearthat an attorney is to a poor fellow in his situationmuch what a cat is to a mouse, or a weasel to a rabbit .I am sure I feel for him though I seem to speaklightly." 2 On another such occasion shortly afterwardshe writes to consult Mr. Stephen, adding,if there be more than five words necessary to besaid on it do not plague yourself with it now, unless itmay be material to Mrs. S.'s interest ; she, as a widowand near relation, claims doubly my best aid. I wantyou to have your country run undisturbed, and do notgive you credit for the same innate love of law which1 Journal, Jan. 2. 2 Diary, Jan. 1.E 382 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1803.made Lord Kenyon bring some cases to be answered,as another man would crack walnuts, when he wassitting tete-astute with Lady Kenyon after supper.It is a shame to get so much law gratis ; especially asyours is better than gratuitous law has the characterof being."Jan. 3rd. Addington called and spent an hour Itold him of Stamp Office frauds, and peace or war, &c.6th. Mr. Neil dined with me about prisons a tour of1 700 miles for that sole end." 16th. " Simeon dined :interesting conversation gives a melancholy accountof the enthusiasm of the people in South Wales. InScotland the ministers hampered by their GeneralAssembly politics. He was kindly received by all,The Bishop of Ely very civil to him, and reproved anattempt to fling out at him. Lord Teignmouth dinedmuch talk with him about Lord Cornwallis's statueinscription. Wrote a long letter to poor Finley.20th. Vaccine meeting. Afterwards an interview withpoor Finley in Newgate very affecting shocked atNewgate and its inhabitants."This impression was, no doubt, increased by hishaving been too constantly employed of late to continuehis early custom of visiting our prisons. Thiscase had been brought casually before him. It wasone of great affliction. Finley was an officer inthe army, the son of a clergyman whose venerablewidow still survived. ee He had been patronized,"Mr. Wilberforce writes to Mr. Babington, " by theMarquis of Buckingham, Windham, and others ;1803. FINLEY. 83and being dissipated and profuse beyond his means,is now under sentence of death for forgery, andsure to suffer. I heard of him through his wife, apoor Scotch girl, young and handsome, whom he hadbrought out of the north, and who has not a friend oranacquaintance in London, while, poor soul, she hasasucking child at the breast. I heard some thingsof the man which made me entertain an indifferentopinion of him, and was averse to sending anyclergyman to him ; but my dear wife prevailed onme to do it, and I put Doddridge's Rise and Progressinto his hands, and Crowther 3 undertook tovisit him. To be short, we trust it has pleased Godto bless the means which we have used, and that thepoor man is a true convert. Providentially he hashad far more time than usual for preparation, and,as he remarked himself when I was with him theother day, he has enjoyed much more space andleisure for religious consideration than if he hadbeen lying on a sick-bed. His venerable mother, amost pleasing old woman above fourscore, told mewith tears, that she was indebted to me beyond whatlanguage could express for having been the instrumentof her son's happy change."Finley was executed upon the 8th of February.My note written to Crowther with a message tohim, consoled and cheered him. Crowther came todine. Delighted with his account of Finley 's latter3 Rev. Samuel Crowther, Vicar of Christ's Church, Newgate.84 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1803.days his deep humility and his soundness." 4 Whathe witnessed in this instance strengthened his disapprobationof the usual haste with which execution ismade to follow sentence. He had once intended tobring the matter before parliament, and gave it uponly from the fear of inflicting a useless injury uponreligion , by provoking an unsuitable discussion. " Tobring forward," was his answer when it was pressedupon him, " such a motion would lead to much profaneribaldry, and no good result. You could-onlyargue it on grounds to which the great mass of membersare altogether strangers." No man with a boldermaintenance of truth united a nicer sense of thereverence due to holy things ; and he would not needlesslyexpose the sanctuary to the hard gaze of coarseand careless spirits. He had studied carefully hisaudience, and would reprove the low tone of doctrinewhich he sometimes heard from the pulpit by remarking," I could say as much as that in the Houseof Commons."He was still at Broomneld ; and whilst even there,his time fled so " inconceivably fast that, though" hewas " never idle," he knew not how to find leisure forapamphlet he longed to write upon the Slave businessbefore the Abolition question comes on;" 5 yethe shrank back " still more " from the approachingbustle and turmoil of the great city. Certainly thequiet of a country life is most congenial with all ourDiary, Jan. 8. Mb. Jan. 27.1803. BUONAPARTE HIRING ENGLISH SHIPS. 85best dispositions. Our blessed Saviour, however,mixed in the busy haunts of men. May I be enabledto do it more in His spirit not slothful in business,but serving the Lord ; and not solicitous about thefavour or the praises of men." 6On the third of February parliament reassembled,and he returned to active duty. " House of Commonsdined Stephen's. Busy about our helpingBuonaparte with ships for St. Domingo" to reestablishslavery.(e Would that, as you desire," he writes to Mr.Stephen, 8 " I could give myself wholly to this business.But it is impossible. I have had a deputationof clothiers with me for two hours almost, whileyour messenger has been waiting. If you can helpme with good proof that the act we deprecate is contraryto the law of nations, I shall be most thankfulfor it. But the House adopts so implicitly themaxim, Quolibet in arte sua, &c. that all my assertionswould weigh not a feather against Sir William Grant'sipse dixit, or Sir William Scott's pausing. If one couldget an answer from a civilian of note declaring thetransaction illegal, the showing it to the merchantsmight deter them."I am vexed with Addington," he says a weeklater, 9 " who does nothing decisive, though I havetold him of great abuses in one of the public offices.Then he half-defended the merchants for helping6 Letter from W. Wilberforce to Thomas Babington Esq. Jan. 31.Diary, Feb. 3, 8 Feb. 4. 9 Diary. Feb. 12.86 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1803.Buonaparte with ships for transports, which mostmonstrous. Stephen very earnest. Grenville calledon me about it, and Pitt reprobating it. Pitt notyet come up. I suspect not very friendly to Addingtonjust now. Fox did not seem to feel the enormityof our helping Buonaparte as he ought. I wrote tohim about it. Hardcastle had an offer for two ships.Cruelties and perfidy in St. Domingo utterly horrible.Stephen's predictions fully verified."How shall I tell you' he writes to Mr. Barrington,10 " that I have ascertained that the Frenchgovernment have actually engaged some Englishships to carry over troops and stores to St. Domingo ;whether to serve also as stifles and trowsers I knownot. It is a crime which I believe will bring itspunishment along with it in the injury it will do oursailors, and in the effect it will probably produce incausing the blacks of St. Domingo to regard us astheir enemies . . . those very blacks, with whom wemade a treaty, which was never annulled, and towhich the security of Jamaica for two or three yearswas owing ; and many of them the same individualswho served faithfully in our army, and to whom wehad engaged to give their liberty at the end of a fewyears. You know, I believe, that we marched 12,000of these troops to Toussaint, when we evacuated theisland." Nothing but the renewal of hostilities withFrance saved us from this guilty undertaking.He was just about to bring on the Abolition questMarch 4.1803. MILITARY PREPARATION. 87tion, when he was seized, he tells Mr. Babingtonwho was then resident in Madeira, " with a certainillness which is going through all London, calledfrom its generality the influenza, and by the learned,as I hear, grippe, (Franchise,) under a notion of itsbeing brought from Paris, where it raged previouslywith great violence. It is attended with great temporaryprostration of strength, fever, attacks in thehead, bowels, and lungs. I conceive it is this complaintunder which I have laboured, for I am only nowrecovering, I thank God, after a more serious illnessthan I have had for many years. But this, as well asevery other dispensation, has furnished abundant matterfor thankfulness. I suffered no pain worth speakingof ; I had every possible comfort ; my mind was inavery tranquil, comfortable state, and the Dean ofCarlisle happened, as we speak, to be upon the pointof coming up, and was an unspeakable comfort to mywife." The complaint ran through his family, andlong threatened fatal consequences to his eldestdaughter.Whilst he was still confined at home " a messagefrom the King announced the necessity of immediatemilitary preparations." ] Silent leges inter arma : aridfor the remainder of the year threatening of invasionand provision for defence engrossed the minds of all.Your heart would ache," he writes upon the 22ndof March to Mr. Babington, " could I unload to youmy budget and make you a partaker of my political11 Diary, March 8.88 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1803.grievances. The premier is a man of sense, of a generousmind, of pure and upright intentions, and of morereligion than almost any other politician. But alas,he has sadly disappointed me ; I trusted he wouldcorrect abuses, hut in vain have I endeavoured tospirit him up even when convinced of their reality.Just now, when I expected I should hear of the membersof a particular Board, that they were about to behanged, or (as I am writing to a sober matter-of-factman) more literally, that they were turned out withdisgrace, I have heard that they are going to have200 per annum each added to their salaries. In almostevery department, but most in the differentbranches of the naval, there has been sad mismanagement.Then my poor slaves ! This King's messagewhich came down before I had returned to the Houseafter my illness, (by which I was attacked almostimmediately after my arrival in London,) has made itimproper to bring forward my intended motion. Youcan conceive what would be said by Lord Hawkesbury& Co. if I were to propose the Abolition now,when the whole attention of government is justlycalled to the state of the country. How should I beinvoked to delay the discussion at least till a moreconvenient season! I don't think that with suchplausible objections, so smoothly pressed as they wouldbe by some whom you will guess without my namingthem, we should have above thirty or forty supporters,and all the Irish members headed by Lord Castlereaghwould be pledged against us for the time to come.1803. TO THOMAS Barrington ESQ. 89And all this time the wicked abominations of theSlave Trade are going on in a greater degree thanever.Let me tell you,- while I think of it, thatthe accounts you will see in the newspapers of Buonaparte'sviolent language and demeanour towards LordWhitworth at Madame Buonaparte's drawing-room,are substantially true. He spoke loud enough to beheard by two hundred people, and his countenancewas perfectly distorted with passion. I am grievedto tell you, from the concurrent testimony of severalwell-informed persons who have lately been in France,that there exists pretty generally a rooted hatred ofGreat Britain. It is conceived that the war musthave ended much sooner but for us. Envy, jealousy,vanity, all conspire to foment this spirit of hostility.How shocking this ! my heart is heavy when I thinkof it. May you and I be enabled to live more andmore above this world, and habitually to have ourconversation, our citizenship in heaven.""I have been much engrossed lately by conversationwith Milner, and several public meetings,and notes and letters; yet too little done, alas !Gambier's paper got an interview between Addingtonand him on Admiralty and dock yards'state. Peace and war still uncertain. During myillness I read Hayley's Life of Cowper now EdinburghReview. George Eyre dined, and long talkabout Paris, whence he just come all military greatinveteracy against England unequalled greatness of90 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1803.French gallery innumerable gambling houses." 12Colors at breakfast. Lord Mayor on businessasking him to move Sunday Bill. I have not attendedthe House, salutis causa, and there has been nothingmaterial to do. The state of the navy, the cruel,unlawful, and oppressive treatment of the sailors,saddens my heart. I am disappointed with Adding -ton. G. Berkeley seems disposed to bring the matterforward." 13 " The idea of the navy corruptions andabuses prevails more and more. I told Canning thatif Addington would not reform them I would not bebackward to join in the House in applying the remedy.Pitt's return talked of and wished." 14 " Two daysago I wrote a serious letter to Addington on navaland other mismanagement, which kindly receivedand answered. Peace and war still undecided." 15All eyes were turned anxiously to this great question,as the hope of preserving peace became evidentlyweaker every day. It was at this very time, amidst thedin of warlike preparation, that the foundation-stonewas laid of an institution which was to leaven all nationswith the principles of peace. The great difficultyof obtaining Bibles for home, and still more foreign,circulation, had for some years been a matter of unavailingcomplaint. A new scheme to effect thispurpose was now in agitation. The designers ofthe new society proposed to combine for this commonobject the scattered energies of all professingDiary, March 19.3 Diary, April 3. u Ib. 8. 15 Ib. 17.1803. BIBLE SOCIETY. 91Christians ; and so to create a mighty instrument forthe circulation of the truth. Mr. Wilberforce hadsecretly done much in this very work ; 16 and thecatholic aspect worn by this new society delighted hislarge and liberal mind. He was accordingly one ofits first framers. " Hughes, Reyner, and Grantbreakfasted with me," says his Diary, 17 " on BibleSociety formation." And a few days later, " cityBible Society proposal." Here, as he would oftenmention, "a few of us met together at Mr. Hardcastle'scounting-house, at a later hour than suited cityhabits, out of a regard to my convenience, and yet onso dark a morning that we discussed by candle-light,while we resolved upon the establishment of the BibleSociety."Little did it promise, when thus planted as { thesmallest of seeds,' to grow to such a goodly statureamongst the trees of the forest. This is not the placeto scrutinize its constitution. The good that it haseffected has been great beyond the utmost expectationof its founders, both in the circulation of theword of God, and in awakening the zeal of a carelessgeneration. The evil which has waited on this good,has been incidental in its character, and confined,perhaps almost entirely, to the public meetings. Norshould those who view it in its consequences, forgetthe different position of its founders. Mr. WilderThus the clergy of East Harleigh and some surrounding parishes,to take one out of many instances, appear to have been supplied manyyears ago with Bibles by his private charity.'7 AprilS.92 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1803.force saw no danger to the Church from the cooperationof Dissenters, who at that time professedan affectionate regard for the national establishment.Bishops Porteus and Barrington, who hadsupported his efforts for enforcing the King's proclamation,readily joined with him here ; and by noother machinery could the result have been obtained.So great was the torpor of the Church, that all morestrictly regular exertions had absolutely failed, 18 andthey who devised this powerful instrument of good,are hardly to be blamed, though they have with aholy daring called up a spirit too mighty for theirabsolute controlsletter to Lord Lancaster, written during theEaster holidays, is a lively picture of these anxioustimes.London, April 16, 1803.My dear Lancaster,I flatter myself that you will be ready to abuseme for not writing to you this week, when a littlerecess from parliamentary business would of courseleave me more leisure for the service of my friends.I really did intend paying off all my epistolary debts,but somehow or other, the week has rolled away insensibly,and never do I remember less done in it.My bodily state has in part made me inefficient.There is certainly a something which is very peculiar,18 The Principality had for years vainly begged for Bibles, which thelimited funds of the Venerable Society had made it unable to bestow uponthem.1803. TO LORD MUNCASTER.even stout people feel it ; with a blazing sun there isa rawness which is not dulcified, just as you sometimesfind an acid which no sugar will overpower.fc We are just returned to Palace Yard, to spendSunday in quiet with our children, having been visitingat Henry Thornton's and Lord Teignmotith's. Nothaving seen any one since my return, I have no newsto tell you. There certainly has been a negotiationwith Pitt, in which his return to power, and that ofsome others of his ministry, has been in question.Whether it is over, or if over, what is the issue of it, Iknow not. There is one view in which it is honourableto Pitt to be called out of retirement in thetime of difficulty and danger.The gleanings of peace should new tempests deform,The regret of the good, and the fears of the wise,Shall turn to the pilot that weathered the storm.'Yet in another view I like it not. It will associatethe ideas of Pitt and war together as much as thoseof Fleury and peace a far more desirable combination.The lower orders to a man will be likely tofeel this, and you will anticipate the use which willbe made of it by Fox and his partisans.I hinted to you that I feared there was too muchcause for the reports in circulation of the gross mismanagementof our navy. Do you see that abusive fellow,Cobbett ? He is too low, and bitter, and indiscriminate ;but his paper is often worth reading. His charges againstthe Admiralty are precise, and if they can be verified,94 LIFE OF Wilberforce. 1803.no punishment can be too great for the delinquency.All from whom I have heard are in the same story.I own I feel more than all the rest what I fear hastaken place, that just and grievous matter of offencehas been given to the sailors. What a disappointmentto me, who had reason to expect from Addington'slanguage a year and more ago that some grievanceswhich had long existed should be done away, andnow ships have been sent to sea with two, three, andfour years' pay due to them, directly contrary to Actof Parliament. If we hear of a general mutiny inthe West Indies it will not be at all wonderful.From what I hear, this subject, if war does not takeplace, will be brought forward in parliament. Howthe negociations will end no one can guess. There issomething quite unaccountable in the orders andcounter-orders about evacuating the Cape of GoodHope.O my dear friend, I wish I were out of thebustle. How ardently do I pant for the shade ! If Idurst carve for myself I would not continue a weeklonger in harness. But I am ashamed, overflowingas my cup is with blessings, to say any thing whichimplies dissatisfaction with my condition. Neverhad man more cause for thankfulness, and I ought tobe more actively grateful than I am.Farewell, my dear friend. With kind remembrancesto Lady M.,Yours ever,W. Wilberforce."1803. WILDERNESS PARK. 95The tone in which this letter closes is preserved inhis Diary, when three days later, " Lord Bathurstcalled and told" him " about the negociation betweenPitt and Addington." " What a worldly spirit didthis conversation create in me, from the consciousnessof being the depositary of secrets ! Yet my betterjudgment resists these emotions, and suggests to methat these things are low compared with a Christian'sobjects. I find reason to thank God for my marriage,which, by shutting me out more from the world, hastended to keep me from its infection. Oh may myconversation be in heaven ! In the same spirit, hesays a few days later, when he was " much pressed byLord Camden and Pitt to go to Wilderness, LordCamden's, to meet Pitt, and hear the account of thelate negociation. I have consented. I hope it isright. Oh let me beware, lest I grow fond of theworld. I am going into a trying scene ; may I be sostrengthened as to come out unhurt. O Lord, quickenme ; fill me with heavenly-mindedness, and peace,and joy." 19Set off on the 25th, about half-past two, toWilderness with Lord Camden, in his chaise. ToLong's, Bromley Hill. There found Pitt. Saw theplace, sweetly pretty, and with Pitt tte--tte, toWilderness. Heard the complete story of the latenegociation with Addington his plan of defendingthe country, if war. His mind of the same superiorcast. Did not get to dinner till almost eight19 Diary, April 24.96 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1803.o'clock. William Long, Lord Camden, Pitt, and I,chatted till bed-time, half-past twelve. 20 Tuesday.After breakfast long discussion with Pitt. Talkedabout navy's state, as clay before. Then read longingly,and walked out. I fear the morning was toomuch wasted, and grieved on reflection that I had nottalked at all to Pitt on Abolition, though I deliberatelythink it would have done no good. I fear myframe of mind is not quite what it ought to be ; forthough my spirits are often low in the society of thesefriends, yet I do not feel enough a lively and tenderconcern for their spiritual state. O Lord, make memore transformed into Thine image." 21The following day brought him back to London,and a host of occupations. On the Saturday evening,he speaks of " combating his dulness by prayer andmeditation, in order to fit myself for tomorrow, especiallyas I have had so little time for religious officesthis week. I have found evil from not trying to improveSaturday evenings, and to be earlier on Sunday morningsfor God. I must endeavour D. G. to mendhere." 22 This labour was not thrown away. " Oblessed day," he says on Sunday, " which allows us aprecious interval wherein to pause, to come out fromthe thickets [the bush] of worldly concerns, and to giveourselves up to heavenly and spiritual objects. Andoh what language can do justice to the emotions ofgratitude which ought to fill my heart, when I considerhow few of my fellows know and feel its value*> Diary, April 26. 21 Ib. April 27. Journal, May 1.1803. WAR EXPECTED. 97and proper uses ? Oh the infinite goodness and mercyof my God and Saviour ! "Every eye was now fixed upon the dangers of thecountry. An army of 500,000 veterans, flushed withvictory and imbittered by former disappointments,lay just across the Channel, ready to invade its shores.He was giving a " dinner to King, the Americanminister, on his taking leave, when Henry Thorntoncame over with the sad tidings of Addington's havingdeclared in his place, that Andreossi had asked for apassport, that Lord Whitworth returning, in short,that war. The news had the effect on the sudden ofmaking me feel a sort of intoxicating flush, thoughmy judgment so deeply deplores it. 23 7th. Morning,on opening the Bible, after praying to God forguidance and protection, I accidentally just glancedmy eye on Jeremiah xxxix. 16 18. 24 Oh that I mayhave God for a refuge, and then it matters not whatbefalls me. I would not lay much stress on suchincidents, because we are not warranted so to do bythe word of God, but it seemed fit to be noticed andrecorded."His Journal during this year is more than usuallyfull of the secret workings of his mind. " What amystery of iniquity," he says, " is the human heart !How forcibly do thoughts of worldly pursuits intrudeinto the mind during the devotional exercises, andhow obstinately do they maintain their place, andwhen excluded, how incessantly do they renew their Diary, May 6. 24 " Go and speak to Ebed-melech," &c.VOL. III. F98 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1803,tacks ! which yet the moment our devotional exercisesare over, fly away of themselves. To-day the SlaveTrade thus harassed me." 25 And on a followingSunday " I have been at prayer, and I hope withsome fervency of desire for the blessings for which Iprayed ; but alas, my worldly mind ! Surely it is thetemptation of the evil spirit. Having called for thefirst time at Grant's on the way from church, andhaving talked quite at random of my probably takinga house near him with a back door to Museum Gardens,my mind keeps running on it; it absolutelyhaunts me, and will recur do all I can. Oh may Christby His Spirit give me that self-possession and sobrietyof mind, that low estimate of temporal things, thatstrong impression of their uncertainty and transitoriness,that I may not be thus at the mercy, the meresport of my imagination. In these times especially(yesterday the news of Lord Whitworth's leavingParis, and consequent expectation of war) I should beweaned from this world, and be as one who is here astranger and a pilgrim." 26May 17th. There are those who still expectpeace. Lord Salisbury told Acier so, merelyfrom speculating on the character of the man. St.Andrew St. John told me that Lord Whitworthwas enraged, though they would probably stop hismouth. That Talleyrand, &c. say our governmentnever fairly gave them in writing any ultimatum, anystatement of our terms. Fox had a communicationJournal, April 15. * Ib. May 15.1803. SPEECH AGAINST THE WAR. 99lately from Talleyrand to this effect. The generals,they say, are sanguine in their idea of invading England; that Talleyrand has played deep in our funds.Fox came up to me on the ministerial side to-day inthe House, but Attorney-general Perceval there, sohe could say nothing, but I suspect he meant to beginon the war." 27The next day he e( read the papers concerningthe rupture with France on his way to Broom -field ;" 28 and found himself reluctantly compelledon the following Monday to oppose the government." Lord Teignmouth came after breakfast totalk politics. He and I had taken exactly the sameview of the state of affairs ; thinking our governmenthad improperly asked to retain Malta, and that theyought to have offered to acquiesce in any arrangementfor making it independent. Read the papers, andtalked, and considered. House till half-past twelve.Spoke late, and House very impatient, being againsttheir opinions." 29 " Malta," he said, " is indeed a valuablepossession, but the most valuable of all the possessionsof this country is its good faith. It is apossession which, above all others, we should watchwith jealous circumspection, and guard from the verysuspicion of infringement. This then is my grandobjection to the conduct of ministers, that by claimingthe possession of Malta, instead of its independence,they took ground which was barely tenable ;7 Diary. Ib. May 18.29 Ib. April 23.F 2100 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1803.they gave our inveterate enemy an opportunity t)fmistaking our real views both to France and to Europe."The debate was renewed the following day.House till four in the morning. Divided in minorityof 67 against 398. Henry Thornton, Bankes, andI agreed. Fox spoke three hours with wonderfulability, as Pitt last night, in quite different style, foran hour or more, appealing to national pride, honour,&c." 30To this appeal he had himself replied in theconclusion of his speech. " I have not descantedon the evils of war, and endeavoured to affect yourpassions by turning your minds to the contemplationof its various horrors ; not but that I think avery unjust outcry is raised against all those whotouch on those topics, whilst appeals to pride, toglory, to the reputation of our brave forefathers, areheard with delight and clamorously applauded. Itmight tend, sir, to the discovery of the path oftruth and wisdom, if appeals to the passions were inall cases to be excluded from our discussions, and ifwe were to confine ourselves to a dry, cold, strict,logical investigation arid analysis. But if we allowof appeals to those passions, the influence of whichon persons in our rank of life must be particularlystrong, surely we should not so squeamishly rejectevery appeal to those feelings of our nature, whichteach us to sympathize with the widow and theorphan, and to deplore the various sufferings of30 Diary, May 24.1803. BENEFIT OF THE PEACE OF AMIENS. 101which war is, above all other calamities, the sure andprolific source."He felt deeply upon this subject, and published hisspeech. He was far from thinking with Mr. Pitt, 31that administration had been too slow in their appealto arms. The great benefit indeed, as he maintained,which had followed from the peace of Amiens,was not the temporary respite it afforded to our burdens,but that it showed the infinite ambition of ourenemy, and so proved the necessity of war. Tosecure this end effectually, Buonaparte must be shownto be clearly the aggressor. " Surely, if we are forcedinto war again, our people will engage in it with morespirit because they see their rulers unwilling to subjectthem to its evils." 32 This was in some degreeprevented by the conduct of our government; stillit was in a great measure attained. The nation, whichin 1800 was so weary of the war that nothing couldhave induced it to continue its exertions, awoke likea giant refreshed after its two years' repose, and neverturned back its hand till the hour of victory. " Itmay be necessary to make peace," wrote Dr. Milnerto Mr. Wilberforce whilst the negociations were depending," in order that the nation may be convincedthat peace cannot be had. This is just what happenedwhen you brought on the negociations at Lisle by31 His publisher, taking for granted that Mr. Pitt and his friend musthave agreed, was on the point of including in one advertisement hisspeech and that of Mr. Pitt, to which it was an answer. He was butjust in time to prevent this ridiculous mistake.MS. notes of Speech,102 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1803.your motion in 1795. The eyes of England wereopened, and they bore the war better afterwards."His Diary at this time is full of interesting notes.May 22nd, Sunday. Lock charity sermon Dr.Hawker excessively filled very offensive in familiarityin his prayer ; and in his sermon the slang ofexperience ; such a sermon as would have pleased ahundred and sixty years ago. 27th. Fox's motionabout Russia, withdrawn on Lord Hawkesbury's concession.Fox very civil to me. Perceval in earneston Sir William Scott's Bill; yet almost all agree inwishing the bishops to be absolute in authority. 28th.Lord Teignmouth at breakfast. Sir William Jones'smonument inscription. Heard Erskine's account ofhis visit to La Harpe ; and latter's conversation ;and Emperor Alexander's (of Russia) letter. DinedGrant's Master of the Rolls, Mackintosh, (infinitelyentertaining,) M. Montagu, Mr. Homer, (a man ofextraordinary talents, and a writer in the EdinburghReview,) and others. Staid till half-past ten, andcame away unwillingly to Broomfield. Mackintoshtelling us an infinity of anecdotes of French, when heover. Tallien above all (in cruelty). Poor Danton.1 C'etoit un bon enfant.' Barren affected to talksentiment. Tallien called a spade a spade. Tallienuniversally shunned. He said of Louis XVI. ' Cependantil n'avoit pas peur pour lui-meme, mais il parlour dusang de son peuple, le miserable.' La Harpe educatedEmperor Alexander, who keeps up a close correspondencewith him, and proposes to learn of him." .AGAINST CENSURING MINISTERS. 103intosh was a few days afterwards a guest at his ownhouse ; and a friend who was of the party particularlynotices the skill with which he directed the conversationtowards those veins of thought in which heknew his guest to be the richest. He himself complains,that though " Mackintosh was very entertaining,yet I got little on the subject I wanted causesand representatives of the decline of nations."On the 2nd of June Mr. Canning communicatedto him the resolutions of censure upon ministers forhaving so long submitted to the overbearing conductof France, which were moved by Colonel Patten onthe following day. He describes the debate. " Smallspeakers for a long time, till at length Tom Grenville ;then Addington and Pitt. Previous question, for whichI voted, 56 against 333 ; then Pitt and his friendswent away; I staid and voted against the motion." 35Last night discovered more of the influence of theCrown than most incidents of late days ; also moreright principle, for people don't like to vote againstPitt, yet only 56 with him. He indicated that onlyrestrained by decency towards Crown, and presentstate of the King, from moving for dismission. 36th.Pitt strongly urged a decisive measure of militarypreparation to-day. Windham showed himselfa most dangerous adviser. 8th. I heard itrumoured that government meant to tax the funds.This said to be Tierney's plan. Pitt decidedlyagainst it. It would surely ruin public credit.Diary. 34 Jb. June 4.104 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1803.Tierney made treasurer of the navy. 13th. House.Budget. I had heard of great objections to taxingthe funds. This is done by the present plan to 5per cent., yet no objection was urged."The palmy days of Addington's ministry were past,and the difficulties of the war soon displayed its inherentfeebleness. " Our military preparations," Mr.Wilberforce tells Mr. Bankes, 35 " appear very tardy.We had an interesting debate yesterday. 36 Pitt, asusual, showed the thorough consideration he had givento the whole subject, but (perhaps as usual) overstatedthe advantages to be derived from the plan, which onthe whole was to be approved. He is, or rather hasbeen, but indifferent in health. It would be sufficientlypleasant, if it were not so serious a concern as toexcite feelings of a more indignant kind, to hear (aswe did last night) Windham, &c. declaring againand again, that defensive war must to us be ruin,when we reflect on their unceasing clamours for warunder circumstances in which we could have noadequate means of offensive operation." Every daysupplied fresh proofs of the weakness of the government." July 4th. People already begin to sickenof the war. I see secret discontents and fears, butno one speaks openly. The citizens outrageousagainst Addington's incapacity, as they call it.Against taxing the funds." 37 This plan was speedilyabandoned. On the 13th he says, " Addington gave3A June 24, ^ On the second reading of the Army Reserve Bill.37 Diary, July 4.1803. TO LORD Nunc ASTER. 105up his inequality as to land and funds, on which wehad divided with Pitt, 50 to 150." M The followingday he writes to Lord Nunc aster.London, July 14, 1803.My dear Lancaster,It is really singular how exactly consonant tothe sentiments which I had been enforcing in privateon Addington, Hawkesbury, Charles Yorke, &c. lastnight, are those contained in your letter just nowreceived and lying before me. I have been again andagain urging government to open their eyes to thereal situation of the country, and to the new energieswhich the present exigence should make them callforth ; but they maintain, Addington especially, thatthe spirit of the country is as much up as he wishesit, &c, though my letters, and conversations with avariety of people, enforce on me as well as you the oppositeconclusion. We exactly agree, I repeat it 'tisas if your country, which always you know aboundedin echoes, had echoed back to me the feelings, whichwith a loud voice I had poured forth to my friend inEskdale.I am sure you would approve of my advice to Addington,that he and the rest of the ministers shouldhave a list formed of all men in London, from the firstduke to the lowest tradesman, who has any considerablefollowing ; ship-builders, rope-makers, brewers,cabinet-makers, ironmongers, &c. &c. : that applicantDiary, July 13.F 3106 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1803.tions should in private be made to them all, through themeans of persons having influence over them, explainingto them their danger, their interest, their duty, andthe service they might render by stepping forth with adeclaration of their readiness to exert all their influenceand authority, in calling forth the utmost energiesof their country. Then the King should cometo the House of Lords and make a suitable speech,and a general meeting be held of all the persons ofinfluence above mentioned; the nobility, with thePrince of Wales at their head, should agree to makeall their servants learn the use of arms, and, mixedwith others of their several parishes, form companies ;and all the eminent traders should engage for the exertionsthey could severally make. This would enableus to obtain from London 100,000 men at least ;and still more, it would give an electric shock to thewhole kingdom, and every other great town wouldimitate the example ; and the nation would cheerfullyanticipate the call of government to arm in their ortdefence. Now, without taking these methods towarm and rouse, they are about to bring forward aBill to enrol all the population of the kingdom betweensixteen and sixty. This I fear, if compelledby parliamentary authority, unaided by influence,will be sulkily obeyed. As it is, all the militia forceis drawn and drawing from the north towards thesouth Hull left absolutely defenceless ; and this isnecessary. But then should not London arm in itsown defence ? I feel all you say of the danger of a1803. TO LORD MUNCASTER. 107smaller force landing in the north, while the mainattack is made in the south ; though I think they willscarce venture so long a sea voyage as from the Elbeeither.My dear Lancaster, you and I disagree about theground and policy of the war, but I am sure youwould have said, if you had foreseen how languid thegovernment would have been in such trying circumstances,that we had better not have ventured sobold a line of conduct. Pitt has been privately pressingthem to call forth the voluntary irregular forceof the country, and the measures, again put off, and tobe brought forward on Monday, would not have beeneven now produced, but for him. He showed Yorkeall his clauses a fortnight ago. I sometimes think Iought to go to Yorkshire this summer as my properpost. But then again when I call to mind my weaklybody, that I often cannot walk half a mile, never canride one, that I must have my meals and sleep withperfect regularity, that I cannot bear a drop of rain,&c. I am afraid of getting into circumstances inwhich people, seeing me in good spirits and able totalk, but not knowing my bodily infirmities, mightattribute my inactivity to cowardice and lukewarmness; and I might disgrace myself, and damp the exertionsof others. Why should you not write to Addingtonyourself to open his eyes to the real state ofthe public mind, and to the necessity of spiritedmeasures, &c. Farewell. Kind remembrances.Ever affectionately yours,W. Wilberforce."108 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1803.The state of public business led to a protractedsession. " July 15th. House Income Tax Billlong debate on leaving out poor rate and tithe, inestimating tenants' income strange dulness of opponentsdivided but 24 against 95 late, 16th.Doubted, but returned home to Broomfield. LordSt. Helen's, Teignmouth, Henry Thornton, dined.Much talk about invasion. All people seem to thinkour sea-guard not to be depended on. Many say thatnow in the calms of summer, the enemy will rowover before we are prepared. I cannot myself expectit at present. Yet we are strangely unprepared, andthe confusion might be extreme if the French shouldcome." 39The excitement of these stirring times causedno relaxation of that careful scrutiny with which hetried his temper and his conduct. " I have not beenconsiderate," he says, " or kind enough towards Addington.Poor fellow, what annoyances has he ! Hehas no peace as I have, alas ! " And again, " July17th. I fear I did not act honestly in persuading myselfthat I might neglect the House of Commonsyesterday for Lord St. Helen's, whom I had askedto dinner. It is dangerous to act contrary to conscience,in little things as well as great. It is temptingGod to withdraw His Holy Spirit. That way ofpersuading ourselves, which we are apt to practise,when inclined to a thing which the first simple suggestionof conscience opposes, is to be carefullywatched against. Yet we seem not to be deceived39 Diary.1803. INVASION EXPECTED. 109either, but to see as it were out of the corner of oureye the right all the while." 40It was no light excuse which ever led him toabsent himself from parliament. Three days afterthis last entry, he says, 41 " To town, meaning Levee,but so poorly that I gave it up. House. DefenceBill till late. Alas, Sunday drilling introduced contraryto Yorke's declaration, from his being put outof sorts about another clause. I spoke. Pitt answeredme." He never ceased to oppose this injuriouspractice until he succeeded in preventing it. He wasbusy also in urging government to greater energyof action. " Sir Charles Middleton sent me a planfor defence ; getting immediately one hundred largecoppered ships, East Indians, West Indians, colliers,&c. with large carronades, and employing them torun down the flotilla. I showed it to Pitt, and gaveit to Addington. Both approved. Saw it afterwardsat Lord Hobart's, where Sullivan said that he hadhit upon the same. The most knowing expect anattempt at invasion, but 'tis strange how little ideathey have, or even government seems to have, of thetime when, and whether now or not. Buonaparte saidto have attacked Hanover personally to vex theKing. Addington says he bears it well. Said hisdetermination was taken, and hinted he'd take thefield if it came to that. Sir William Scott told methat the farmers in Oxfordshire said that they wereso heavily taxed that if Buonaparte did come they*o Journal. Diary110 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1803.could not be worse ; and at Battersea Henry Thorntonreported sad things of the state of mind of thelower classes. From Motley, again, they say if theSquire turns out they will all go with him. We gotthe Bill mended though not cured about Sunday exercising.How different the House of Commons fromthe kingdom ! No one seemed to care about it thereexcept Thorntonss, &c. Well may we call downGod's vengeance. Pitt spoke of it as not contraryto English Church principles. Cobbett extremelyabusive about it. All agree we are not ready for theFrench yet. All the regiments are marched fromHull towards London. If we are not attacked forthree months, people seem to think we shall be impregnable.Alas, too haughty and self-sufficient, andPitt rampant about setting Europe to rights, &c.after vindicating our own safety. Pitt does more insome ways than he would in power, from the deferenceto colleagues he would then feel. SupportedCrawford, and discovered great military genius.His speech capital urging precautions yet animating."42 This was the very tone he himself held. " Istrongly opposed this war," he wrote many yearsafterwards, 43 " differing from those with whom Icommonly agreed, at a great cost of private feeling;but when once it had begun, I did not persist in declaimingagainst its impolicy and mischiefs, becauseI knew that by so doing I should only injure mycountry."Diary, July 26, To Joseph Butterworth Esq. July 29, 1812.1803. YORK MEETING. IllNo one saw with more regret the strange inertnessof the government. His long and tried friendshipfor Mr. Addington made it the more painful to him,and he did all he could by personal remonstrance tostir him up to greater energy of conduct. He exertedhimself to kindle a proper ardour in the country; and for this purpose he determined upon travellinginto Yorkshire, to he present at a public meetingfor voting an address. Upon the 26th of July heset out from London, and leaving his family at WoodHall, in Hertfordshire, he pushed on to York, whichhe reached upon the 28th. " Found the meetingbegun. I had better have been there the night beforemany gentlemen castle yard. I spoke, andpretty well, but I did not feel myself warmed.Thought the speeches but middling. All unanimousand people warmed. Dined with grand jury,and much talking after it."To the expenses of the volunteer force he subscribed500 ; and finding that he " could do nomore good by remaining" in the north, he set outupon the following day, and on the 30th rejoined hisfamily in Hertfordshire. Here he staid some time ;going to London on important questions, and rejoicingat every interval of leisure to shake off itsdust and turmoil, and wander at will in the beautifulretirement of Wood Hall. Here he describes himselfas " reading Hume, considering topics, runningover many books. Much time consumed about lettersa great accumulation of these, and necessity112 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1803.of writing to stir up and do good in various ways ;and," not the least characteristic, " visiting daily thesick-room of one of Mr. Smith's footmen, to readand pray with him." Aug. 5th. " A charming day.Walked about an hour with Cowper's Poems delightfulpark deer water wood. Delightfulwalk in the evening a most romantic scene for agentleman's park. They have family prayers night andmorning. What a lesson to try to do good by speakingto others ! I remember when at Milford, manyyears ago, I mentioned to my cousin about familyprayers, and he adopted the custom the very nextnight." Four days later he writes to Lord Lancaster.Wood Hall, Aug. 9, 1803.My dear Lancaster,My long journey into Yorkshire, when for neara week my letters accumulated, produced such anarrear as I have not yet been able to pay off, and ashappens in such cases, one's friends have been theworst used. Yet this is so vile a principle, that Iwill not go on acting upon it, but send you a fewlines.I have got an Act for you, and I will call at theTreasury tomorrow, and get Sargent or Vansittart todirect it. Their heavy communications travel lightas air from postage. ' Blest paper credit ! ' Do youremember the lines ? Government would draw onthem your vehement indignation if you were nearhead quarters, and were to see how shamefully dilatory1803. PITT Lord-warden. 113they are even where the very life and substance of thestate is in question. Before I went into YorkshireSir Charles Middleton's plan for defending us againstany flotilla was received, considered, and highly approvedof; yet when I hoped to hear on my returnthat the execution was proceeding rapidly, to mygrief and shame I found they were still yawningover it without having begun, yet declaring theirentire approbation. But it is to no purpose to vexyou with my bad tidings. If you were within anyreasonable distance, I should call on you to use yourinfluence with Addington to urge him to exertion.He really stands on a precipice. The safety of agreat country is far too serious a stake to be complimentedaway, or even to be sacrificed to friendship ;and if, through his negligence and false delicacy,any great loss is sustained, the blood which mighthave been spared by timely preparation will cry forvengeance.Pitt is about to take the command of 3000 volunteers,as Lord-warden ; I am uneasy at it. He does notengage on equal or common terms, and his spirit willlead him to be foremost in the battle. Yet as it is hisproper post, one can say nothing against it. The plannow adopted, against which I lifted up my voice, butthe newspapers scarce made me intelligible, instead ofan armed nation, would give us to oppose the enemyscarcely more than he would bring against us, exceptin the neighbourhood of London ; and how differentwill be the quality of these volunteers from that of114 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1803.trained veteran soldiers ! But I hope government willnot adhere to this system, which is adopted, as I believe,because there is an utter want of arms, whileat the same time I have too much cause to fear theutmost efforts are not used to supply them. Thevariety of our offices, and the consequent want ofunity and vigour, is highly injurious. I must sayfarewell.Yours ever,W. WILBERFORCE."Two days later he writesTO HENRY BANKES ESQ. KINGSTON HALL.London, Aug. 11, 1803.My dear Bankes,It has often been in my mind to write to you,but I happen to have been more than usually pressedfor time. Finding there was to be a county meetingat York, I made a rapid journey down and up again,and have since been resident at Wood Hall, SamuelSmith's, near Hertford, whence I come over to attendthe House, and return again towards the end ofthe week. One word for Wood Hall, which furnishesabundant matter for philosophical, or what isstill better, religious reflection on the changes of thisprecarious world. A very old family of Bottles soldthe estate, with a good old house on it, to SirThomas Humboldt, fresh from India, and dropping1803. WOOD HALL. 115with gold. Sir Thomas pulled down the old mansionand built a magnificent habitation, finished adunguent in itself, and all its accompanying apparatus.He is done up. Then comes Paul Benfield, who feelinghimself ( Ut Gyarae clausus scopulis,' &c. adds amagnificent wing ; but soon after he also passes to thehammer, and the whole is knocked down to my cousinSamuel Smith.But I did not intend saying a word on this headwhen I took up the pen, but to send you a few particularsof the state of things here, which it seemsunfriendly not to furnish to you when at a distancefrom the scene of action. I forget exactly whenyou left London, but I think it was about the time ofthe Income Tax Bill. We got through it much inthe same way as through many of a similar sort, andthe same rapid manufacture of clauses which haddone such honour to the industry of our friend Rose,was seen to proceed with equal celerity in the handsof his successor Vansittart. To be sure, when onesees how acts of parliament are made, one almostwonders they are half as correct, or rather incorrect,as they are. The Army of Reserve Bill passed. Pittattended constantly ; in the main behaving well, butonce I understand, when I did not happen to be present,saying something towards Addington whichindicated ill-nature and contempt. It was when Addingtondeclared against taxing the future foreignpurchasers of funded property, because it wouldabridge the market, and thereby depreciate the LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1803.modify to the old stockholders, when Pitt congratulatedhim, or the House, on the supererogatory tendernessfor the public faith, which he so suddenlydisplayed. Pitt had been, however, before so farreconciled, that though I think he never calledAddington, individually, his honourable friend, he didthe ministers in general, and Addington called himso frequently. Pitt communicated freely with Yorke, 44and showed him his plan for the levy en masse, pressingforward strongly the introduction of the scheme,and secretly grumbling at the dilatoriness of ministry.At length he declared to me, and others, thatif government would not move it, he himself would.Yorke then gave notice of it, and it has gone through,as you see.I must be very short in what remains, and I amsorry for it, because all I have yet said is not worthyour reading. But from my having various mattersof business to settle with the different offices,I have been much among the ministers ; and I amgrieved to say that their weakness is lamentable.There is no man who takes such a decided lead as tocommand the movements of the different parts of themachine ; and the consequence is, that the country isnow, on this 11th of August, utterly unprepared forthe enemy, if he should be more timely in his preparations.Government have not expressed theirmeaning with any distinctness to the Lord-lieutenants,as to the organization and even quantity of theThe Right Hon. Charles Yorke, Secretary at War.1803. VOLUNTEERS. 117levy en masse ; and I have by this post a letter fromyour old friend Grimston, 45 telling me that at thelargest meeting of the East Riding ever assembled atBeverley, to carry into execution the levy en masse,though the Lord Lieu tenant, who was there, read tothem all the Secretary of State's letters, not one personpresent conceived he knew government's meaningand wishes, (they had not as I collect the Act,nor would have now but for my individual attention,)and they were forced to separate re infecta, only appointingdays for the subdivision meetings of deputyLieutenants. You may judge how this damps therising spirit of the people. Grimston personallyseems much hurt that a troop of yeomanry cavalrywhich he commanded all the last war, with greattrouble and expense, and now offered to commandagain, and to march to any part of Great Britain incaseof invasion, is refused, he knows not and is nottold why, as are refused also two other offers of othergentlemen. This at a time when all regular andnearly all militia force is withdrawn from Yorkshire.In several other places no answers havebeen received to most liberal offers of volunteerservice ; or there has been such delay that the volunteershave been tired with waiting, have beentampered with, and have withdrawn their offer. Governmentacknowledge that there is an utter wantof fire-arms ; yet a strange lack of energy prevailsas to increasing the supply. Even the river** Thomas Grimston Esq. of Grimston, Wilderness.118 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1803.Thames' defence is quite incomplete. Sir CharlesMiddleton, no idle talker, gave a plan for thedefence of the coast against any flotilla; for thesuccess of which he declared he would answer withhis life. Before I went into Yorkshire, Addingtonand Lord Hobart's office highly approved of it, yeta fortnight after I found it had scarce proceeded astep, and at last it was frittered away in the executionof it. Government now give out I hear that theFrench are not ready, hut the preparations on theother side of the water are incessant and on a prodigiousscale. If we have time to mature our meansof defence, humanly speaking, I shall not fear theevent ; but if we should be attacked within the nextthree weeks, there would indeed be cause for seriousalarm. The spirit of the people is roused, and theyare in general well disposed to act, but I really fearall may be ruined by the inefficiency of their governors.Pitt is doing great things as Lord-warden.As for our navy, it is certainly true that the commanderin chief of the Channel fleet was cruisingalone very lately ; that had he been able to detachany of his squadron, the St. Domingo men of warwould not have got unmolested into Ferrol. Sheridanfights lustily for Addington. He proposed asufficiently absurd vote of thanks last night to thevolunteers who had so gallantly offered their services ;but you see clearly that the affectionate regard ofgovernment to him knows no bounds in this honeymoonof their union. By the way, Lord St. Vincent1803. TO HENRY BANKES ESQ. 119lately offered Tom Sheridan a most lucrative place,which Sheridan refused ; very wisely I think. Thecity are out of all patience with Addington, and Ithink people in general will begin to be out of temperin various places, from their personal acquaintancewith the delays and inefficiency of his administration.There has come out a pamphlet called, Cursory Remarkson State of Parties by a near observer, evidentlywritten by some confidential man, whichabuses Pitt with the most bitter malignity.I hope you are all pretty well. My wife and littleones, who went to Wood Hall when I went into Yorkshire,and stay there till I go to Bath, which will beas soon as I can be no longer useful here, are verywell in the main. Let me hear from you.Ever yours sincerely and affectionately,W. Wilberforce.P. S. Lord St. Vincent is certainly, I am told,to be replaced by Lord Castlereagh after parliamenthas risen, and Yorke I believe is to be preferred."Upon the 17th he was in London, and " at Pitt'shouse in York Place by four o'clock talked with himnear an hour he going to dine at John Villiers', andasked me, but I refused, and went on to Broomfield.18th. Lord Hobart's office. He seemed to think Ihad some personal interest in the affair, so warm wasI for our north of England. Strange determination,to accept only six times number of militia as volensLIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1803.tears : it will damp the spirit of the country. Sadwork. I remonstrated. Addington seems convinced,as do all others, that a council of war a wise measure,yet dare not press it against Duke of York. All aremost distrustful of Duke's military talents. Back toWood Hall, where by ten at night safely : found allwell. Praise the Lord, O my soul. 46 Weather extremelyhot for some time, now more broken andmoderate. The quiet in this sweet place charmingafter London heat and hurry. Pitt very ill used bygovernment, Admiralty chiefly. Even the riverThames' safety not provided for ; and when theTrinity House proposed the means, the Admiraltyfoolishly economical. Lord Romney, Lord-lieutenantof Kent, with Lords Camden and Darnley, on receivingLord Hobart's letter about twenty-five musketsfor 100 men, &c. would not deliver the contentsto the county, and obtained an exemption forKent. Pitt's exertions great, and his ascendencystriking on excellent terms with Duke of York.It is really shocking how low our establishmentsreduced. We could not have resisted 40,000 mengetting to London. Pitt says they have been talkinglately of preparing against next spring, which makeshim half suspect something is intended just now. 4728th. My letters out of Yorkshire and elsewhere arenow very strong about the discontents occasioned bythe Volunteers' limitation. A most pernicious measure,against which I have been remonstrating both46 Diary 4 ? Diary, Aug. 19.1803. BATH Eaton. 121in and out of parliament with all my might." " Onthis plan' he writes to a friend in the county, 48 " allYorkshire would furnish about 21,000 men. I opposedit before the House rose, though no accountwas given of my arguments. There have not beentwo opinions as to the expediency of selecting cautiouslyin manufacturing towns and districts. Butwas it requisite for that end to damp the zealousardour of the country in general ? It has acted likethe sudden check of a violent fermentation. By thusrepressing the voluntary spirit, government has incurreda fearful responsibility. I cannot but believewe might have been so manifestly strong, that Buonapartewould have despaired of making any impressionon us, and would have given us a real victory withoutthe risk of a defeat, and the bloodshed and expenseof a contest."Leaving Wood Hall late in August, and spending aweek with his family upon the road at the house ofhis friend Matthew Montagu at Sandford Priory,he arrived on the 3rd of September at the village ofBath Easton, where he designed to take up his quartersfor the remainder of the vacation. " Delightedwith the beauty of our new villa. Weather delicious.Afternoon and evening read and heard, outof doors, in a lovely arbour by the river. This is abeautiful country ; our house exactly like Westmoreland,saving lakes." 49 " I am now come," he says onthe first Sunday after his arrival, 50 " to a place whereTo W. Hey Esq. Aug. 31. * 9 Diary. 5 Journal, Sept. 4.VOL. III. G122 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1803.there is a prospect of my living in more quiet thanI have long enjoyed. Oh may I improve it for thebest purposes. May I remember that such a preciousopportunity as this place affords me of keeping myheart, and making a progress in divine things, maynever occur again ; that I shall have to render accountof it as of a talent committed to my stewardship."He was " occupied chiefly on letters tillarrears of correspondence were paid off. Last nighthad twenty letters ready. Reading a little Humein dressing, also Greek Testament. Evening, on thewater."The public dangers which at this time beset thenation induced him to make his residence at BathEaston a season of more than usual devotion : and therecord of his employments on the first Friday after hisarrival there, shows how he usually spent the dayswhich he devoted to religious services. " Friday,Sept. 9th, half-past eleven. Destined this day for fast-day,meo more, with that degree of abstinence whichmay best qualify my weak body to go through theday without molesting the soul. My chief objects inthis act of humiliation are, to deplore the sins of ourcountry, and still more my own grievous share ofthem ; my manifold provocations of the righteousdispleasure of my God and Saviour. To deprecatethe wrath of God from our land, and draw down Hisblessings on us. I would also beg a blessing on ourresidence at this place, that my time here may tendto my religious advancement, that it may be products.DEVOTIONAL DAY. 123time also of benefit to my children and family, andto others with whom the providence of God connectsme.For instances of the language of good men in actsof humiliation, vit. Dan. ix. 3 21. A fast-day, Neh.ix. 1 ; Jonah iii. 5." Here a reference in his Journalto many other passages of Scripture, with a summaryof their contents, which appear to have made subjectsof meditation.Half-past twelve Let me go now to confessionand humiliation, in direct prayer, for my time wearsaway. Let me deplore my past sins many yearsin which I lived without God in the world then mysins since my having in some degree become acquaintedwith him in 1785-6. My actual state mynot having duly improved my talents my chief besettingsins." [Here a reference to a private papercarried about him.] " (My birth-day was worse keptthis year than I have long known it, from its beingmy last day at a friend's house. This therefore to beasort of birth-day review. I am come here into thearbour by the river side, and am quite secure frominterruption.) How greatly are my sins aggravatedby the extreme goodness to me of my God andSaviour ! I am encumbered with blessings, my cupis so full of them as to overflow. During life all hasgone well with me, so far as God has ordered matters,and all the evil has been the result of my ownfollies. All that I enjoy has been from God all Isuffer from myself. My temporal blessings are 2124 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1803.period to those of almost any human being who everexisted. But then my spiritual ! Born in the happiestcountry, at a season of the greatest enjoyment,for hitherto I have suffered nothing from the stormswhich have raged around me. In a condition of lifeperhaps the happiest of all, except that possibly alittle lower might be both safer and happier, (becauseI can live less to myself, less in the privacy and quietI am now enjoying,) but mine is surely one of thevery happiest. Then as to what is personal goodnatural talents, though not duly improved, and injuredby early neglect ; a cheerful and naturally sweettemper (a great blessing) ; the want of that proudself-confidence, (though this has grown in me to thefault of too great diffidence,) which is unfavourable tothe reception of religion ; a most enjoyable constitution,though not a strong one ; an ample fortune, anda generous disposition in money matters. (I speakof this as mere natural temper, not as having in it thesmallest merit, for I hope, at this moment, I can feelthat it is no more than any other natural instinct,except as referred to the will and power of God.)To these blessings have been added most affectionatefriends, and near relatives." [Here a reference to hisdomestic relations.] ft My being honoured with theAbolition cause is a great blessing."But far more my spiritual blessings. How few arethere in parliament on whom the mercy of God hasbeen so bounteously vouchsafed ! On none of theearly acquaintances with whom I entered life. Praise1803. JOURNAL. 125the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all His benefits.Above all, let me adore God's unspeakable kindnessand long suffering, in not being prevented from callingme to His fold, by the foreknowledge which Hehad of my hardness of heart and ingratitude. Thenthe preventing grace of God. What else has preventedme from bringing a scandal on my professionand Thy cause ? " [Here a reference to some occasionsin which he supposed himself in especial danger.]Let the impression of these incidents ever remainwith me, to humble me, to keep me mindful howweak I am in myself, how constantly I need the graceof God, how carefully I should avoid all temptationbut such as occurs in the path of duty.After having lament ed my sins before God, that Imay feel them the more, and the contrition whichthey should produce, let me meditate awhile on theguilt of sin, on the majesty and holiness of God, onthe base ingratitude and sottish stupidity of man.I will read (meditating-way) Witherspoon's excellentsermon, ' A View of the Glory of God, humbling tothe Soul.' O Lord, let Thy Spirit accompany me, letit make me see and feel towards sin as Thou dost, andlong to be delivered from every remainder of my corruptions,and to be holy as Thou art holy. (I amreminded, by thinking I hear somebody coming, topray ejaculatory to God, to keep me from peevishnessif I am interrupted. I have taken the best precautionsagainst it, let me desire this day particularlyto be full of love, meekness, and self-denial.)126 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1803.It is near half-past two ; I have been hitherto quitefree from interruption, and even the fear of it. Let menow go to prayer, after a short meditation on the promisesof God. I have been large, though how imperfect,in confession. It remains for me to supplicatefor the pardon of my sins, and for growth in gracefor a blessing on this place and its employments forablessing on my intercourse with others. (Constantprevious ejaculatory prayer.) Intercession for countryand mankind slaves enemies then for servantsfriends enumeration of different classes, andwife and children. Then thanksgiving enumeration.O Lord, give me Thy Spirit to help me to pray, andpraise Thee acceptably, to worship in spirit and intruth. Amen."Such was the incense which this day ascended fromthe river's bank, where, like the prophet-courtier ofold, he poured forth his meditations. 51 On the sameday the following plan appears to have been insertedin his Diary. " As I am likely D. V. to continuehere three months, and to enjoy more leisure thanusual, I proceed to fix the objects of my attention,and will be as diligent as a due care for the recoveryof my health will admit. I will adhere to my planasclosely as I well can, having employments suitedto different states of understanding, so that withoutfatigue I may yet be always employed. In themorning I will try to get two or three hours for compositiondrawing up, and storing topics, &c. (After51 Dan. x. 4.1803. PLANS OF STUDY. 127having read Brougham on Colonial Policy, andAdam Smith.) I will have in reading a book forminor attention, (into which class may come anynovels, plays, or other works of imagination,) for seasonswhen unfit for much mental application. I meanto read the Greek Testament for at least half anhour daily, and to meditate over parts before readwith my morning prayers. Walking out, to learnpassages by heart, and keep them up. In conversationto adhere to plan, to have topics ready. I mustkeep a time account, beginning it tomorrow, and tryto redeem time on Sundays for serious, as on commondays for general purposes; except that a walk, meditatingand solitary, to be a part, when fine, of Sunday'soccupations, for I never find my mind more liftedup to God than when thus meditating sub Dio.May the Lord bless my plan, and enable me to redeemthe time in future, and to live by rule, (yetnever peevish when broken in upon,) and whether Ieat or drink, or whatever I do, to do all to the gloryof God."The following extracts are from his entry on thepublic fast day in the succeeding month, the appointmentof which he had himself been instrumentalin procuring. 52It becomes me on this day to humble myself beforethe Lord ; first, for national sins, those especiallywherein I have any share. And alas, I may toojustly be said to be chargeable with a measure of that52 Vid. Correspondence of William Wilberforce, &c. Aug. 10, 1803.128 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1803.guilt, which I have not sufficiently tried to prevent.Have I then used my utmost endeavours to amendthe public, or my own particular circle, or even myown family. Who knows but that if I had beensufficiently on the watch, and had duly improved allthe opportunities of doing good, and preventing evil,which have been afforded me, many who are nowstrangers and enemies to God might have becomeknown and reconciled to Him ? Many grievous sins,which greatly swell the sum of our national account,might never have existed. What openings for usefulnesshave I enjoyed as an M. P. both in and out ofthe House of Commons ; as an author, actual andpossible ; as a friend, an acquaintance, a master, &c.Alas, which way soever I look, I see abundant causefor deep humiliation. How much guilt might I havekept out of existence, and consequently how muchmisery : East Indian idolatries ; internal profaneness;even Slave Trade. And especially, have Isufficiently supplicated God, and done my utmost inthis most effectual way, by calling in His aid ?<e Secondly, for my own manifold transgressions.These I have down on another paper ; they are presentwith me, and I humbly hope I lament them beforeGod. We know not what scenes we may becalled on to witness. My own death may be at hand.O then, while it is day, work out, O my soul, thy ownsalvation. Pray to GodFor thyself that thou mayst be accepted in theBeloved ; that thou mayst be supported under .INTERCESSION. 129ever trials it may please God to expose thee to ; andif it be His holy will, but not otherwise, that thoumayst be continued with thy wife and children inthe enjoyment of domestic peace and happiness.For thy country that God would have mercyon us, and deliver us from the power of our enemies ;that He would also bless to us our difficulties anddangers, and cause them to be the means of our turningto Him with repentance and holy obedience ;that He would restore to us the blessing of peace,and sanctify to us our enjoyments.For our rulers the King and his ministers, andall the public functionaries.For my friends, acquaintances, and connexions,particularly for those whom I habitually remember inmy prayers." [Here a list.] "Another class." [Herea list of his early connexions, including many politicalfriends.] " These are relics of old times. I wouldespecially implore the Divine mercy for Pitt, who ispeculiarly exposed.Let me pray fervently and sincerely for ourenemies, that God would have pity on them, that Hewould turn their hearts, &c.<( Let me pray for all my fellow-creatures, for allthat are in pagan ignorance, particularly for the poornegroes, both in Africa and the West Indies. OLord, do Thou at length visit them with spiritual blessingsand a termination of their temporal sufferings.Amen.And to all my supplications and intercessions, letG 3130 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1803.me add abundant and warm thanksgivings; for, OLord, Thou hast been to us, and above all to me,abundant in loving-kindness. For our unequallednational blessings, both temporal and spiritual. Runthem over in detail, whether as exemption from evils,or possession of goods, &c.For my own blessings. So peculiarly full a cupamidst so liberal a banquet. All around me arefeasting, but mine is Benjamin's mess. Consider, Omy soul, thy country ; the period of the world whereinthy lot is cast ; thy station in life ; thy personal circumstancesas to body and mind; thy externalsrank, fortune, favour with men, and especially numerous,kind, and useful friends ; the events of thy life ;thy having been kept out of office, and too intimateconnexion with political companions ; thy being keptfrom utter falling, &c." [Here an enumeration ofparticulars like that before given.] 53Such was his preparation against those perils towhich none but the careless were indifferent. " Themost enlightened and experienced in naval and militarymatters in this part of the world are mostalarmed." 54 " Literally and verily," writes Dr.Milner from a northern town which he was visiting,tf there seems not the smallest concern here aboutthe war. I never saw a place so involved in worldlyaffairs. It is shocking ! It is affecting beyond measure."Happy was it for the country in this hour of dan-journal,Oct. 19. M To William Hey Esq. July 13.1803. PROVIDENTIAL ESCAPE. 131ger, that amongst many careless ones, " there werefound some righteous, for whose sake " the land wasspared. Intercession formed a leading part in all hisprayers ; and his reference at this time to Pitt, andthe other relics of early intimacy, is particularlytouching. His thoughts were now much turned toMr. Pitt, by the danger to which his office of Lord-wardenseemed likely to expose him. " Pitt," hewrote the day before to Mr. Gisborne, " is exertinghimself with the utmost alacrity, and if the county ofKent, one of the districts most open to the attack ofthe enemy, be prepared for his reception, I believe itis, under Providence, to be ascribed to his efforts andauthority. O my dear G., though for many yearsthere has been so little of the eadem velle et nolle,that there cannot have existed much of what meritsthe name of friendship for that great man, yet I feela good deal for him on account of the danger to whichhe is exposed, while, I fear, so little prepared for theevent which may ensue. For Pitt to close his life inresisting the enemies of his country, would indeed bein history a brilliant catastrophe ; but how differentlymust we think and feel, who see through a Scripturalmedium ! "But while his attention was thus directed to thecommon alarm, he was preserved from one of thoseimminent and unexpected dangers which continuallysurround our path. He was a constant observer ofthe advice of Bishop Berkeley, 55 " that modernSins, 119.132 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1803.scholars would, like the ancients, meditate andconverse in walks and gardens and open air." Hisfavourite haunt at this time was a retired meadow,which bordered on the Avon. A steep bank shadedby some fine trees, one of which by its projectionformed a promontory in a deep part of the stream,was his common seat. On the 25th of October, hesays, " Walked with pencil and book, and wrote. Acharming day. I was sitting by the river-side, withmy back to the water, on a portable seat, when suddenlyit struck me that it was not quite safe. Writing,I might be absent, and suddenly slip off, &c.I moved therefore a few yards, and placed my stool onthe grass, when in four or five minutes it suddenlybroke, and I fell flat on my back, as if shot. Had ithappened five minutes sooner, as I cannot swim, Imust, a thousand to one, have been drowned, for I satso that I must have fallen backwards into the river.I had not the smallest fear or idea of the seat's breakingwith me ; and it is very remarkable, that I hadrather moved about while by the river, which wouldhave been more likely to break it, whereas I sat quitestill when on the grass. A most providential escape.Let me praise God for it."Several of his private observations during this summerand autumn are too characteristic to be omitted.When visiting a house where there was much societyof a trifling kind, " Sad work indeed," he says, " oathsof minor kind, most unprofitable talk, alas ! I wouldnot live at ' a Place' to be subject to much of this, for1803. JOURNAL. 133almost any consideration. Quite tired of our relaxation.What absurd work ! " At another time, " Aservant here is dangerously ill. I know they have noobjection to my talking to him, yet I feel a sad lukewarmness,and even averseness to it. Did Christ feelthe same towards me and other poor sinners ? Whateverbe the cause of my disinclination, shyness, pride,what it may, let me not search out for reasons tojustify the abstaining from what I wish to avoid,but obey the plain primary dictates of conscience."Praying with the sick servant " " I saw the pool-manfor twenty minutes, and prayed with him" -appear as entries almost daily during the residue ofhis visit.In another place he says, " Nothing could exceedthe kindness with which our friends received us.Alas, it grieves me to see a family, in all respects soamiable, fooled at all by the world. Their wealth istheir bane. It connects them with fashionable, thoughtlessneighbours, connects their children with frequentersof scenes of dissipation. Oh may God bless them !How hard is it for them that have riches to enter into,and keep in, the narrow road ! Beware, O my soul."Among his Sunday's observations, he says, " I haveallowed so little time for evening devotions, that myprayers have been too often hurried over. 'Tis myold fault ; my profane studies, or my letters, engrossme. Yet if we be alienated from God at all, itmatters not by what it is, whether our hearts be overchargedwith surfeiting, drunkenness, or cares of this134 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1803.life ; whether with literature, or pleasure, or ambition.I have often on a Saturday evening found in myself,though I hope not allowed, this kind of sentiment ' OhI shall have time enough for religious occupations tomorrow,and how shall I find sufficient employmentfor the Sunday ? ' O Lord, this indicates a sad want oflove. How different David's feelings, Psalm Lxxxiv.Oh quicken me in Thy righteousness. Give me allholy affections in their just measure of vigour andforcedAgain, " I fear I am not improving time to theutmost, in reading and hearing so much. I amseduced by the pleasantness of it. I will try to composemore, and to write something that may be useful.Composing will at least be beneficial to myself, andpolitics as my trade, and remarks drawn from history,must be useful. Also I will in the evening read forhalf an hour at least the Old Testament, with which Iam not well acquainted. When can I do it, if not now,when I have my time so much at my own command? "Soon afterwards he says, " I am reading the Psalmsjust now, comparing the two versions, and readingHome's Commentary. What wonderful compositions !What a decisive proof of the Divine origin of the religionto which they belong ! There is in the worldnothing else like them and that this proof shouldexist where there are so many others of the same kind,and of other kinds. If the Psalms, suppose, andsome other parts of Scripture, belonged to differentsystems . as the 3rd chapter of St. Matthew ; 5th,1803. FEAR OF Self-deceit. 1356th, 14th, 15th, 16th, 17th, of St. John; St.Paul's Epistles ; Isaiah, &c. . . . we might, were thisinternal evidence the only proof afforded, be dividedand puzzled. But how wonderful, how unaccountable,except on the true hypothesis, that each should initself be so excellent, and should belong to, and beconnected with, the others, and have the same confessedsource and origin I "His Journal, in which he had lately inserted manynotices concerning his state of mind, concludes withthis striking caution " Let me beware, lest I makeChrist the minister of sin, by comforting myself tooeasily when any temptation has prevailed over me, withthe reflection, that I have a remedy at hand ; it is onlyto humble myself and implore pardon, and, the promisesbeing sure, to obtain forgiveness. There is in truth noother way ; but beware, O my soul, lest thou provokeGod to withdraw His Spirit and leave thee to thynatural weakness. Not I hope that I sin in the viewof this willingness of God to forgive, but I fear, afterhaving discovered the workings of corruption, that Itoo easily take comfort. Let me rather, when I havethus detected in myself the humiliating marks of myimperfect state, go softly for some time. Let methink of that God and Saviour with whom I havetrifled ; of my base ingratitude ; of the aggravatingcircumstances of my sins ; of the multitude of themercies which have been poured out on me ; of thesignal advantages and privileges with which I havebeen favoured. These reflections, through the LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1803.ness of God and the working of His Spirit, may producea more settled lowliness and watchfulness ofmind."His health, at all times weak, had been so shatteredby the fatigues of the preceding session, as to creategreat alarm amongst his nearest friends. The quietof the vacation, early hours, and the Bath waters,had in a great measure restored him to his averagestate ; though he " was reminded by " his " sensationsthat " his " frame was not susceptible of thatthorough repair which it used to receive at Bath inearlier days." 56 How he would bear the renewedfatigues of London seemed a doubtful question, andone friend wrote repeatedly and urgently to press uponhim the duty of withdrawing altogether from publiclife. But he was not of a temper to retire and leavehis task half done ; and though he was constitutionallyinclined to defer too much to the opinion of thosewhose moral qualities he valued highly, in this instancehappily his own view of duty was unshaken. Howfirmly and gently he put aside these solicitations maybeseen in the following letter.Near Bath, Nov. 4, 1803.My dear Babington,Many thanks to you for your last kind letter.I think I do not deceive myself in believing that itwould be a high gratification to me to retire frompublic life, but you I am sure will agree with meLetter to Rev. T. Gisborne, Oct. 18.1803. WEAKNESS OF HIS HEALTH. 137that such a measure ought to be the result of muchdeliberation. What you say will lead me to reflecton it seriously.But I assure you I think I am by no means somuch worn out, or so near it, as you imagine. I amnot indeed equal to any bodily exertion, but it is as amouse at its best cannot draw a cart, or to comparemyself a little less disparagingly, as a pony could notdraw a broad-wheeled waggon ; still, the pony, orif you will the mouse, may in its way, and up to themeasure of its natural powers, render good serviceand be fit for use, and not merely for being sent tograss for the rest of its life. But on this head I willconsult my friend the Dean, on whom I can entirelyrely for all the qualities requisite for enabling him toform a satisfactory judgment in the case. Kindestremembrances. Farewell.I am ever affectionately yours,W. Wilberforce."Perhaps I should hesitate," he tells Mr. Hey, 57about going up to attend the meeting of parliament,but for the consideration, that as I cannot serve mycountry in a military line, I ought the rather tolabour in my department of civil service ; and if bymy efforts government can be spurred on to increasedactivity, I may effect more than could be achieved bythe strongest arm. I often think how little I couldhave done in a state of society in which muscular*7 Nov. 18.138 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1803.force was the main point of superiority." Whilethus " labouring " in his own " department' no mancould better sympathize with those who were calledto a different sphere of duty.TO CAPTAIN BEDFORD, R. N.,H. M. S. THE THUNDERER, Pantry BAY, IRELAND.Bath, Nov. 5, 1803. mMy dear Sir,Though I have suffered myself too long to deferwriting to you, I can truly assure you, that not aday has passed without my thinking of you, and alwayswith an affectionate concern for your comfortand welfare. But so much time is consumed in goingtwice a-day for the water to and from Bath, and myacquaintance there is so large, that I have been forcedto ask a letter of licence from many of my correspondents.I call to mind however where you are,and how employed ; and this entitles you to priorityof attention. If you are in a situation not only solitary,but dangerous ; not only estranged from all yourfriends, but exposed to many enemies ; not merely tothose whom war compels us to call by that name,but to those natural enemies, if they may be so termed,the manifold dangers and hardships of a winter'scruise . if you are subjected to all these evils andrisks for the protection of us men of peace and ourwives and little ones, we ought to think of you withunceasing affection and gratitude, and endeavour in1803. DESIRE FOR PEACE. 139every way to sweeten your cup and manifest our senseof the obligations we owe you.I trust, my dear sir, that though I am writing to asea-officer I may honestly avow that I pant for peace.Alas ! that the bad passions of men should producesuch a state of things, that the two most enlightenednations on earth . . . possessing more than any othersthe means of enjoying and diffusing happiness . . .should be respectively straining every nerve in orderto aggravate each other's sufferings and accomplisheach other's destruction. Oh for that blessed statewhen the reign of peace and love shall be completeand universal ! With these sentiments and feelingsyou may be sure that I shall lose no opportunity ofpromoting the restoration of peace with France. Itis much to be regretted that, from pride and othersimilar passions, nations are always forward to rushinto wars, though the bulk of a people soon begin torepent of them and to wish for the termination of hostilities.Ministers of state, on the contrary, are reallyless prone to get into wars ; but when a country isonce plunged into them, they are drawn forward bytheir own schemes ; they flatter themselves that they,shall by this measure and that, weaken the power ofthe enemy; and forgetting that the expenditure ofblood and treasure is always going on, they seldomare disposed to leave off till they are forced to it.Often also they are afraid lest a less honourable peacethan the sanguine expectations of men led them tohope might be obtained, should disgrace their characterLIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1803.ter, and fix on them an imputation of pusillanimityor weakness. They should remember more than theydo, that it is the bulk of the people who suffer theevils of war, but that they reap little advantage fromits most successful prosecution. How have I beendrawn on ! Surely if the contents of my letter couldbe seen it would be ordered to be burned on thequarter-deck. Yet if I mistake not, the friend towhom I write does not greatly disagree with meeither in opinions or feelings. * * *May every blessing attend you, my dear sir. Itis the frequent prayer, I sincerely assure you, ofhim who is always very truly yours,W. WILBERFORCE."He returned to London at the meeting of parliament,and entered the House while the King's speechwas reading. "How I love to be quiet with myfamily," he says at the close of the recess, " how longa period of retirement did it appear on looking forward,and now it is gone like a dream, and I amabout to plunge into the bustle of life again." 58There had been throughout the autumn occasional"rumours of the return of peace," 59 but they hadnow all passed away. Invasion indeed had been solong expected, that men were becoming hardened tothe threat. " A general sense of security has takenthe place of alarm. Several members of the government,who were all alive to call up the country,Diary, Nov. 22. * Diary.1803. WEAKNESS OF GOVERNMENT. 141are now made cooler from the mere effect of havingbecome familiar with the idea of danger. Menof no great strength of mind act more from theirfeelings than their judgment. London now thoughtsafe that the French cannot from a flotilla land anarmy of many together. Two days ago a good accountof Russia's army." 60 Yet it was clear that wewere entering on a dangerous struggle, and fewlooked with any confidence to the vigour of the presentgovernment. " They seem every where' he complains," in low estimation." 61 " One meets in thePump-room people from different parts of England,and I think, without exception, that in every quarterthey are accused of gross remissness and incapacity." a"The ministry," writes " the Dean," 63 from Cambridge,64 " are every where, but particularly here,thought weak on the whole, but exceedingly well-intentioned.I do not hear a mouth opened againsttheir principles. I am sure nothing would give somuch general satisfaction as a junction between Pittand Addington; Pitt's vigour, and Addington's discretion,would please exceedingly." This was exactlyhis own view. " I shall be very glad," he tellsMr. Babington, 65 " if it be practicable, to bring Pittand Addington together again. While on the onehand I am forced to acknowledge that the presentadministration does not command that respect, which60 Diary. 61 jb.& * Letter to Rev. Thomas Gisborne, Oct. 18.& Milner. 64 Nov. 2. fe Nov. 4.142 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1803.in our circumstances is desirable, yet I dread the returnof all the old Cabinet to power."He soon had an opportunity of pressing this arrangementupon Mr. Pitt, with whom he spent the whole ofone day, " Dec. 13th, from breakfast till dinner," inprivate consultation. The wishes of all who were freefrom party bias pointed in the same direction. Thoughthe government Journals talked of immediate invasion,"and Mr. " Addington showed " him " a letterfrom Lord St. Vincent, in which he said the attempt atinvasion would be made this week ;" there was still anevident languor in all the preparations for defence.<( You surprise me," he replied to Mr. Hare Naylor,very much, by what you say concerning the state ofyour coast, for though our eastern shore of Yorkshire isby no means in a situation to receive the enemy, yet itwas natural to suppose that Sussex, as the road to thecapital, would be taken care of, and in fact I wastold it was thoroughly prepared. Certainly you havea Lord Lieutenant of more than ordinary activity."The general opinion of government is, that itis sadly blundering and inefficient. Yet people areafraid of the old set entire. Windham and Co.strong in opposition. Fox manifestly drawing towardsthem. Provoked by cursory remarks. 'Tissaid Sheridan trying to pique him by saying, f Youwill get Pitt in again if you oppose.' He peevishlysays, f I can't bear fools, any thing but fools.' This17th of December I have heard of the accoutrementsbeing received at Hull, and that they will be .JOURNAL. 143livered to the East Riding volunteers." Yet a weeklater he was told " that only half their arms, andnone of their accoutrements,, had reached them. Itis shocking work ; yet not being quite clear that thereis much real blame, I do not like to speak of it in theHouse." 66The ensuing Christmas and the recess were nowapproaching, and he was as usual anxious to turn it tothe best advantage. " Who knows but that it may bemy last preparation for eternity." 67 " My heart is in asad state. O heal my backsliding. Bring me backto Thee. Take away the heart of stone, and give meaheart of flesh. Blessed be God that I am not nowabout to plunge immediately into the bustle andhurry of London and parliamentary business, but thata recess is before me, in which I may have the meansof some privacy, and opportunities of meditation anddevotional abstraction. O Lord, do Thou vouchsafeme Thy quickening Spirit; without Thee I can donothing. Mortify in me all ambition, vanity, vainglory,worldliness, pride, selfishness, and aversionfrom God, and fill me with love, peace, and all thefruits of the Spirit." " This is a dull day with me ;my mind is sadly heavy. I see with my judgment thegreat truths which this day commemorates ; that Hewho enjoyed the glory of the Father before the worldwas, came down, emptied Himself, and became awailing infant for our sakes. I see that it was unutterablelove, but I seem incapable of feeling any thing.Diary, Dec. 17. Diary.144 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1803.I have got up early this last week, and have had somethree quarters, or an hour, for private devotion in amorning. I hoped to have perceived on this day theblessed effects of it ; but I believe I have too muchreckoned on it as a settled thing, as any effect followsits cause. Res delicate est Spiritus Dei. Perhapsthis dull, spiritless frame is designed as a punishmentto me for this thought. But this same course, withmore constant humility and watchfulness, must beright. O Lord, enable me to press on. How wonderfulis this callousness ! a sort of mental paralysis. Itmay not however be without its uses ; it may makeme feel more how absolutely helpless I am in myself;may keep me more simply dependent on the graceand Spirit of God. O Lord, I know not what I am,but to Thee I flee for refuge ! I would surrendermyself to Thee, trusting Thy precious promises,and against hope believing in hope. Thou art-thesame yesterday, to-day, and for ever ; and thereforehowever cold and dull I am, yet, waiting on the Lord,I trust I shall at length renew my strength. Evennow my heart seems to grow warmer ; oh let me fallagain to prayer and praise, and implore fresh suppliesof strength and grace." 68I have read too little of the Bible this week. Incourse, I am in Deuteronomy, but to rouse my sluggishheart I have been occasionally dipping into theProphecies and Epistles." e9 " Give me, Lord,spiritual understanding ; let me drink of the waterJournal, Dec. 18 and 25. Diary, Dec. 31.1803. JOURNAL. 145of life. To Thee, O Lord, I fly for succour ; Thypromises are sure ; and Thou wilt cast out none thatcome to Thee. There is my stay ; otherwise Thoulightest well cast me out ; but by commanding usto ( have grace ' to grow in grace Thou slowestthat we may. Oh let me then rouse myself, lest,having preached to others, I myself should be acast-away. I have found my heart much affectedby looking at past entries in my Journal; and atthe idea that, to the eye of God, all my variouscrimes, vanities, and follies, are present, in their full,unabated, softened size and character, as they at thetime appeared to me. O Lord, enable me to purifymyself as Thou art pure." " I humbly hope I feeldeeply humbled at the footstool of God's throne, andprostrate I plead the atoning blood of Christ, andhumbly trust in His promises of pardon and of grace.When I look forward to the scene before me, andthink how ill I have gone on, I shrink back withdread. But, O Lord, I cast my care on Thee ; Iflee to Thee for succour. Saviour of sinners, saveme. Help, Lord, help, watch over me, and guideand guard me. Amen. Amen." 70It is no slight proof of the high measure of holinessto which he had attained, that he should have beenthus lowly in his own sight, whilst those who mostcontinually watched his conduct, could only give Godthanks for the great grace vouchsafed to him.It is delightful to contrast with his own language70 Journal, Dec. 31.VOL. III. H146 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1803.the observation of one who, with as holy and as humblea soul, was just entering on his brief but gloriouscourse. Henry Martyn was now passing a few weeksin London, and was brought by Mr. Grant to Broom-field.Here he saw Mr. Wilberforce surrounded byhis family and friends. Their " conversation," is thelanguage of Mr. Martyn's private journal, " duringthe whole day was edifying, agreeable to what I shouldthink right for two godly senators ; planning somemeans of bringing before parliament propositions forbettering the moral state of the colony of BotanyBay. At evening worship Mr. Wilberforce expoundedsacred Scripture with serious plainness, and prayedin the midst of his large household." 71The session opened upon the 1st of February, andthe breach was evidently widening between Mr. Pittand Mr. Addington. " I need not tell you," writesMr. Wilberforce to Lord Lancaster, " that I haveendeavoured to keep them in amity : but each hasbeen surrounded with enemies to the other. DearLancaster, Pitt and Addington were intimate friendsI reflect with thankfulness to Heaven that I havefriends who deserve that honourable appellation ; whoare bound to me by ties which no political differencescan ever loosen. Indeed I fear that ' never can truereconcilement grow, where wounds of deadly hate havepierced so deep.' It is really sad work." He hadtalked over the subject with Mr. Pitt before the commencementof the session. fc After breakfast to see7i Journals and Letters of Henry Martyn, vol. l.'p. 86.1804. OLD AND NEW OPPOSITION. 147Pitt much political talk found him resolved notto hamper himself with engagements, or go into systematicopposition." 72 This now combined the mostdiscordant elements. " Lord Camden tells me thatit is certain that Fox and the Grenvilless have coalesced."73 But with neither of these leaders, whoseadherents were called respectively, the old and newopposition, did Mr. Pitt ally himself. On the " Volunteers'Bill, Pitt explained his ideas, and governmentseemed to approve of them." 74 Next day on the samemeasure, " Pitt was excellent and useful," 75 and hedid not even take part in Sir John Wrottesley'smotion for an inquiry into the conduct of governmentin the Irish insurrection.Of this debate, in which there was a <f sad oppositionbetween outward speech and inward sentiments,"he sends Lord Lancaster the following sketch.Broomfield, March 10, 1804.My dear Lancaster,I know well what would be the variations ofyour expressive countenance if you were a witness ofthe scenes which have lately passed in St. Stephen's.Of all achievements of the human face however,Tierney's on Wednesday night was the greatest I eversaw exhibited. You would have had much food formoralizing, had you been in the House. If, luckilyfor him, Fox had not got spoken, (to use one of Lord7* Diary, Jan. 10. 73 ib. Feb. 14.7< Diary, Feb. 27. 75 ib. Feb. 28.H 2148 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1804.Melville's elegant tortures,) he would not howeverhave got off so easily. Windham also could onlyexplain, not reply ; and Grey, of whom hoaxing isnot the forte, preserves also an old liking to Tierney,which, though it did not prevent his striking, preventedhis hitting as hard as Fox would have laid on.The latter, by the way, seems disposed to have nomercy on Addington. I really feel for Addington,who is a better man than most of them, though notwell fitted for the warfare of St. Stephen's. He hasexhibited (you, I think, would also interpret it thisway) marks of soreness, by losing his temper readily,once indeed without the smallest reason. pitt onthat occasion behaved nobly. Instead of retortingangrily, as I own I feared, or even showing any contemptuouscoolness, he scarcely seemed conscious ofAddington's having exposed himself, and answeredwith perfect good humour. You would have beenstruck with the difference between Pitt's demeanourand that of his friends, many of whom you know bearno good-will to Addington.All this is of course secret history. We haveagain been much alarmed about our dear littleBarbara. How afflicting must it be to have a childill and not to be able to provide the remedy ! Isubscribe to hospitals and dispensaries with increasedgood-will since I became a husband and afather.You know the high opinion I entertain of SirCharles Middleton. He, I am sorry to say, believes1804. NAVAL INQUIRY. 149our administration to have been strangely negligent.But I must break off. Kindest regards.Yours ever affectionately,W. Wilberforce."Sir Charles Middleton's opinion weighs with mebeyond that of any other naval man, because besideshis providence, his experience, his integrity, he isless of a party man by far than any other I havebeen able to consult. Nearly all the naval officerswhom I have heard speak their minds, declare thatthe force by which we are opposing the enemy isinsufficient for its purpose. One naval lord of professionalcelebrity said lately, ' We shall soon probablybe at war with the navies of France, Spain,Holland, and even Portugal,' (he might have addedGenoa, which furnishes, as Lord St. Helen's assuresme, multitudes of excellent sailors,) ( and we shallhave no adequate force to oppose to them.' Our shipsare wearing away with unprecedented rapidity fromvarious circumstances, and no efforts have been madeto bring forward new ships as our old ones areexpended." 76This was the ground of Mr. Pitt's first act of directopposition to the government, by his motion (March15th) upon the state of the navy. " Pitt's motionon navy state. I moved by Tierney's low attack,and quite unpremeditatedly answered him, and aswas told, extremely well. I felt my legs more than I6 Letter to Lord Lancaster.150 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1804.ever remember in argument. Never was a morewretched defence made. Slept five hours, and awokewith the train of my ideas running round like a mill.Full of the debate, and vexed to find such symptomsof solicitude ; yet I hope it was nervousness." 7TThough the motion was lost, yet he soon after expresseshis conviction that it " had done good. TheAdmiralty, I am glad to hear, are exerting themselveswith double, I should rather say tenfold, activity." 78Yet this step exposed Mr. Pitt to unusual reproach.Every body blames him as factious for his motionabout the state of the navy. He is conceived to havehad little ground for it, and rather to have lost himself,as they phrase it." 79 " How sad are the effectsof party spirit and party principle in this country !Even where they do not prevail, the idea of their prevalenceis so general, that all is ascribed to thattainted source." 80 " It is not in fact talents in whichwe are chiefly wanting ; but resolute integrity, whichwould correct abuses, and select proper men for importantstations. Alas, my friend, I have lived longenough to see that real integrity is a rare quality, andat the same time the most valuable of all." 81It was in great measure his perfect freedom fromthe taint of party spirit which kept his natural affectionsunimpaired amidst the hardening incidents ofpublic life. Yesterday," he says, 82 March 20th, " on77 Diary. 78 Letter to Lord Lancaster.79 Diary, March 24. Letter to Lord Lancaster.81 Letter to Lord Lancaster. 82 Diary.1804. SUNDAY DRILLING. 151entering the House Tom Stanley told me of poor LordAlvanley's death after a short illness. Overcome withthe event to tears, and retired. In the evening, Pittshowed me a few lines he had written to take leaveof him the night before, recommending his son, Pitt'sgodson, to Pitt's protection. ' God bless the King,and country in general, in these perilous times." 3Freedom from party spirit helped him also tomaintain a sober estimate of their relative importance,amidst the crowd of objects by which he was surrounded;and he would frequently lament the wantof this safeguard in other public men, even whenhe formed a favourable judgment of their real principles.In this tone he wrote to Mrs. Hannah More.London, March 1, 1804.My dear Friend,I am worried to pieces, and vexed beyondmeasure, entre nous, by friends of ours. Alas ! alas !this corrupting world ! You must think that the stainingof our statute book for the first time, by recommendingSunday for a day of drilling in England ;(for two military men declared Scotland would notbear it, and the distinction was accordingly made ;)you must think, who both know and believe the Bible,that this open affront to the majesty and protectionof God, is likely to draw down His vengeance on us.As it happened, the Bishops of London and Durhamwere out of town when the Bill passed through theLords; the Archbishop of Canterbury was so ill as not152 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1804.to be capable of doing business. But now I can getnothing done, though a private application wouldeffect the whole easily. So much delicacy, and caution,and fear of any thing, and every thing, but ofthat which, even for interest's and safety's sake, isalone worthy of apprehension,Je crains Dieu,' &c.All this however to your private ear. It is onlyto a friend I breathe out my sorrows, and only to you,that as occasion offers, you may counteract the dispositionI regret.Ever yours affectionately,W. WILBERFORCE."With the same view he had written to Mr. Gisbornein the autumn, 83 urging him to bring the questionbefore several of the bishops, " that if any opportunityshould offer, our shameful selection of Sunday,exclusively of other days, may be rectified in parliament;" and he had now been endeavouring to interestthe Bishop of Gloucester (Huntingdon) upon thesubject. 84The holidays suspended for a time the rising strife ofparties, but when parliament met early in April, thingsat once assumed a hostile aspect. " Pitt, who returnedon Monday, disposed to go more decidedly into oppositionthan he was a few weeks ago. He is surroundedby men of party spirit without his integrity, and of83 Oct. 18, 1803. w Diary, April 15.1804. PITT IN OPPOSITION. 153strong passions." 85 Immediately on his return Mr.Pitt desired an interview. " I was unluckily detainedhere yesterday," he writes from York Place onWednesday, 86 " till after the hour I had mentioned.If you can find time to come so far, I should be veryglad to see you to-day ; if not, I will call on you atany hour you please tomorrow." In the course ofWednesday Mr. Wilberforce " went up to Pitt, whommissed yesterday. Talked with him ; and set him downat dinner. How changed from a few weeks ago !ready now to vote out Addington, though he has notbound himself to Fox. I fear he has been urged forwardby people of less wisdom than himself. I amout of spirits and doubtful about the path of duty inthese political battles." 87 " I fear that I am partly influencedby personal considerations. I cannot helpregretting that Addington's temperance and conciliationshould not be connected with more vigour. Lord,direct me right, and let me preserve an easy mind,resigned to Thee, and fixed on Thy favour. All else isvanity." 88His Sunday's thoughts turned in the same direction.I am distressed just now by the state of politicalparties. My distress arises partly I hope from realdoubts how I ought to act, yet I fear there is also amixture of worldly fear, and also a weakness of nature,which though not unamiable, ought not to be suffereda* Diary, April 17.86 Right Hon. W. Pitt to William Wilberforce Esq. April 18.<tf Diary, April 18. & Journal, April 17.H 3154 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1804.to influence conduct, or even to discompose me. OLord, to Thee I will pray, to enlighten my understandingand direct my judgment, and then tostrengthen me to take the path of duty with a firmand composed though feeling mind. Poor Addington! with all. his faults, I feel for him. But what alesson does he read me ! Had he really acted uptohis principles, he might probably have beenabove his present difficulties. O Lord, Thou rules.Thy will be done. And keep me from being absorbedby, or too solicitous about, worldly things, rememberingthat a Christian is to regard and feel himself astranger and a pilgrim, and to have his portion, hisconversation, his treasure, his country in heaven. Bethese my habitual feelings, through Thy grace, OLord." 89(f Fox's motion for a Committee concerning thedefence of the country" came on the next day.Debate lasted till four in the morning. Fox spokefeebly Pitt ably ; but too strong. Perceval's feelingand warm defence of Addington was greatly to hishonour." 90He was most anxious, as he tells Mr* Hey, thatPitt should keep himself clear of that " co-operation(coalition is a word of bad omen) which has beenlately announced, and with which you must, I think,have been disgusted. For my part, I still cherish thehope of seeing him acting with Mr. Addington, andshall use all my endeavours to bring the junctionJournal, April 22. *> Diary, April 23.1804. PITT AND ADDINGTON. 155about. There have been busy, ill-meaning friends oneach side." As he had Mr. Pitt's assurance, " thathe would take no decisive step, until after havingwritten to the King, and waited till he was wellagain*' he trusted that there still was room for mediation; and though " he had given over suggestingmatters to Addington, as he had long continued doingwith the frankness of an old friend," he " had a longtalk with him." 91 " The Lord Chancellor 92 came in,and said that he had lately told Pitt how much he wishedto see him and Addington united, that (with greatseriousness) he could not conceive any man in suchtimes as these had a right to think of any thing butthe country, and my poor old master there, pointingto Buckingham House." 93 He was satisfied that itwas " the wish of every body in London, except theimmediate connexions of the ministry, that Pitt wasin office ; but that all, except Fox's party, deprecatedthe idea of union with him. I believe that if theKing would press Pitt to come into power with Addington,in an office not touching him close, he wouldaccede to it from his veneration and affection for theKing. Otherwise the consequence will either be thatthe King's head will give way, and the Prince ofWales be established Regent, or a coalition ministrywill be formed between the Grenvillites and theFoxites, which would injure Pitt in the public estimation."94 With these views he wrote " to desire an91 Letter to Lord Lancaster. ^2 Lord Eldon.93 Diary. 9i ib. Apr Q 2 7.156 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1804.interview with the Lord Chancellor, to whom I hadsaid two or three days ago, that he could do moregood than any other man in England. He returneda very friendly answer, and I saw him to-day, and hislanguage and sentiments did him honour. Saw himfor half an hour, about one. He open, cordial, andgenerous." 95 He thus transmitted to the north theactual state of things.Broomfield, May 1, 1804.My dear Lancaster,You would not perhaps scold me, but I shouldreally reproach myself, if I were not to send you afew words, though they must be but a few, on thepresent state of politics and parties. My wish hasbeen that Pitt might consent to unite with several ofthe present administration, and especially with Addingtonhimself. Grieved indeed am I to say, whenI call to mind their former long and intimate friendship,that a sad degree of hostility has taken possessionof both their bosoms, and chiefly, I fear, of thatwhich, belonging to the strongest character of the two,was likely to partake of that strength. Still, youwill anticipate all I could say to you, of the fatal consequenceswhich might follow from the King's beingin his present state compelled to receive into hisCabinet an administration, consisting entirely of menwho had forced themselves against his will into hisservice, and containing some persons who were0* Diary, April 28.1804. TO LORD MUNCASTER. 157naturally the objects of his extreme aversion. Formy own part I confess, what I believe you know, Foxis not so obnoxious to me as some of Pitt's own connexions; but I fear the country in general would misconstruetheir being united in an administration formed,as this would be, from the effects of their jointopposition. Pitt's character would suffer, and if so theloss might be irreparable.The newspapers will tell you what passed inthe two Houses. I may add in confidence, till itbe otherwise known that a private intimation hadbeen made to the General, 96 as you used to callhim, through an old legal friend of ours, thateither he would be sent for, or that a negociationwould be opened with him through that same legalfriend. I have myself (this most strictly entre nous)had some conversation with that legal friend, and hissentiments and language do him the highest honour.He really in the main exactly concurs with me inwishes and opinions, as to what is best, both for thecountry and for the General himself.I am staying to-day in the country, enjoying thefirst greetings of summer the nightingales are abundant,and, my dear friend, while through nature Ilook up to nature's God, and still more when, from regardingthe Author of nature, I further contemplateHim in the still more endearing character of the Godof grace and consolation, my heart is warmed andthankful for the unequalled blessings I enjoy. I look*> Vide vol. i. p. 69.]58 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1804.down with unaffected superiority on the contentioussparring of our political parties. Happy they whopursue those paths which even here are alone pathsof peace, though pleasantness may sometimes (precariouspleasantness) be found in other ways, andwhich alone will at length conduct us to permanentand solid happiness. O my dear Lancaster, pressforward in these ways. The Scriptures, prayer,with humble reliance on our Redeemer and Intercessor,and on the aids of His promised Spirit, theseare the sure means of progress.With kind remembrances,I am ever affectionately yours,W. WILBERFORCE."On the day before he wrote thus, Pitt he foundhad received an intimation that he would be sent forbyG. R. or negociated with through the Chancellor.Fox in the evening showed he knew nothing aboutit." 97 On the following Monday " Pitt saw the Kingfor the first time. All looked foul before. Rose mostinjudiciously intimated that the King had authorizedPitt to give in a plan of government. But surely thisshould have been a private intimation. Though nocontract direct or indirect between Pitt and Fox, yetFox's friends will abuse Pitt grossly if Fox does notcome in, and he does." 98 Two days later he " called onPitt, and heard the state of the political negociation." "Pitt the 25th of April wrote to the King, telling him& Diary, April 30. * Ib. May 7. " Ib. May 9.1804. PITT'S INTERVIEW WITH THE KING. 159of the open and decisive part he felt it his duty to takeabout his ministry under Addington, declaring hewould never commit himself with any man (he hadtold me that he would never force Mr. Fox upon theKing). The 2nd of May, Pitt submitted to theKing through the Chancellor, by letter, a plan of administration,containing heads of the great parties.King's answer. Pitt returned the 6th a very properanswer, (mild answer turneth away wrath,) and entreatingan interview. Had it next day."He now again announced the state of affairs to LordLancaster.TO LORD MUNCASTER.(Private.) Broomfield, May 10, 1804.My dear Lancaster,As you may like to receive a little private intelligence,I would not omit or delay writing. A lookfrom a friend is better than nothing.You will be glad to hear that during an interviewof more than three hours which Pitt had with theKing, the latter treated him with great cordiality, andeven affection, and talked with as much rationalityand propriety as at any former period of his life.Before Pitt supported Fox's motion, he wrote theKing a private letter, intimating that he felt himselfunder the painful necessity of opposing his Majesty'sgovernment, from a firm conviction that his doing sowas indispensable to the national safety and honour,&c. He also afterwards by the King's desire LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1804.mitted to him his general ideas of the sort of administrationwhich it would he hest to form in the presentconjuncture : viz. an administration composed of theheads of all the several great political parties ; groundingthis opinion on the probability of a long war, andthe advantages of a strong government at home,abroad, and in Ireland. A few days afterwards hesaw the King, and again explained and enforced asfar as he properly could the same ideas. The Kingobjected a good deal at first to the Grenvilless, butat length gave way very handsomely, but indicatedsuch a decided determination against Fox, that itwould have been wrong to press it further.The Grenvilless, as you hear, say they cannot acceptoffice without Fox and Co. ; and so Pitt is to come inwith his own personal friends, Lord Harrowby, &c.and with some of the present men. The country ingeneral I am persuaded will like this best, thoughthe old opposition partisans will be enraged. Andthough Pitt had most clearly explained from the firstthat Fox and Co. were not to consider him boundin any degree directly or indirectly, to press their admissioninto office, and that they were therefore notto shape their conduct on any such supposition, yet Isee clearly Pitt will be abused. You cannot thinkhow violent S. is. He is loud too that the governmentcannot stand at all. Surely he might haveformed some estimate of Pitt's powers. The CarltonHouse politics I hear are all in favour of Fox. Pitt ofcourse would have taken any of the Prince's friends.1804. FROM LORD MUNCASTER. 161I am not sure that this arrangement is not thevery hest possible ; the Grenvilless are so wrongheadedand warlike. Surely, except with a view tothe heir apparent, they are wrong in uniting themselveswith people to whose political opinions theirown are decidedly opposite in almost all importantparticulars. Farewell.Yours ever,W. Wilberforce."I agree with you in all you say respecting theGeneral," was Lord Lancaster's reply. " Well do Iremember, about this time twenty years ago, urginghim with great warmth and earnestness (upon histelling me that he had just sent his letter to the St.Allan's, and my lamenting over it) ' never, neverupon any account to suffer any thing to lead himinto a coalition with his then great rival in politics ;'that I verily thought it would lose him his great stay,'the opinion of the country at large.' "CHAPTER XIX.MAY 1804 TO FEBRUARY 1806.Encouraging prospects of Abolition Cause Motion carried inthe House of Commons by a great majority Delay in theHouse of Lords Pitt's promise of suspending Guiana SlaveTrade by Proclamation Summer at Broomfield LymeLiterary employments Projected work on the Slave TradeCorrespondence with Henry Brougham New sessionReconciliation between Pitt and Addington Abolition Billagain experiences a temporary repulse, notwithstanding itssteady advance in public favour Pitt repeats his promise ofsuspending Guiana Slave Trade Charges against LordMelville effectually supported by Wilberforce His feelingson the subject Proclamation against Guiana SlaveTrade delayed, but at length issued Trafalgar Pitt's deathhis debts, and funeral.THE new ministry had no sooner entered upon officethan Mr. Wilberforce renewed his motion for theAbolition of the Slave Trade. The question hadseemed to slumber for the last four years. In 1800and 1801, the plan of abolishing by a general conventionhad appeared too promising to be risked by aparliamentary defeat. In 1802, the important objectof preventing new crimes in Trinidad had producedsuch delay that the session had closed before the1804. PROGRESS OF ABOLITION. 163measure had made any progress ; and in the last yearMr. Wilberforce's purpose of securing the earliestseason of discussion was defeated, first by his ownillness, and then by the public danger. The time for arenewal of his motion had at length arrived, and itwas under fresh and favourable auspices that heresumed his arms.It was not to the change of government that theAbolition was indebted for these brighter prospects ;though the substitution of a Cabinet, in which it hadmany warm friends, for one almost wholly hostile, wasa favourable circumstance. But the cause of Abolition" had obtained many converts of late years," 1through the altered situation of the country. Itsfailure in 1792 had been occasioned by a fear ofFrench principles, which the conduct of some leadingadvocates at home had too much countenanced. TheHouse of Commons which was returned in 1796,when this fear was at its height, had been unreasonablybut deeply prejudiced against any change in ourColonial system. But the aspect of affairs had nowaltered. In France, democracy had assumed the lessattractive features of military despotism ; while thecommon danger had rendered an unsuspecting spiritof loyalty almost general in Great Britain ; and Jacobinshappily was too much discredited either torender to the Abolition her destructive aid, or supplya convenient reproach for its supporters.Besides this important change, some of the West1 Mr. Pitt's speech, May 30.164 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1804.Indian body had withdrawn or moderated their opposition.When mentioning, early in the year, thathe was (e about to bring on again the question ofAbolition ;" 2 " some of the principal West Indians'he says " begin themselves to relish theidea of suspending the Slave Trade for three or fiveyears. They have not the assurance to pretend to beinfluenced by any principles of justice, (this is literallytrue,) but merely by a sense of interest. The soil ofDemerara, Berbice, and Surinam, is so fertile thatone acre will produce as much as three (generallyspeaking) in our old islands. There is also in theman inexhaustible store of untilled land, fit for sugar.Consequently, the proprietors of estates, knowing thatthe demand for sugar is not even now greater thanthe supply, are afraid lest they should be in the situationof owners of an old and deep mine, who areruined by the discovery of some other where the orecan be obtained almost on the surface. I can ofcourse consent to no compromise, but I shall rejoicein Africa's having such a breathing time, and I amreally in hopes of seeing some fruit of my labours inthis field. I shall esteem it one of the greatest merciesif I am permitted to see the dawning of light inAfrica ; any disposition on our part to withdraw thatblack cloud by which we have so long shut out fromits poor inhabitants the light of Christianity and thecomforts of civilization."2 To Mrs. H. More, Feb. 21.3 To W. Hey Esq. Feb. 11, and April 121804. HOPES OF WEST INDIAN SUPPORT. 165His Diary alludes to the same expectation. " Someof the West Indians now begin to talk of Abolition.They are afraid in general of the cultivation ofDemerara and the Dutch colonies, and offer a threeyears' suspension. 4 This will probably be moved andcarried by Addington, who will be the sober, practicalman, in opposition to the wild enthusiasts whoare for total Abolition." 5 Early in the spring hewas " assured that the great West Indian merchantsand planters would be for a five years' suspension.Five or six names given me. They should carry it,it was said, unanimously at a meeting." 6 To furtherthis plan he wrote to Mr. Addington, " urging himto make himself the head of a suspending party forfive years." 7 There would be (t a disinclination inthe minds of the West Indians to accept any propositionI should make . . . and I could not do more thanacquiesce in such a proposal . I need not say that Ido not propose this to you on my own account. It mightperhaps to some not be very pleasant to have the chiefobject and endeavour of their whole public life takenout of their hands. I foresee also that it will be saidand believed by the world in general, that I, andothers who have been acting with me, have been meretheorists or worse ; and a contrast not very favourableto our characters will be drawn to the credit of thosewho, it will be said, making less ostentatious pretensionsare taking the course of true practical humanity.Diary, Dec. 16, 1803, * Ib. Dec. 24, 1803.Ib. April 19, 1804. 7 Diary,166 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1804.I hope you know me well enough to know that allthis I disregard, and it will be some satisfaction tome,in addition to better sources of comfort which Ineed not mention,, to reflect that I may indirectly becontributing to the success of the qualified measure,which, however short of my wishes, may yet be productiveof much happiness to mankind." 8The honourable and grateful task which he thusproffered, was declined by Mr. Addington " from anatural aversion to come forward just at this moment; " 9 and he soon found that it was in vain to hopefor any general support from the West Indian body. Ata general meeting of planters and merchants held atthe London Tavern, on the 17th of May, LordPenrhyn in the chair," the proposal of suspendingthe Slave Trade during the present war was decidedlyrejected, and a large majority acceded to the motionof Mr. Lyon, the agent for Jamaica, " that everylegal and proper step should be taken to oppose theprogress of any Bill which may be brought into parliamenteither to suspend or abolish the Slave Trade."All hopes vanished upon this decision, and thepromised concurrence of the planters only served, asit had done four years before, to delay his own proceedings.He determined therefore at once to introducehis motion ; but not daring to look forward toentire success, he wished to engage Mr. Pitt to comeforward to his succour by proposing the suspensionof the Trade. " Called on Pitt, and proposed his8 To the Right Hon. H. Addington, May 4. Diary, May 16.1804. WEST INDIAN OPPOSITION UNABATED. 167talking with Milligan, and settling plan of suspensionwith him and other West Indians." 10 To this proposalMr. Pitt readily agreed, but wrote to him a few daysafterwards :My dear Wilberforce,My conversation with Milligan amounted onlyto this, that he and other sensible West Indianswished for the suppression ; but the great majoritywould oppose it, many from adherence to formeropinion, and more from the fear that if once suspendedthe Trade could never be revived. In this state, andhaving had no time to settle any thing with any partof the Cabinet, I see no use in moving the suspension,unless any thing arises in the debate to give afavourable opening for it. It would certainly havebeen well if there had been a little more time to consult,but I am afraid any delay is impossible.Ever affectionately yours,W. P.Wednesday, May 30."He was therefore" to renew single-handed this greatcontest, whilst against him was arrayed a body notstronger for its wealth and numbers, than for thecharacter, talents, and station of many of its members; which extended its influence through the aristocracyof the land, which had a prince of the blood forits avowed advocate in the upper House of parliament,Diary, May 18.168 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1804.and above all was supported by men who, like GeorgeEllis, ruled the literary world, and who plainly toldhim that they " differed from him totally on the greatsubject of Abolition." nUpon the 30th of May he moved the first readingof his Bill. Though complimented by one of hisopponents for his ingenuity in finding new argumentson so hackneyed a subject, he was himself discontentedwith the spirit with which he introduced the question.I never felt so discomposed, and stiff, and little at easeon any former occasion, and I own I think I did notdo near so well as usual, though the Speaker said hehoped I had satisfied myself, as I had done every bodyelse. The anti-abolitionists made no stand in speaking."12 They failed no less on a division. ft We divided124 against 49. All the Irish members voted withus. There was a great Irish dinner, 33 or 34 diningtogether. Lord De Blaquiere gave my health as a toast,and they all came and voted for us. Lee and Lord DeBlaquiere spoke and did good. Addington in a speechof one minute opposed us as impracticable, and blindlythrew out a Committee. Barham with us. Pitt andFox a few words. On coming home found Brougham,Stephen, Macaulay, Grant, Henry Thornton, &c.John Villiers came, and he, I, Stephen, Brougham,and William Smith talked over and settled Bill. Stephenand I had more talk afterwards. To bed late."Thus was the Abolition of the Slave Trade for a11 George Ellis Esq. to W. Wilberforce Esq. Aug. 27.12 Diary, May 30.1804. ABOLITION PROSPECTS. 169third 13 time voted by the House of Commons ; butnot as formerly through the hesitating concurrence ofa scarce perceptible majority. Its supporters werenow as overwhelming in numbers as they had alwaysbeen in argument. From that night the issue of thequestion was clear. Accident or artifice might for oneor two sessions postpone the triumph, but this alterationin the sober judgment of reflecting men showed that themists which had obscured the plain demands of rightwere passing away for ever. " The papers will informyou of our last night's success' writes Mr. Wilberforceto a member of the Old Slave Trade Committee. 14Well the Supreme Disposer of all things can turnthe hearts of men, and before him difficulties vanish."The venerable Newton expressed his doubts whetherhe, who was " within two months of entering upon hiseightieth year, should live to see the accomplishmentof the work : but the prospect," he adds, " will giveme daily satisfaction so long as my declining facultiesare preserved." Mr. Wilberforce repliedTO THE REV. JOHN NEWTON.Palace Yard, Friday.My dear Sir,I steal one moment from business and bustleto thank you most cordially for your kind congratulations.I really scarcely deserve them for not havingcalled on you for so long a time, yet I must do myselfthe justice to declare, that my having neglected so to13 It had passed the House of Commons in 1792, and 1796.14 To Rev. J. J. Plymley, (now Archdeacon Corbett,) May 31.VOL. III. I170 LIFE OP WILBERFORCE. 1804.do has in no degree arisen from any want of thataffection and esteem which I must ever feel for you.my dear sir, it is refreshing to me to turn awaymy eye from the vanities with which it is surrounded,and to fix it on you, who appear in some sort to bealready (like Moses descending from the mount) enlightenedwith the beams of that blessed day which isbeginning to rise on you, as you approach to the veryboundaries of this world's horizon. May you soonenjoy it in its meridian lustre. Pray for us, my dearsir, that we also may be enabled to hold on our way,and at last to join with you in the shout of victory.I fear the House of Lords ! But it seems as ifHe, who has the hearts of all men in his power, wasbeginning to look with pity on the sufferings of thosepoor oppressed fellow creatures whose cause I assert.1 shall ever reckon it the greatest of all my temporalfavours, that I have been providentially led to takethe conduct of this business.In extreme haste, I remain, my dear sir,yours affectionately and sincerely,W. WILBERFORCE."These cheerful anticipations were universal. " Isympathize," says Jeremy Bentham, 15 " with yournow happily-promising exertions in behalf of the raceof innocents, whose lot it has hitherto been to bemade the subject-matter of depredation for the purposeof being treated worse than the authors of suchcrimes are treated, for those crimes, in other places."w To William Wilberforce Esq June 8.1804. TO LORD MUNCASTER. 171A few days later he sent to Lancaster Castle afull account of what had passed.Broomfield, June 4, 1804.My dear Lancaster,Though on all sides, and in all directions, lettersare lying around me unanswered, and many ofthem unread, I must, before I proceed to the liquidationof the vast debt which for above a week has beenaccumulating, and with many sadly and justly clamorouscreditors I must send you a line or two. Indeedyou must have been surprised (I hope not hurt) atmy not having written the day after our carrying thefirst bastion of the Slave Trade citadel ; a citadel, thedungeon of which is more foul, dark, and cruel, andcontaining a far greater number of poor wretchedvictims of injustice and oppression, than any of 'sHill Forts, formerly so much talked of. I canassure you my heart was with you (and Burgh also)from the moment of our victory. But, my dear Lancaster,you will enter into my sensations. I could not,I cannot feel any thing of the joys of success, when Iknow how little we can depend on the continuance ofour first advantages, even in the House of Commons,and still more when I look forward to the House ofLords. But on this subject so much pours in uponme, that I must let down the flood-gates, and not permitanother drop to come through, except that,though you will be sufficiently indignant againstAddington from reading the account of his seething,(it lasted literally but for about forty seconds,) yet youi 2172 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1804.would be ten times more indignant if you knew all.I have the satisfaction of reflecting that I acted towardshim, in spite of much provocation, like a truefriend. I had endeavoured to procure for him, orrather to put him in the way of procuring for himself,the credit of effecting a suspension of the Slave Tradefor five years, (while we should have been stigmatizedas speculative visionaries, he, on the contrary, beingthe man of practical humanity, &c.) To all this, noanswer, no hint of what he thought or intended, &c.At last he comes with his wretched repetition ofour mode being impracticable. I own I never feltmore indignant. But what am I doing ? my sheetnearly done, and not one word except on that subjecton which I meant to say but three. I will close it,telling you that the Historical Sketches 16 have produceda powerful impression on my mind, on a re-perusal.It is most true you never hear one word aboutinvasion, any more than of death or of the dayof judgement. Your inference is most just. OLancaster, Lancaster, I used often to tell youthat you thought too highly of one person's talents,of whom, both in point of talents and some moralqualities, I also thought, and still think, more highlythan of those of almost any other man. But, as Ihave often said, c he that is least in the kingdom ofheaven, is greater than he.' True religion, whichmakes a man ' keep his own heart diligently,' to usethe Scripture expression, gives him further insight16 Historical Sketches on the Slave Tra^.e, by Lord Lancaster.1804. SECOND READING OF ABOLITION BILL. 173into the hearts of others, and enables him to anticipateconduct and events far better than many superiorto him in natural sagacity and acquired knowledge.Fear God and keep His commandments, that is thewhole duty of man.' I more and more see the truthand force of the proposition.Have you seen Bates's Moral Philosophy, orHall's last fast sermon, " The Sentiments properto the Crisis." I had nearly forgotten a piece ofbusiness on which I have had to write to you foramonth past. A friend of mine and Grant's, Mr.Parry, is about to go to the Lakes with his wife anda little girl or two. He is an East India director,a man of practical sense, great piety and benevolence,whom you must love on account of his being incessantlyactive in works of kindness, &c. his wife, oneof my sister's oldest friends. In one word, I ammuch interested for them, and desirous of their havingevery advantage towards a comfortable tour Let mebeg you to allow me to introduce them to you.I must stop farewell. Kind remembrances.Yours ever,W. Wilberforce."P. S. Alas ! at the very time I am writing I amexpecting to hear of poor Dick Milnes's death. Omy friend, let us be ready. And this reminds me thatI had forgot to tell you one circumstance in whichyou and Mr. Parry are alike \ he lost his only sonlately, a youth of the utmost promise."The second reading of the Bill came on upon the174 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1804.7th of June. " Long discussion. House sat till two.Lord Castlereagh's long anti-speech. Windhamagainst us. I only shortly spoke at last. Wecarried it 102 to 44, 1T or near it." 18 Other matters ofgreat interest were in progress. Mr. Pitt had enteredupon office in the face of bitter and powerful parties.The old opposition are extremely angry with Pittfor coming in without Fox. Pitt himself thinksGrenville will oppose even more warmly than Fox.They abuse the Chancellor." 19 The whole strength ofopposition was mustered against Mr. Pitt's militaryplan. On the 8th of June, " its second reading cameon only about 40 majority. Opposition, Foxitesespecially, in high spirits. It seems probable thatmore have divided against Pitt on this Bill than onany future measure, because already pledged againstit while Addington in ; but yet the effect of these baddivisions may cause the rats to run, and so pull himdown. It is curious, for several weeks not one wordsaid, or even thought, of invasion. It is next to impossibleany one topic can long maintain its place inconversation.June 15th. House opposition got the better in afirst division by surprise. Pitt very angry and hisfriends spoke against time. His second division,only about thirty majority. His next will be no better ;but this Bill no test. 18th. House which very late.Pitt's Militia Bill till half-past four, 265 against 223.Opposition had been very sanguine, and said theyl ? He perhaps took into his calculation some persons who paired offThe numbers given in the Part. Deb. are 100 to 42.'8 Diary, June 7. l9 Ib.1804. ATTENTION TO ABOLITION BILL. 175would carry the question. 22nd. House which onLord Advocate's letter. Whitbread's motion Pitt'sand Perceval's honest, manly, and moderate way oftaking it. Lord Advocate's own speech most imprudent.Babington and I were partly induced to votefor previous question last night, by considering thatPerceval must have overruled, and struggled to getso moderate a measure attended to, and it strengthensor weakens his hands, accordingly as such a one issupported by independent men ; if they vote againsteven that, it is said, f You see no good is done by yourmiddle terms and your candour.' Canning spoke excellentlyon Monday ; talking at the close of Addington'ssystematic opposition. Though Addingtonangry, yet the remark may have done good, andprevent his opposing."His own Bill meanwhile required his whole attention,as its progress could be secured only by unweariedvigilance. No claims of local interest securedit the attendance of any class of members, while itwas opposed by a powerful party with all the expedientseither of reason or stratagem. " A great mass ofpapers has been laid upon the table of the House,"said Sir Laurence Parsons; 20 <e these ought to be readbefore the question is decided, and I am sure thateven the honourable member who introduced the Billhas not read them." He could reply that " he hadread them, and should have thought himself culpable,if he had not looked over documents which had nowbeen a month upon the table, and which were so20 Debate of June 7.176 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1804.intimately connected with a subject in which he feltsuch particular interest." On the 12th he wentfrom Broomfield to the House, though very poorly,because the Abolition Bill was coming on." That dayit passed the Committee. Next morning he was earlyat the parliamentary offices, and the House.Brougham, Stephen, Babington, Henry Thornton,Macaulay, dining with us in Palace Yard most days ofthe Slave Trade debates. We proceeded to hearcounsel on report, when their own friends slipped away,and leaving less than forty, counted us out." 21 Onthe next occasion on which the subject could beintroduced, General Gasooigne inveighed againstthis delay, 22 and threatened to enforce the order ofthe day ; while Mr. Fuller, who had moved theadjournment, complained of the haste with whichMr. Wilberforce was urging the matter through theHouse, and quoted as a negro saying, that " MassaKing Wilbee wanted to free them, but that the parliamentwould not let him."The Bill however, through his constant attention,continued to advance, and two days afterwards hewrote to the member for Waterford, 23 one of its activesupporters :Broomfield, Clapham Common, June 22, 1804.My dear Sir,Ecce iterum Crispin, I fear you will be readyto exclaim on the sight of my hand writing, but Ihope you will suggest to yourself my best excuse, I21 Diary, June 13. 22 Debate of June 14. * Edward Lee Esq.1804. TO EDWARD LEE ESQ. 177mean what is due from me to the great cause, ofwhich I have the honour to be the conductor.I happened to hear yesterday that many of theIrish members were intending to leave London almostimmediately, and knowing how much our success dependson their support, I confess I heard it with nosmall concern. Allow me, however, to beg yourinterest and endeavours in this emergency. We havebut two stages remaining, which I hope we shall passthrough early in next week. I cannot but hope,therefore, that our Irish friends will not desert uswhen we are so near the end of our course. I knowthat our opponents mean to muster all their strengthon the third reading. It is important not only to beatthem, but to beat them by a considerable majority,with a view to our reception in the House of Lords,both now, (and hereafter if we fail now,) and to thegeneral credit of our cause in the country. Believeme, I would not be thus importunate in any thingwhich concerned myself personally ; but yourown mind, my dear sir, will better supply the rest.I am, my dear Sir,your faithful servant,W. Wilberforce."This was a most critical moment. " June 23rd.The Irish members, who at first all so warm for Abolition,have since been persuaded by some West Indiansthat it is an invasion of private property.Barham offended by my apparent inattention to him.I wrote him a letter of apology, and all healed. Ni3178 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1804.deed, feeling all that was thankful, it was impossibleI could mean any thing uncivil. Lord Castlereaghtold me that many years ago he had looked into theSlave Trade, and adopted his present opinions. Whata cold-blooded creature ! Owns he goes all the length,and that Dundas ought now to support us, or not tooppose. Somers Cocks (as well as Fox) the otherday gave Pitt a hard knock about his not being inearnest about Abolition, and Sir Robert Buxton (instillworse taste, alas) defended him. I never was sodissatisfied with Pitt as this time." 24 On the 25th,however, when the case was again argued before theHouse, (i Pitt, warming in his speech, moved againsthearing counsel as well as evidence, and carried itwithout a division ;" 25 and two days afterwards, theBill was read for the third time in the House of Commons" our majority 99 to 33. Samuel and JohnSmith, &c. most kind in attending, and Attorney-generalalso. Addington most vexatious ;" 26 " yetI am glad that some rather severe remarks I made onhim and his warm zeal for Abolition, in which he declaredwe none of us surpassed him, did not get intothe newspapers." 27He had now triumphed in the House of Commons,but greater difficulties were behind. He set out forthe House, in order to carry up his Bill to the Lords,receiving on his way (( a most kind and honourableletter on the subject from Grenville," 28 in reply toone that he had written the day before.24 Diary, June 23. Ib. June 25. 26 Ib. June 27.2 7 To Lord Lancaster, July 6. 26 Diary, June 2&1804. TO LORD GRENVILLE. 179TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE LORD GRENVILLE.Broomfield, June 27, 1804.My dear Lord Grenville,Though I have been so long in parliament, Iwas ignorant till yesterday evening, when I accidentallylearned it in conversing with the Bishop of London,that in the House of Lords a bill from the Houseof Commons is in a destitute and orphan state, unlessit has some peer to adopt and take the conduct of it.So soon as I knew this, your Lordship occurred tomeas the natural guardian and protector of the Billfor the Abolition of the Slave Trade. I know notwhether you may happen to recollect, that it was byadvice of you and Pitt that I went down to the Houseof Commons, and gave notice of my intention ofbringing forward a proposition on that subject, whichin private had long engaged my attention ; and youtook a leading part in drawing up the resolutions, onwhich we grounded our measure. Let me earnestlyentreat you therefore to undertake this pious charge.Allow me also to say, that as I account it one of themost signal favours of my life, that I have been providentiallyled to bring forward this cause, so it ispersonally gratifying to me in the highest degree, toreceive the support of any one like your Lordship, withwhom I was connected in earlier days, though wehave not seen any thing of each other of late ; and ofwhom it has given me sincere pleasure to hear, thatyour longer acquaintance with life has only tended tomake you, in your advancing years, place a highervalue on religion, and esteem Christianity not only as180 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1804.the foundation of our future hopes, but as the onlysource even of our present happiness.What the fate of the Bill may be in the House ofLords I cannot anticipate. I own I am fearful as totke issue in the present session ; but on our appearancethis year may depend our success in the next : andthe effect on our old islands of the growing cultivationof the newly-conquered Dutch settlements, whichhave already neutralized so many of the West Indianbody, may (to use poor Burke's phrase) dulcify themby another session." C9Unfavourable news met him at the House. Afterdiscussing the subject with one of his brethren,Bishop Porteus told him, that " taking into accountthe advanced period of the session, the probable sentimentsof several leading men in administration, andthe absence of by far the greater number of bishopsin their respective dioceses," they " extremely doubtedwhether it would be prudent to risk the Bill thissession in the House of Lords. " If," said the Bishop,as we much fear, it were to be rejected, this wouldinjure the cause, and greatly impede its successanother year." 30 This information prepared him forthe proposal which was made to him in the House ofLords. " I carried up my Bill. Pitt told me that ameeting had been held of the Cabinet, in which it wasagreed that the subject to be hung up till next year,on the ground that the examination of evidence indispensable; that they could make no progress this year,20 From a rough copy found among Mr. Wilberforce's papers.3 Bishop Porteus to William Wilberforce Esq. June 27.1804. BILL POSTPONED. 181and that therefore it was better not to bring it on.That it was best for the cause to be regarded as a newquestion, on the ground of the danger of the colonies ;and this more likely to work when some little time forits operation. I felt less at first than when 1 reflected."31 " The fact is' he says, " that the House ofLords from their habits would not dispense with thehearing of evidence, and the session was so faradvanced that if any vote should be come to, it wouldonly be pledging against us those who possibly mightbe gained over." 32Lord Grenville was of the same opinion. He promisedto " be in town to say his say," on the day ofdiscussion, but pronounced it inexpedient to attemptto divide. " The advantage," he says, " which ameasure has with us, from being in the hands of oneof the leading ministers, is much greater than wouldbe thought by those who do not understand the interiorof the machine." 33 " I own," says Mr. Wilberforce,34 " it quite lowers my spirits to see all my hopesfor this year at once blasted, yet / can't help myself.To be sure, one session in such a case as this is notmuch; yet as we know not what may happen in theinterval, I tremble lest some insurrection, or otherevent with two handles, should turn men against us.Still it is a great reconciler that I can't help myself."Yet there were many cheering indications. " Icannot help thinking," he tells Lord' Lancaster, 3531 Diary, June 28. 32 To Lord Lancaster, July 6.Lord Grenville to William Wilberforce Esq. June 29.3 * To Rev. Thomas Gisborne, June 28. 35 July 6,182 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1804.that we are somewhat advanced on our way ; thoughI am far from being so sanguine as many were, evenin 1792. You will I know receive pleasure fromhearing your f Sketches' were of use. The more Ireflect upon it, the more I am thankful that Providencegraciously conducted me to this great cause.We must now exert ourselves. On the next yearmuch depends. The Almighty alone knows what isto be the issue. It was truly humiliating to see, inthe House of Lords, four of the Royal Family comedownto vote against the poor, helpless, friendlessSlaves. I sometimes think the Almighty can scarcelysuffer us to be rid of such a load of wickedness, towhich we cling so fondly, without making us suffer forour bigotted attachment. It is often the way ofHeaven to let the error bring its own punishment alongwith it. Well, my friend, it will one day be consoling,that you and I exerted ourselves to clear the ship ofthis sinking cargo."While he formed this sober estimate from promisingappearances, the expectations of more sanguinemen outran the actual issue. " I was glad," wroteDr. Coulthurst from Yorkshire, 36 " that you went onso triumphantly through the House of Commons. Itis thought that in the next session you will succeed inthe House of Lords. I am a West Indian, and havesome little property there, and I am far from thinkingthat the Abolition of the Slave Trade will be the ruinof the West Indies ; while I think it will very muchmeliorate the condition of the blacks."36 To W. Wilberforce Esq. Oct. 30.1804. DEBATE IN THE LORDS. 183Upon the 2nd of July came on the " second readingof the Bill in the Lords, agreed among governmentto be postponed." The debate was opened by theChancellor in a very " threatening speech, becauseoverrating property, and full of all moral blunders,yet amiable in some views. He showed himself tolabour with feelings, as if he was the legitimateguardian of property. Lord Stanhope's a wildspeech." 37 " With horror I heard that he wasabout to divide the House. Many of our friendswere necessarily absent, and we should have beensadly beat. He gave it up however very kindly onmy remonstrance; but his speech contained somemost mischievous passages, threatening the Lords,that by means of his stereotype press he would circulatemillions of papers amongst the people, and delugethe country with accounts of the cruelties of theSlave Trade, and of the barbarous treatment of theSlaves in the West Indies." 38 " Lord Hawkesburyspoke honourably and handsomely. Westmoreland,like himself, coarse and bullying, but not withouttalent. Grenville spoke like a man of high andhonourable principles, who, like a truly great statesman,regarded right and politic as identical." 39The debate closed, according to agreement, withthe adjournment of the question to the followingsession. But though Mr. Wilberforce reluctantlyagreed to this arrangement, he did not idly lay asideall present exertion. No branch of the accursed trafficproduced greater misery than that which supplied the37 Diary. * Letter to Lord Lancaster. 3!) Diary.184 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1804.conquered colonies with slaves ; and this he proposedto terminate at once, by a resolution of the House ofCommons. On this business he " called (July 3rd) onPitt, who positively said he had no doubt of stoppingthe Trade by Royal Proclamation. Very strong onthis, and against any vote of parliament." On thefaith of this engagement, after <e a conference inPalace Yard Brougham, Grant, Babington, WilliamSmith, Henry Thornton, and Macaulay," 40 he gave uphis intended resolution ; partly because his " carryingthe measure in parliament, if Pitt opposed, would beextremely doubtful ;" 41 and partly because such anAct of Parliament, unlike the temporary suspension ofthe Trade by a Proclamation, would have removedthat salutary apprehension of the competition of thevirgin soils, which had already so far mitigated theforce of West Indian opposition.The delay which intervened before this promisewas redeemed, is the great blot in all Mr. Pitt's treatmentof this cause. The Proclamation was promisedweek after week, and still causelessly delayed. " Letme beg you, my dear Pitt," Mr. Wilberforce wrote,(Sept. 14th,) " to have the Proclamation issued . Itwill not cost you half an hour to settle this. I begyou will remember how much I myself am personallyconcerned in it ; if any other excuse be necessary formy boring you so about it than the merits of the subjectitself." In November Lord Harrowby wrote toMr. Wilberforce, " I am hardly sure that I am not aperjured privy counsellor in telling you that the orderDiary. Letter to Rev. T. Gisborne, June 281804. Bromfield. 185about Surinam, and all other conquered colonies, wasactually on the list of council business on Thursdaylast." Yet another year elapsed before, under thethreat of instant parliamentary proceedings, it wasactually issued.Though the progress of this cause during thepresent year has been detailed without interruption,it must not be supposed that the constant attentionit received from Mr. Wilberforce was the singleservice of a man free from other cares. He waspressed every day by his usual amount of duties,and after entering many " hurrying weeks," says ona Sunday spent quietly at Broomfield, " I feeltired to-day as a man whose general work overcomeshim." 42He was of too large a heart to be quiet so near London;and the claims of business, of charity, and ofhospitable kindness, drew largely upon his time andstrength. A few extracts from his Diary will discoverthese features of his life. " J. R. called and walkedwith me near an hour. I regretted it, but thought itunfriendly to break ois sooner than I did. May 18th.To town betimes. Called Pitt's warned him aboutEast Indian system of aggrandizement, pursued byLord Wellesley. Called on relations dined settledApprentice Bill. Babington and Mr. Hothouse (lawyer)called and Broomfield, evening. 19th. Breakfast,Mr. Taylor called. Before he gone, ColonelFullerton came. Before he gone, four Yorkshireclothiers, who staid till near four. Dinner Bernard,s Diary.186 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1804.Mrs. Stephen, James Stephen,, William Hoare, Mr.and Mrs. Henry Thornton, Teignmouths, Cornish,and Macaulay. Much talk with Bernard about RoyalInstitution and other useful he full of useful, andmany of them splendid, projects. J. H. and poor S.out of office. Alas, alas ! that there should be sucha dereliction of the feelings of friendship.May 2nd. Town City Bible Society generalmeeting they forced me to speak. 13th. Aftermuch doubt, resolved and went to hear Hall at meetingvery energetic and simply vehement, on 1 Tim.f Glorious gospel.' He seemed to labour with a senseof the weight and importance of his subject. Trulyevangelical also. Excellent indeed language simplethoughts just, deep, and often elevated excellingin experimental applications of Scripture, often withimmense effect begins calmly and simply, warms asproceeds, till vehement, and energetic, and impassioned.All of us struck with him. Simeon withus his first hearing of Hall. 14th. Breakfasted atHenry Thornton's to meet Hall Hannah More andPatty. Hall very clever, unaffected, and pleasing inconversation. Town Hatched's Suppression ofVice Society read their report of proceedings highlyuseful. Lord Radstock had in a month got themabout 153 members, many of them of high rank.Home letters House dined Carrington's to meetLlandaff, Ferguson, Mason, &c. Mason seems welldisposed and independent in mind and ways of thinking.I am mistaken if he keeps in the beaten track,'and gives up his free agency to the degree it is done,1804. DIARY. 187alas, by the men of the world. Summoned to town onSpanish sequestrationbusiness. Saw Pitt for some time,and afterwards Harrowby, and talked with him muchabout West Indian (Dessalines') cruelties. Back toBroomfield, and dined Stephen, and Broughams,Teignmouth, &c.July 6th. Town. Busy when there, though carriedup needlessly the Sierra Leone business, forwhich I went, being put off as O. knew ; but did not tellme, though I wrote to ask. Pity ! this little churlishness.Dined home Pitt, Lord Camden, Lord Carleton,Rose, Foster, John Villiers, C. Noel, LordHarrowby but a dull day. Pitt not in spirits : I verypoorly, and doubting about being able to receivethem. 9th. After letters, to town, having an appointmentwith Pitt ; who had answered my last letter inavery friendly way really affectionate, as I am sureI felt and acted towards him. Waited an hour andcould not see him cold meat and House SierraLeone business. Alas ! Windham and Dr. Lawrencespoke against it, not having taken the trouble to lookinto the report or business, and even Francis carriedaway by T.'s cold way, which really produced apersuasion that the colony had answered worsethan it has then Fuller's ribaldry but only nineappeared to divide against us, and the rest ashamed."Town. Sierra Leone Committee. House. Fever Institution.Brougham and Grant dined much talk.Brougham very unassuming, animated, and apparentlywell inclined to religion.My occupations many letters reading Bates's188 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1804.Rural Philosophy Otaheite (Encyclopaedia) runningover Kept's Elements Repton's Quarto SirW. Jones's Life by Teignmouth : she not pleased ;what a thankless office ! 26th. Mr. Richmond withus and Mr. Norton. 27th. Several friends to seeNorton at breakfast. Then to London and back todinner C. Hoare, Venn, J. Thornton and Richmond,Healthy and Norton. 30th. Morning, breakfastfriends about sending the gospel to the Indians.Mr. Norton's Mohawk's dance Venn,Healthy, Cooksonon, John Thornton much discussion.We are all extremely struck with Mr. Norton, theMohawk chief (Teyoninhokarawen) ; his blended modestyand self-possession ; his good sense and apparentsimple propriety of demeanour. May it be a providentialincident thrown in my way to send the gospelto those ill-used people. He again danced his wardance more moderately."Broomfield, Aug. 1, 1804.My dear Lancaster,You are a man of by far too lively sensibilitiesnot to have often felt, when you have been thinkingof an absent friend, ' perhaps at the very momentin which I am thus reflecting or speaking of him heis no more.' Have you then seen in the newspapersa paragraph . . Last died at Booth Ferry, on herway to the lakes, the wife of Edward Parry Esq. ?Yes so it is, my dear friend. I told you, when Irecommended this good man to your friendship, thathe had been f a stricken deer,' and I little expected that1804. TO LORD MUNCASTER. 189he was again so soon to verify my account of him.Happily Mrs. P. was a woman to whom no deathcould be sudden, and therefore though called away undercircumstances which rendered the event peculiarlyaffecting to the survivors, (for she was come down withher husband for the first time since her marriage to theplace of her birth and early connexions, to a sister especiallywho loved her almost to extravagance,) she cannotbe said to have been taken by surprise. You will notwonder that poor Mr. Parry has changed his course,and has taken his daughters to Scarborough a mournfulparty, but ( sorrowing not as those who are withouthope,' but as those sustained by the most efficaciousof all cordials. I was once myself so nearly in thesame situation as to find it needful to have recourseto it. But the Almighty graciously spared me, andallowed me to continue to enjoy my domestic comforts ;the best of all this world's blessings.te I brought this letter to town to-day in the hopeof securing a quiet half hour to be allotted toyou, but I can barely finish and make up. Whata contrast ! I am now writing from the very heartof the city of London to you in the very bosomof the happy valley. It makes my mouth water tolook to you ; but yet you are with me in heart,for I am attending a Committee of the Society forthe Abolition of the Slave Trade, after having beenat a meeting of the Sierra Leone Company. I amsitting at this moment under Sir Francis Burnett'sCommittee Room. By the way, a friend just nowtold me, that an honest Baptist in his neighbourhood190 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1804.had been neutralized by Lord William Russell's drivingto him in Leather Lane, with his coach and four,and out-riders, &c. Surely it is to the man's honourthat all this magnificence could not gain him. Farewellkind remembrances.Ever yours,W. WlLBERFORGE."His own choice would have been a very differentlife. " Dined quietly' he says, 43 " for the first timethis age. How delightful is a little peace in thecountry!" At times, indeed, as he tells Mr. Hey, hewas disposed to seek more quiet by a change of residence." Broomfield, (I wish you knew it better,) "for even at this moment his hospitable spirit wouldhave added to the crowd of friends around him, "isa scene of almost as much bustle as Old Palace Yard.So much so, that the incessant worry (it is an expressiveword) of this house makes me think of quittingit, and I should not hesitate for a moment, were it notfor our having several valuable friends so near us.The Henry Thorntonss, Stephens, Teignmouths,Venn, &c. I consider the neighbourhood in which Ifix myself a point of still more importance, now that Iam the father of several children. I should scarcelybe able to avoid occasional visiting among my neighbourswherever I might live, and what irreparableinjury might my young people receive from theiraccidental conversations with those who by courtesyof language are called friends. I have already dis-diary.1804. LYME. 191covered that children are very sagacious and attentiveobservers, and shrewd in detecting inconsistencies.Often when they seem to be playing about the roomheedless of all that is going forward, it appears afterwards,that they heard and remembered too the conversationwhich was going forward."Leaving Broomfield in the beginning of September,he moved with his whole family 44 to Lyme, in Dor-seashore,where he " hoped to enjoy something of tomethe greatest of all luxuries, as well as the best ofall medicines, quiet." 45 "The place," he tells Mr.Babington, 46 "suits me mightily: a bold coast,a fine sea view the clouds often shrouding the topsof the cliffs ; a very varied surface of ground ; a mildclimate, and either fresh air or sheltered walks as youplease. I allow myself two or three hours open airdaily, and have enjoyed more than one solitary strollwith a Testament, a Cowper, or a Psalter, for mycompanion. Except quod non simul esse, &c. I wishyou were here, and all your house ; but if the presenceof some friends would be a most valuable addition,the absence of the multitude of callers is a mostvaluable loss. We have not had one call since wecame." " I never was at any place where I had somuch the command of my own time, and the power ofliving as I please. Only two calls from JusticeTucker." 47 He delighted to exchange the bustle of44 His whole family consisted of four sons and two daughters ; William,born 1798 ; Barbara, born 1799 ; Elizabeth, born 1801 ; Robert Isaac,born 1802; Samuel, born 1805 ; Henry William, born 1807.45 Letter to Mrs. Hannah More, Sept. 5. Vid. Correspondence, &c.> 6 Sept. 15. -7 Diary, Dec. 31.192 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1804.his public life for this domestic privacy. " Here,"he breaks off in the midst of a letter to HannahMore, " I am irresistibly summoned to a contest atmarbles, and in these days of the rights of man as Iwould not furnish any valid ground for rebellion, andremembered I was at Lyme, I obeyed the call' 48He could now too indulge, in some degree, his keenrelish of natural beauties, and the common air. Heread much out of doors, and wrote with a pencil," 49and " had many a delightful walk along the hoarseresounding shore, meditating on better things thanpoor blind Homer knew or sung of." 50Yet this was no idle time. " I cannot say whenceit proceeds," he tells Lord Lancaster, " but my timescarcely ever rolled away so rapidly as it has done atthis place. I believe it arises from the comfortableuniformity of my days. In that respect indeed mylife here is like my life in London ; only the oneis uniformity of bustle and interruption, the otheruniformity of studious and closet occupations interchangedwith domestic society. Time seems to appearto pass away slowly or rapidly, accordingly asthere have been many or few prominent and markedevents, which on our looking back occur to our view.When there are many of these, we are, without knowingwhy, led into conceiving that a considerable timemust have elapsed, to afford space for so many incidents; but on the contrary, when very few incidentsrise to our view in the retrospect, the period seems49 Nov. 22. Vid. Correspondences. < 9 Diary.50 Letter to Hannah More, Sept. 15. Vid. Correspondence, &c1804. SUMMER EMPLOYMENTS. 193necessarily a short one. Such are my practical metaphysics.You are not however to suppose me idle here,because I am not employed in business of the samekind as that which worries me in town. I scarceever remember to have been more occupied. A friendhas found me a good deal of work in revising an intendedpublication. I own I am selfish enough togrudge a little the trouble, for it sometimes costs measmuch to piece in an addition which I think necessary,as it would to write a new chapter. I have alsobeen scribbling a little thing for the Christian Observer,which I will send you, but you must not mentionits author ; and another for a similar work, forthe benefit of our great cause. Thus I have givenyou a hint of some of my operations. But my lettersare my grand employment ; it is shocking to say it,but I brought to this place a box full of unansweredepistles, and each day has supplied a new demand.But surely I am become as great an egotist as the celebratedcounsellor himself. Here have I filled all thissheet with an account of myself and my own avocations.It is not however egotism that is censured, but egotismin the wrong place. If I were to entertain the Houseof Commons with the manner in which I spent mytime at Lyme, I should justly become the object ofridicule ; but not in writing to a friend, who loves tohook on and run in couples with me through thetwenty-four hours, let me be employed how I may."Much employed," is the language of his Diary,in answering an immense arrear of letters, and con-vol.III. K194 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1804.tindal fresh masses coming in. Wrote an article forthe Edinburgh Review ; 51 answer to Defence of theSlave Trade on Grounds of Humanity." " You wouldsmile' he tells Mrs. Hannah More, " if you knewhow I am now employed." 52 " Also for ChristianObserver a review of Lord Chatham's Letters, withwhich I took pains ; a paper on Baxter ; and anotherintroductory to a Narrative Series. Much of themorning spent in looking over Stephen's manuscript,and Hannah More's intended publication on theEducation of a Princess, and adding a good deal of newmatter. Read Barrow's Africa, New Testament inGreek, some of Miss Edgeworth's Moral Tales forrelaxation, plays, a little poetry, Guardian, De Ret'sMemoirs. Also hearing Brougham's Colonial Policy."53 " Manifestly the launched, and a capital onetoo, of a shrewd man of the world." 54 " Correspondingwith Lord Harrowby, Brougham, and others."This correspondence is full of interest. Mr.Brougham had offered " to shape " 53 his " course inacontinental tour exactly so as to make " hisexertions of use to the great question of Abolition.This I might r do by procuring information in Holland,as to two points. First, the analogy of theMaroons of Guiana, . . for facts will be brought forwardwhich we cannot meet from the old evidencesuch as, those which concern the influence of neigh -51 Mr. Jeffrey enforced the usual payment, with his standing allusionto Peter the Great.52 Sept. 28. Vid. Correspondence, &c. - w Diary.44 William Wilberforce Esq. to James Stephen Esq. Dec. 19.5i Letter from Henry Brougham Esq. July 5.1804. CORRESPONDENCE WITH BROUGHAM. 195pouring rebellion upon our slaves. . . The experience ofthe Dutch in matters relating to Maroon war and itseffects on the neighbouring slaves might be fairly setagainst that" of our Jamaica men. Secondly, thegrounds upon which the Dutch government still clingsto the trade. Perhaps that far-sighted people,anxiously occupied as they are at present with colonialdiscussions, may have discovered their true interests ;or at least may be opening their eyes to the dangersof their situation. Next I am perfectly willing, afterleaving Holland, to go through any part of Germanywhich bids fair to offer information. I know fromgood authority that the state of the Europeanpeasantry will be copiously referred to, and will beurged as a parallel case from common notoriety,and requiring no positive proof. All the proof isindeed the other way, but it will be a matter of somedifficulty to bring it forward specifically. I do not,however, despair of succeeding when I reach the spot ;and if Germany is not enough, I will most cheerfullygo to the great scenes of bondage, (as it is called,)Poland, Russia, and Hungary."Mr. Brougham was now travelling as an American,and often at some personal risk ; " I hear of him as quarteredfor a week in the same house with several Frenchgenerals," x to prosecute these inquiries throughoutHolland. The Dutch, whose Slave Trade wassuspended by the war, were willing to agree to immediateAbolition, if Mr. Pitt would send them " fourlines expressing his private and individual sentiments50 \y, wilberforce Esq. to James Stephen Esq.K 2196 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1804.as to the effects of the Dutch Abolition in removingthe grand preliminary obstacles to the restoration ofthe conquered colonies." 57 No English ministercould give such a pledge. "It would not at all surpriseme," says Mr. Brougham, 58 " nor in the least diminishmy conviction of Mr. Pitt's sincerity, nor at allchange my fixed opinion of his superiority in talentsand greatness of views, were he at once to refusehaving any thing to do with the business." Yet Mr.Pitt appears, from a letter of Lord Harrowby's, 59 not tohave been altogether disinclined to entertain the subject.Mr. Brougham's communications with the Dutchauthorities give a lively picture of the state of Abolitionprospects ; and show that their speedy victorywas not the effect of any passing feelings, or of officialfavour. " Le delay du Bil," he says, when alludingto the repulse of the past spring, " a ete cause parquelques formalities qui sont necessaries dans laChambre haute quand il est question d'une loi quitouche directement aux interests des particuliers. On apass le Bil dans la Chambre basse par des pluralitiesdes voix tout a fait indies, quelquefois meme en raisonde neuf a une. Les advocate de la traite ontavoue hautement que e'en est fait de la question : etles negotiate de Londres, de Liverpool, et de Bristolont pris toutes leurs demarches depuis la decision dela Chambre sur le pied d'une Abolition subite etcertaine."5 " Henry Brougham Esq. to James Stephen Esq. Sept. 7.Henry Brougham Esq. to W. Wilberforce Esq. Dec. 27.To William Wilberforce Esq. Oct. 11. Vid. Correspondence, &c.1804. PREPARATION FOR NEXT SESSION. 197The Abolition business was now Mr. Wilberforce'schief care. The expected struggle of the followingsession made the most patient forethought absolutelynecessary. Every part of the question was passed inreview before him, and he was especially " meditatingon the preparation of the African part, for the Houseof Commons." Thus he was enabled to arrange thegeneral conduct of the question, and allot to severalhands important matters for present consideration."I think it highly probable," he says to Mr. Stephen," that we shall all agree finally, that it will bemost prudent not to adduce evidence before the Houseof Lords ; but don't let us be rash in determining ;rather let us quietly hunt out for witnesses." ^Mr. Stephen was already at work, and the openingsheets of his pamphlet were transmitted to Lyme forcorrection. " Have you sent me," Mr. Wilberforceasks, 61 " all that you have yet done ? I have nearly readit through once, and I am obliged chiefly to use myown eyes at it. I will say not a word till I have gotthrough all that you have sent, except, that it hasmade my heart ache." For this work he furnishedcalculations as to the decrease in the number of theslaves, which I remember to have gone through formerlywith Pitt and Grenville."This work he thought promised to be " eminentlyuseful," though he wished its plan enlarged. " Stephen'swork," he writes to Mr. Macaulay, 62 " will makeAfrica a secondary object, and on that ground alone,the effect produced upon the reader's mind would notto To J. Stephen Esq. Oct. 10. 6l Ib. Nov. 27. Dec. 17.198 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1804.in my view of things be satisfactory. Again, there isalways danger to be apprehended from embarkingall your stock in one bottom. Many persons areapt, after reading awhile, to take up some crotchet,or mode of interpretation, or some other conceit ofprinciple, which prevents their fairly appreciating theamount of the writer's facts and arguments. Perhapshe contradicts the statements some foolish fellow oftheir acquaintance, who has travelled, has made tothem as of his own experience, or what is worse, hecontradicts perhaps their own ; and afterwards allfacts which do not accord with their theory are supposedfallacious. This is only an instance, but theobservation I am persuaded is just. Ergo, thereshould be an African work. Different parts of itmust be assigned to different labourers ; and to providefor something like uniformity, a number of propositions(of which I will subjoin a specimen) shouldbe given out to our several white negroes. Stephenis perhaps right in confining himself to proofs drawnfrom the admission of opponents. I will send you tomorrowa more particular statement of the part ofthe work I can myself undertake. I will levy acontribution on Lord Lancaster of some extracts fromthe authors mentioned in his Historical Sketches.Another white negro has occurred to me, who woulddo a great deal of work ; I mean Mr. Thomas Clark-son.Could you not assign him a task ; for instance,that of looking through a certain book, and extractingall it contains in proof of certain propositions ? "Let a list," he says, " of all the topics and questions1804. TO LORD MUNCASTER. 199for which the classical writers should be consulted, begiven to the young Grants. I am persuaded RobertGrant will most cheerfully aid us with his familiarsboth with the languages and the writersof antiquity. He will thus contribute his share towardsthe great work of the Abolition of the SlaveTrade. And the day will come when to have beenpermitted to take a part in that holy war, will be regardedas an honour and a blessing." 63He proceeded at once to levy his threatened contributionfrom Lord Lancaster.Lyme, Dec. 18, 1804.My dear Lancaster,Shall I begin by thanking you or scolding you ?On Lord Carhamptori's reasoning about flogging,(viz. that both preaching and flogging were notfair,) you will object to my right to scold, if Imean to end by fining you. But I am a little imitatingthe example of Rhadamanthus, in makingthe castigation precede the statement of the offence; and perhaps I may, after all, give somecause for believing that I am following the Africanpractice, (as evil communications corrupt good manners,)and am only accusing you of an offence that Imay profit from your punishment. Your crime then,if you must know it, is that you have answered myqueries in a loose, general way, which though it mightdo well enough for talk, is not precise enough for mypurpose. And the fine which, in the plenitude of my63 Letter to J. Stephen Esq. Nov. 28.200 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1804.power, I think fit and (African again) find necessaryto impose, is a number of extracts from certain authors,whom you have in your possession, and whoseworks I doubt if we can get readily, even in London.The fact is this my good brother-in-law, Mr. Stephen,to whose pamphlets you so justly gave no littlepraise, is at work on another, the object of which isto exhibit the true picture of West Indian negroSlavery, and to argue for Abolition. He is so hardrun for time, that he will not be able to get throughthe African part of the case ; which always did, andin my mind always will, form the strength of it. Hemeans to argue only from the concessions or evidenceof our opponents, and from the documents they havesupplied. Now we may fairly claim to have the writingsof all such travellers or historians as were connectedin any way with the African trade, as of thatdescription. But even such of them as were unconnectedwith it, being at least not connected withAbolitionists, and having published their workslong before Abolition was talked of, are unexceptionablewitnesses. There is therefore no branch ofproof on which I place more reliance than on thepublications of such authors as those whom youquoted in the Historical Sketches; and as T see Stephenwill not be able to get through this part of thesubject, I have resolved, that late as it is, with thehelp of friends, I will bring forth a statement of theAfrican part of our case, to which, better at leastthan any other now extant, I may refer such men asthe Lord Chancellor, Lord Ellehborough, &c. if they1804. TO LORD MUNCASTER. 201ask me where they are to look for such facts andarguments as I think ought to enforce conviction. Ifthere had been time for it I should gladly have acceptedyour kind offer of packing up all your Africantravellers, and sending them off to London ; but I seeplainly that they would arrive too late ; besides thatMacaulay or Stephen, who would have to look themover, being entire strangers to them, and being turnedloose into such a mare magnum, (to use Lord Melville'sold phrase,) would never find their way in timeto the destined points, and bring back a profitablecargo. But you, my dear friend, knowing the booksso well, and having again and again turned them over,would at once be able to discover the parts which arereally valuable, and at one quarter of the labour wouldin less time obtain for us what would far better answerour purpose. Perhaps your daughters would help youin copying ; and what I could wish is that you shouldsend me extracts, such as those of the HistoricalSketches, calculated to prove certain propositions, ordisprove others. At the end of every extract, theplace in the book and the book from which it is takenmust be carefully and distinctly noted down ; a piece ofprecision not always attended to in the HistoricalSketches ; which however I remember to have beenwritten currente or rather volante Calais, and thereforeI wonder not at any such omission.The books from which I am anxious that youshould send us the best extracts you can procure arethose which you have yourself quoted ; Bosnian,Laban, and some of the older authors whose works IK 3202 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1804.fear we cannot readily meet with : viz. Artus of Antic,Ogelby, Nyendael, Dapper, and Beaumarchais.The points, or topics, or propositions, to which Iwish your inquiries to be directed, I will put down ona paper by themselves. Let me only now proceed toadd, that while, with the freedom of a friend, I havethus presumed to cut out such a piece of work for you,I yet, with equal sincerity, beg you not to undertakeit unless you are so circumstanced as to be able to doitwithout inconvenience. I think, however, I neednot say to you, that though in any instance which wasto be of real service to me, I know your warm hearttoo well not to be sure that you would resent anyapologies I should offer for calling on you to assist me ;yet that I apply to you on the present occasion, on ahigher principle ; as one whom I know to be interestedfor the much-injured Africans, to be enlisted, as itwere, in their cause, and to be determined to use alllawful means for wiping away the foulest blot whicheverstained our national character. In truth, mydear Lancaster, amid the many, many mercies, forwhich I have reason to be thankful to a graciousProvidence, I often think it is one, and not the least,that I have been honoured with the foremost placeamong those who have taken part in this holy warfare.May the Almighty hear our prayer, and put a periodto that system of wickedness and cruelty in which ourcountry has too long been the chief agent. I fear,however, that the Supreme Being is taking the matterinto His own hands, and that He will bring about thesame ends by means far more terrible. We deserve1804. HEADS OF INQUIRY. 203the worst which we can suffer. Let me only remindyou once more, my dear friend, that time is mostprecious to us, and therefore, whatever you do city.My eyes are tired, and I must still scribble thepropositions ; so begging my kind remembrances toLady Lancaster,I am ever affectionately yours,W. Wilberforce.P. S. I beg you will tell your daughters, with myrespects, that they will reflect as long as they livewith pleasure, on any time or pains they may expendin behalf of the poor Africans.PROPOSITIONS TO BE PROVED BY EXTRACTS FROMAFRICAN TRAVELLERS.A. The African negroes not inferior to the nativesof other countries, under similar circumstances, inintellectual or moral qualities. There is nothingeither in their understandings, or hearts, or tempers,which makes it impossible to civilize them2. or establish a commercial connexion with them.Contra, they are naturally ingenious, commercial,&c.B. The Slave Trade is the source of great misery toAfrica"1. by producing or prolonging wars.2. by causing the chiefs to commit acts of depredationon their own subjects or their neighboursvillage breaking.204 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1804.3. by causing innumerable acts of individualdepredation, as kidnapping, &c.C. The Slave Trade produces unjust convictionsfor crimes, excessively severe punishments, prosecutionsfor witchcraft, &c.2. The Slave Trade has gradually rendered thepenal code of Africa, from being mild, very severe.(This you proved admirably.)D. The Slave Trade renders person and propertyinsecure in Africa, and thereby is a standing obstructionto civilization.E. It is not true that the Slave Trade prevents onthe whole much misery ; captives being killed, &c.F. It is not true that the slaves if not bought bythe Europeans would be murdered, instead of beingset to work.G. It is not true that slaves are ill off in their owncountry, or worse off than in the West Indies.H. The Slave Trade corrupts the morals of theAfricans, so that they are rendered the worse, notthe better, for their connexion with us.My way commonly is to mark with the letterwhich belongs to each proposition, each passage whichproves it as I go along, and then to extract and bring1804. CONTINENTAL POLITICS. 205together all the extracts which belong to each head.I shall be anxious to have a line from you. If on reflectionany more propositions occur, I will send themtomorrow. Good night.P. S. If you are so situated (as must often happento a man whose house is never apt to be empty)as not to be able to spare any time for work, only letme beg you, without a moment's loss of time, to sendthe books to Macaulay ; except perhaps one or two toDr. Burgh at York, whom I will prepare."Three months had passed happily away in theseemployments, and the session of parliament was soonto recommence. " We have enjoyed," he tells Mr.Babington, " much domestic happiness, and I growvery fond of so quiet a life, and turn with disgust fromthe noise and turmoil of a London life. However, Iwould remember to keep always mindful of the apostle'swords, ' Be ye stedfast, unmoveable, alwaysabounding in the work of the Lord'" Politics hadbeen almost banished from Lyme, or reached it onlyas a distant sound. " You will not expect," he wroteto Lord Lancaster, " to hear any politics from hence."Pitt," he told Hannah More, " is indefatigable inattending to the defence of the country ; he really isdoing much in that way. I own I have my fears aboutour continental politics." The plans which werethen before the Cabinet, and at which he looked withthis foreboding, were those which issued during thefollowing campaign in the disastrous battle of AusterityLIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1804.lit. "Our language with foreign courts is, that ifthey will in good earnest fall to work, we will helpthem with all our means, money, &c. ; but that we willnot thank them for half measures." These designshe communicated more fully in a letter to Mr.Bankes.TO HENRY BANKES ESQ.Oct. 4, 1804.My dear Bankes,I saw Pitt not very long ago, and then hislanguage concerning continental connexions was verymuch what you and I should wish, except thatit indicated in our court a greater willingness tosubsidize than I rather think you would approve.I know not how to rejoice in his expectations, unlessthere should appear some far more close bond ofunion, and more efficient instruments of offensiveoperation, than we have hitherto witnessed.I should not greatly wonder if France were tobreak forth again, and overflow her banks in anotherdirection, and add other large territories to her permanentempire. Still all is uncertain. In truth allisin higher hands. I own I should best like adoptingsome effectual and economical means of defence,which, if necessary, we could manifestly continue foryears ; and then my persuasion is, that our enemywould be sick of the contest, and what is more, weshould be less likely to get into another.Pitt is the most upright political character I everknew or heard of ; but with all public men it is ex1805. SUMMONS FROM PITT. 207extremely dangerous for a country that they should beunder a temptation to fight it out, to try their fortuneagain after having been unsuccessful in a formerwar. Their own character and glory, and the nationalinterest, are so apt to become identified in theirjudgment, that they are too forward to consider asconducive to the latter whatever measures they areprompted to undertake from their solicitude for theformer. I was glad to hear that the King was prettywell, though it was more represented in the way inwhich we speak of a man who, being strongly suspectedof being insane, we are surprised when hedoes not act very irrationally.My dear Bankes,yours most sincerely and affectionately,W. Wilberforce."The 1st of January, 1805, found him " too busy towrite much, yet desiring to record the goodness ofthe Lord ; His great forbearance and long-suffering ;His kindness during the last year in preserving usand our dear children, and enabling us to enjoy somuch domestic happiness and social comfort, especiallyat this place. But I must stop and go to prayer."This quiet happiness was speedily disturbed. Uponthe 5th of January he " heard from Pitt that an oppositionwas expected the first day of the session,"and judged " it right to come up." Mr. Pitt's summonswas brief and earnest.208 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1805.Downing Street, Jan. 4, 1805.My dear Wilberforce,I have hardly time for more than one word,and that word I am afraid must he ' Come,' though Isay so with reluctance under the circumstances youmention. But by my last accounts, opposition iscollecting all its force, and it is therefore very importantthat we should secure as full an attendance aspossible. There are a great many points on whichI shall be very impatient to talk with you, but onwhich I have no time to write. Harrowby is out ofall danger, but his general health, I am sorry to say,will make it impossible for him to encounter anylonger the fatigues of his office. The loss of hisassistance will be a great misfortune, but we must doas well as we can. The person whom on the whole Ithink best to succeed him is Mulgrave.Ever affectionately yours,W. P."This call he at once obeyed, casting only onelingering look at the peaceful quietness which he wasleaving. " If it were not best to acquiesce cheerfullyand entirely in the will of God, I should grieve atbeing so poorly to-day, because it is probably my lastSunday before I go to London to engage in thehurly-burly scene I there dwell in. I feel like onewho is about to launch into a stormy sea, and whoknows from fatal experience how little his own powersare equal to its sufferings. O Lord, do Thou fit me1805. JOURNAL. 209for it. Enable me to seek Thy glory, and not my own ;to watch unto prayer ; to wait diligently on God ; tolove Him and my Redeemer from the heart ; and tobe constrained by this love to live actively and faithfullydevoting all my faculties and powers to His service,and the benefit of my fellow-creatures. Especiallylet me discharge with fidelity and humility theduties of my proper station, as unto the Lord, and notunto men ; submitting patiently to the will of God, if itbe His will that we should be defeated in our effort todeliver our country from the load of guilt and shamewhich now hangs round her neck, and is, perhaps, likea gangrene, eating out her vital strength, and preparing,though gradually, the consummation of herruin. O Lord, do Thou lead and guide me.On looking back, what sad proofs have I had latelyof the inward workings of ambition, on seeing others,once my equals, or even my inferiors, rise to situationsof high worldly rank, station, power, and splendour !I bless God, I do not acquiesce in these vicious tempers,but strive against them, and not, I hope, in vain.Remember, O my soul, no man can serve two masters.Have I not a better portion than this world can bestow? Would not a still higher situation place both meand my children in less favourable circumstances formaking our calling and election sure ? Covet not then,O my soul, these objects of worldly anxiety. LetGod be thy portion, and seek the true riches, theglory and honour which are connected with immortality.Yet turn not from those who have thesehonours with cynical or envious malignity, but rejoice210 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1805.in their temporal comfort and gratification, while youpray for them, and strive to do them good by preventingthem from being injured by their exaltation." 64He reached Broomfield upon the 12th of January.Through God's good providence we are all returnedin peace and safety ; and now, before I plunge into thestormy sea I am about to enter, I would pray to Godthrough Christ, by the Holy Spirit, to strengthen mewith might in the inner man ; to enable me to walkby faith, to let my light shine before men, and tobecome meet to be a partaker of the inheritance of thesaints in light. O my soul, remember thy portion isnot here. Mind not high things. Be not conformedto this world. Commit thy way unto the Lord, anddelight thyself in God. Let the men of this worldpass by thee in the race of honours, but thine be thehonour which cometh of God, thine the glory whichis connected with immortality." 65The following morning he " called on Pitt, whotold me of the offer of negociation from Buonaparte.His schemes large and deep. His hopes sanguine."^ " Parliament met on Tuesday, but Foxneutralized by Windham and Grenville, and so saidnothing of what he would otherwise have givenus." 67 The scene was again shifting on the busystage of politics. " You will, I know," he heardfrom Mr. Pitt, 68 " be glad, independent of politics,that Addington and I have met as friends ; but I hope<* Journal, Jan. 6. 6i Ib. Jan. 13.Diary, Jan. 14. <* Ib. Jan. 15.Right Hon. William Pitt, to William Wilberforce Esq1805. PITT AND ADDINGTON RECONCILED. 21 1you will also not be sorry to hear that that eventwill lead to political re-union." He was extremelypleased with this reconciliation between " two friendswho had no public ground of difference." He wasgratified too by Mr. Pitt's anxiety to acquaint himwith it. " It showed me that he understood my realfeelings." Upon the 1st of February he " called onPitt, and walked with him round the Park. Pleasedwith his statements of disposition not to quarrel withAddington." 69 "'I am sure he said, ' that youare glad to hear that Addington and I are at oneagain.' And then he added, with a sweetness ofmanner which I shall never forget, ' I think theyare a little hard upon us in finding fault with ourmaking it up again, when we have been friends fromour childhood, and our fathers were so before us, whilethey say nothing to Grenville for uniting with Fox,though they have been fighting all their lives.' " TIn spite of the accession of Lord Sidmouth's partisans,Mr. Pitt felt that his majorities were feeble, andwished to put aside all questions which could dividehis friends. On this ground he pressed earnestlyby private remonstrance for the postponement ofthe Abolition question; but Mr. Wilberforce wouldnever " make that holy cause subservient to the interestof a party ; " and being convinced by theexperience of the former session, that he must beginat once if he would carry any measure throughthe House of Lords, on the 6th of February hegave notice of his motion. Mr. Pitt could estimate> Diary, Feb. 1. TO Con. Mem.212 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1805.his motives he " called upon me and was verykind about it." 71 The Bill was "read a first timeon the 19th, and the second reading fixed for theThursday se'nnight." 72 He had no fears about theHouse of Commons, but that night brought one ofthose reverses, by which his constancy was sooften tried during the twenty years of this hardstruggle. After a " morning of business as usual,"and " eating at home in a hurry," he went down tothe House on the " second reading of the AbolitionBill. I said nothing at opening, and not enough atthe close, but did not expect such an issue. Besides,felt as if I could not go well. Beat, alas, 70 to 77.Sad work ! Though I thought we might be hardrun from the face of the House, I could not expectthe defeat, and all expressed astonishment. TheIrish members absent, or even turned against us.Foster however, who was absent, not I believe fromfault, was for us. Lord De Blaquiere, Sir I. Stewart,Sir I. Newport, voted with us. Some Scotch Ibelieve, who last year neutral, voted against us.Great canvassing of our enemies, and several of ourfriends absent through forgetfulness, or accident, orengagements preferred from lukewarmness." 73 Hisusual supporters, Mr. Fox alone excepted, were silent,though Mr. Huddlestone came forward to refute thearguments for the Slave Trade drawn from the EastIndies, and Mr. Barham to show that some trueliberality was connected with the West; while thedefenders of the Trade brought forward their oft ren'Diary, Feb. 7. 72 Ib. Feb. 19. Ib. Feb. 28.1805. MR. HATSEL. 213fated fallacies with a wearisome pertinacity, variedonly by charges of hypocrisy against their mainantagonist, whom they endeavoured to resign, as " acitizen of France," to the " fraternal hug of the presidentof the Jacobins."This failure pained him deeply. " I never felt somuch on any parliamentary occasion. I could notsleep after first waking at night. The poor blacksrushed into my mind, and the guilt of our wickedland." 74 Yet he had no doubts of his ultimate success.Shortly after the division, he was addressed byMr. Hatsel, the sagacious and experienced clerk of theHouse of Commons " Mr. Wilberforce, you oughtnot to expect to carry a measure of this kind. Youhave a turn for business, and this is a very creditableemployment for you ; but you and I have seen enoughof life to know that people are not induced to act uponwhat affects their interests by any abstract arguments."" Mr. Hatsel," he replied, " I do expect tocarry it, and what is more, I feel assured I shall carryit speedily. I have observed the gradual changewhich has been going on in men's minds for sometimepast, and though the measure may be delayedfor a year or two, yet I am convinced that before longit will be accomplished." " I bless God," are hisprivate reflections on the Sunday following this disappointment,75 " that I feel more than of late I havedone, that humble, peaceful, confiding hope in themercy of God, reconciled in Christ Jesus, which tranquillizesthe mind, and creates a desire after that7 Diary, March 1. ? Journal, March 3.214 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1805.blessed state, where we shall be completely deliveredfrom the bondage of our corruptions, as well as fromall our bodily pains and sicknesses, and all our mentalanxieties and griefs ; where the injustice, oppression,and cruelty, the wickedness, the falsehood, the selfishness,the malignity, of this bad world shall be nomore ; but peace, and truth, and love, and holiness,shall prevail for ever. O Lord, purify my heart, andmake me meet for that blessed society. Alas, howsadly do I still find myself beset by my constitutionalcorruptions ! I trust the grief I felt on the defeat ofmy Bill on Thursday last, proceeded from sympathywith the wretched victims, whose sufferings are beforemy mind's eye, yet I fear in part also less pure affectionsmixed and heightened the smart regret thatI had not made a greater and better fight in the wayof speaking ; vexation at the shame of the defeat, OLord, purify me. I do not, God be merciful to me,deserve the signal honour of being the instrument ofputting an end to this atrocious and unparalleled wickedness.But, O Lord, let me earnestly pray Thee topity these children of affliction, and to terminate theirunequalled wrongs ; and O direct and guide me in thisimportant conjuncture, that I may act so as maybemost agreeable to Thy will. Amen."On the following day he told Lord LancasterLondon, March 4, 1805.Alas, my dear Lancaster, from the fatalmoment of our defeat on Thursday evening, I havehad a damp struck into my heart. I could not sleep1805. TO LORD MUNCASTER. 215either on Thursday or Friday night, without dreamingof scenes of depredation and cruelty on the injuredshores of Africa, and by a fatal connexiondiffusing the baleful effects through the interior ofthat vast continent. I really have had no spirits towrite to you. Alas, my friend, in what a world dowe live ! Mammon is the god we adore, as muchalmost as if we actually bowed the knee to his image.I was in the situation of Lord Cornwallis in Virginia,where I remember his stating himself < to be amonglukewarm friends, and active enemies.' Self-interestis a principle of sure and permanent operation. Justiceand humanity are not so continually on the watch.Many of our friends, more than enough to haveturned the scale in their favour, were absent. Still Iwill do all I can. If we cannot stop the whole of thisaccursed traffic, it is much to stop half of it ; and I amresolved to do what I can, I repeat it. But I will writemore another day. I only wished to send you a linebecause I am sure you will feel, till you hear from me,solicitous, kindly solicitous, on my personal account. Iam almost ashamed of being so well and so comfortable,when I think of the misery of my poor clients : andthere are just now papers from Lord Seaport, Governorof Barbadoes, and an anti-abolitionist, givinga detailed account of three murders of slaves undercircumstances of atrocity too shocking to relate ; andhis Lordship adds, there are several more which hedoes not specify, &c. I will try to send you them,though they will make your heart ache. But farewell ;I am hurried beyond measure. Shall we not see you216 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1805.this spring? I thought you were to come up withyour ladies. Every blessing attend you.Yours ever,W. WILBERFORCE."To do what he could by stopping importation tothe conquered colonies was his immediate business.Having written to Pitt strongly on the GuianaSlave Trade three days before," he was " to see himon the 9th of March." In this interview " I declaredthat I must positively bring it into the House, andwith opposition concert, and combination, as alsoforeign Slave Trade, and Trinidadaa." 76 To thismeasure he was manifestly forced. " Many personsexcuse themselves for not voting with me on theground of Pitt's not meaning it to be carried. Butnot an honest reason. Sheridan, Aubrey, &c. it isthe Prince of Wales's attachment. Attorney GeneralPerceval honest, warm, steady, and intelligent on thesubject." Three days later he " discussed withStephen and Babington about Guiana regulations,"having " heard from Pitt, that government did unanimouslyagree to stop that trade, and that he wishedme to prepare regulations." 77 Yet still he judged itright to provide against the fatal delay of the precedingyear ; and for this purpose attended a " meetingabout Abolition at Lansdown House, Lord HenryPetty's. It was intended to rouse, and animate, andcall forth more active support by informing, and therebyinteresting, the public. Fox, Grey, Lord R.76 Diary. 77 Ib. March 11.1805. GUIANA SLAVE TRADE. 217Spencer, Ward, Ossulston, &c. ; Hothouse, andThorntonss, Babington, Spencer Stanhope, Bankes,(most kindly,) Barham, &c. Opposition preponderated.Bankes and I charged with message to Pitt,whether he would effect Guiana Abolition, or weshould." 78 At a second meeting, held a few daysafterwards, " Lord Henry Petty agreed to move forthe Abolition of the Foreign Slave Trade," while Mr.Bankes and himself " delivered Pitt's answer, thatgovernment would, 'by Order of Council, stop theGuiana and Surinam Trade, except for keeping upstock." ^The rejection of the Abolition Bill was speedilysucceeded by a harassing and painful question. Rumourhad for some time impeached Lord Melville'sintegrity. In February Mr. Wilberforce " had muchtalk with Rose about him. Rose is confident Pittwill defend him, though he tells me some stories (andstrong ones) of jobs which have fallen under his own 80view. He says the Bishop of Lincoln will not mentionsuch matters to Pitt." 81As nothing definite was known, all eyes watchedeagerly for the Report of the commissioners of navalinquiry, who had been examining this very charge.Melville had not mentioned the matter to Pitt,Huskisson, or any human being till the Report wasprinted." 82 No one looked for its appearance moreanxiously than Mr. Pitt. Mr. Wilberforce was " athis office about the Guiana Slave Trade" when " the78 Diary, March 29. 79 ib. April 4. 8 <> Rose's.ei Diary, Feb. 16. * Ib. March 29.VOL. III. L218 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1805.Tenth Report" came " out, and Pitt was reading it forthe first time." 83 <f I shall never forget the way inwhich he seized it, and how eagerly he looked intothe leaves without waiting even to cut them open." 84The Tenth Report distinctly convicted Mr. Trotter,Lord Melville's deputy paymaster, of a misapplicationof the public money, and warranted a strong suspicionthat he had acted with the connivance of hisprincipal. Public character evidently required thatsuch offences should be dealt with on the strictestrules of justice. But party spirit thrust itself uponthe seat of judgment. Opposition seized eagerly sofair an opportunity of unseating government; andMr. Pitt was tempted to act the part of an advocate,rather than a judge. Mr. Wilberforce vainly pressedupon him a more becoming line of conduct. " Bankesand I saw him on Melville's business we talkedwith him above an hour. Bankes very frank, andPitt very good-humoured. It is melancholy to seePitt's excellent understanding so fooled by lessworthy associates. He evidently thinks that it mayshake the government. Thinks gaining time formen's minds to cool may do much." 85Administration indeed could ill afford to lose theshrewd and practical talents of Lord Melville. Butthough it had its weight, this was hot the chief causeof Mr. Pitt's present conduct. Still less was it, as wascommonly supposed, the mere effect of personal attachment." How little is men's conduct fairly judged of inthe world ! hereafter it will be thought that Pitt and8 * Diary, March 18. 84 c on. Mem. 85 Diary.1805. LORD MELVILLE. 219all who voted for him were Melville's friends." ^ Itwas far from being true. " I had perceived above ayear before, that Lord Melville had not the powerover Pitt's mind, which he had once possessed.Pitt was taking me to Lord Camden's, and in ourtete-astute he gave me an account of the negociationswhich had been on foot to induce him to enterAddington's administration. When they quittedoffice in 1801, Dundas proposed taking as his motto,Jam rude donatus. Pitt suggested to him that havingalways been an active man, he would probably wishto come again into office, and that then his havingtaken such a motto would be made a ground forridicule. Dundas assented, and took another motto.Addington had not been long in office, before Pitt'sexpectation was fulfilled, and Dundas undertook tobring Pitt into the plan, which was to appoint somethird person head, and bring in Pitt and Addingtonon equal terms under him. Dundas accordingly, confidingin his knowledge of all Pitt's ways and feelings,set out for Walter Castle ; and after dinner, and portwine, began cautiously to open his proposals. But hesaw it would not do, and stopped abruptly. f Really,'said Pitt, with a sly severity, and it was almost theonly sharp thing I ever heard him say of any friend,I had not the curiosity to ask what I was to be.' " 87But whatever alienation there had been before, itwas now increased to actual coolness. " While it wasgenerally thought that Pitt defended Melville out offriendship, I knew that they were scarcely upone 6 Diary. & Con. Mem.L 2220 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1805.speaking terms." 88 Pitt had been wounded by hisconduct, in the very point where he was tenderest ;his own honour had been trifled with, and his confidenceabused. " Some years before, Mr. Raises 89had hinted to him, that the public money was illegallyemployed. Dundas soon after coming in, Pitt saidto him at once, ( Dundas, here has been Tom Raisesto me with a long story of your way of employing thepublic money ; what does he mean ? ' Dundas assuredhim that it was their mistake, and that 110 money hadbeen drawn except for public service. When thereforethe fact came out, Pitt seemed to a degree involvedin Melville's fault." 90 "In truth Pitt waschiefly led into supporting Melville by that false principleof honour, which was his great fault he fanciedhimself bound in honour to defend one who had solong acted with him." 91 He was of course persuadedof Lord Melville's personal integrity. " Pitt sayshe is quite sure that there was no real pocketing ofpublic money in him. All say that he has acted likea fool, though so able at other times." ^Such rules of conduct could not satisfy one whoacted upon higher motives. Honour and party spiritafforded him no standard. " I have difficult andtrying questions before me in parliament," is thelanguage of his private Journal ; " I will pray forwisdom, and pursue the path presented by conscience,and then peace will follow. Lord, give me wisdom.Do Thou enable me to act, tomorrow, honestly and89 Con. Mem. " The Governor of the Bank. ^ Con. Mem.9i Ib. 2 Diary, April 31805. DEBATE ON LORD MELVILLE. 221uprightly, without fear of man or any other unlawfulmotive. O Lord, give me Thy wisdom, and set meabove this world and all that it contains." He feltdeeply the importance of maintaining, at all costs, ahigh standard of integrity in public men ; and viewedwith peculiar indignation any tendency in parliamentto screen such delinquents for party purposes. Thusin the debate on the debt of Mr. Fordyce, 93 he bitterlycomplains of " the most shabby conduct of opposition,because Lords Rockingham and North concernedCrevey shied off Pitt rather high." 94 Thisled him in Lord Melville's case to a strict and judicialscrutiny of all the charges. And when upon the 8thof April, Mr. Whitbread moved the Resolutions forcensuring Lord Melville, he watched anxiously thecourse of the debate, hoping that some valid argumentsmight be urged in his defence. None suchwere brought forward, and at last he rose reluctantlyto press upon the House the claims of justice. He satupon the continuation of the Treasury bench, and as heturned towards the chair, looked just across Mr. Pitt,who was watching with intense earnestness to catchthe first intimation of the line which he would take.It required no little effort to resist the fascinationof that penetrating eye from which LordErskine was always thought to shrink." 95 He statedsimply, but forcibly, his impression of Lord Melville'sfault, and then impressed upon the House the importanceof its deciding on the strictest grounds of justice.tf Let us bear in mind the weighty words of Clareri-3 March 19. 94 Diary. * Con. Mem.222 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1805.don in the case of ship money. The people of Englanddisliked greatly the levying of the money ; butthey endured it until the judges had wrongfully decidedin its favour. ' Here the damage and mischiefcannot be expressed, that the Crown and state sustainedby the deserved reproach and infamy thatattended the judges, by being made use of in thisand like acts of power &c. We it is who are nowtruly on our trial before the moral sense of England ;and if we shrink from it, deeply shall we hereafterrepent our conduct." " A stormy night," he says onreaching home. " I spoke late, and from the state ofmen's minds, with a good deal of effect 216 and 216,and the Speaker decided against government adjournedat half-past five. Could not get cool inbody or mind. Bed, and slept till twelve."This speech 'was remarkably effective. It appealedboldly from the cry of party, to those high principlesof conduct by which, after being long doubtful, hehad himself been determined clearly as to the part heought to take. " Bankes and I long doubtful whatpart we should take about Lord Melville, but at lengthclear, and Abbot, whom he consulted, clear also." 96 Heseems to have carried with him the decision of theHouse. " The success of the motion seemed doubtful,"(wrote Sir John Regard at the next election, as areason why he could not vote for him,) " or rather, Ibelieve, appearances indicated that it would be thrownout, when you rose, and, supported by a well-earnedreputation for integrity and independence, made a96 Diary.1805. GREAT EFFECT OF HIS SPEECH. 223speech which at the time was said to influence fortyvotes. I was told by a member who was present, thatMr. Pitt could not conceal his agitation when he sawthe turn your speech was taking ; and I believe thatthe delinquency of Lord Melville, and the desertionof some of his oldest friends, inflicted a wound uponhis mind which it never recovered, and contributedto his premature death." 97The effect of this speech upon the House was feltby all. He was " applied to on behalf of Mr. Trotter,"to deprecate his censure as that of " the person whomhe most feared." " Bankes," he says himself, " tellsme that I am much abused by Melville's friends,especially the ladies." 98 " Sir Charles Middleton cameto talk with me about Melville and Admiralty matters.He told me that I was charged with Melville'sremoval. That I had been so warm in the House.Others ascribed much of it to me. Lady C. heardthat I had carried many with me. I feel hurt athaving been thought to wound, yet I have actedrightly, and that is the only stay. Sir CharlesMiddleton told me that Lord Melville had advisedPitt to recommend him to the King, for first Lord ofthe Admiralty. He would be most likely to carryforward Lord Melville's plans, which are in fact SirCharles's, for the naval force of the kingdom. It isto Lord Melville's honour." 99The House adjourned for one day after this debate,& He hasdocketted this letter, "Sir J. Regard very frank blamingmy conduct about Lord Melville. It did not injure Pitt's health."Diary, April 18. Ib. April 12.224 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1805.and resumed the subject on the 10th. " Refinementwhether Whitbread's Bill pressed for removing Melvillefrom presence and counsels for ever, though Pitthad begun by stating that he had resigned. Oppositiononly determined for it this morning, but nowargued as if clearly understood since Monday. Bankesand I deprecated division on it, and at length it wasagreed to lay the Resolutions at the foot of the throneby the whole House." 10At the conclusion of the week he found time for aletter to Lord Lancaster.London, April 13, 1805.My dear Lancaster,I seem to myself to have been wanting in thedischarge of a bounden duty, in not having written toyou during this busy week. This whole morning wasconsumed by the affair of poor D., whose melancholysituation affords a striking proof of the fataleffects of imprudence, and also of the plunges intowhich men are too often seduced when they are travellingthe down-hill road. And this naturally leadsme (can there be a more natural transition ?) to LordMelville. Is it possible to conceive a man of hisknown good sense acting so foolishly? Pitt feels itdeeply. I never saw him so quailed as on Wednesdaynight, and part of Monday also ; and this in myopinion did him honour, by proving, that though soinvincibly firm when all was well within, he could notput a good face on it when his own conscience toldi<x> Diary, April 10.1805. TO LORD MUNCASTER. 225him he was defending a bad cause. I spoke so latethat very little of what I said appeared in any of thenewspapers ; but from various circumstances, I spokewith more effect than has almost ever happened tomein the House of Commons. I am reproachedwith having materially contributed to the catastrophe.To all Pitt's and Melville's friends I say,and most truly, that whatever may be the consequencesof this affair, and whether the administrationmay or may not be able to stand, it is perfectly clearthat they could not have weathered the storm, androde out the gale, with Melville in the vessel after thepublication of the Tenth Report.You will agree with me as to the good consequencesfrom such an unusual demonstration of integrityin the House of Commons. But I should like(though it would be too provoking) to ask thosestaunch constitutionalists, who are such zealous friendsto the honour of the House of Commons, and congratulateus so warmly on the proof of our public spirit,which has lately been exhibited, whether they thinkthe same vote against Lord Melville would havepassed, if he (for he was a party to the attempt) andPitt had succeeded in their endeavours to form thestrong government they talked of with so muchhope, of Foxites, and Windhamites, and Grenvillians,and Petites, &c. for which they said, most falselythat the whole country was so clamorous ? Whyshould I think better of Fox and Windham than ofSidmouth and Pitt ? Yet the latter could voteagainst the Resolution, though they would not directlyL 3226 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1805.defend Melville, and so doubtless they all would havedone. In short, what is called a strong government,and is eulogized as such in high terms, is often, in myopinion, the most corrupt of all others ; as it is ableto carry through any measure, however objectionable,and support any man, however justly obnoxious.We have plenty of work cutting and cut out forus after Easter. The East India papers make upmore than a volume, folio, of 600 pages.Nothing is known about the First Lord of the Admiralty.Lord Melville has recommended Sir CharlesMiddleton to Pitt, but I fear the latter is too muchaslave to form, to appoint him. The idea howeveris honourable to Lord Melville, because it is with aview to economy, reforms, improvements, &c. FarewellI am extremely pressed.Yours ever,W. WILBERFORCE."His Diary just notes the further steps of this mostpainful case. " April 29th. Spencer Stanhope'smotion for Civil, Bankes's for Criminal, prosecution ;Pitt's for a Committee of Inquiry: I took part.30th. Debate about Committee by ballot and LordCastlereagh's name ; foolish to make it a controversy.May 2nd. Thanks to commissioners, which I amended.Opposition very civil. 4th. How foolish of Pitt notto join with opposition in making proceedings againstMelville public ; appointing Committee by name,not ballot. 6th. Whitbread's motion for strikingMelville out of the council. When reached House1805. LORD MELVILLE'S IMPEACHMENT. 227found Pitt had anticipated wisely." On the 27th theCommittee presented its Report, confirming all theformer charges, and stating that, concerning one sumof 10,000, no account was given by Lord Melville.He now desired to defend himself before the House ofCommons; and on the 10th of June, Mr. Wilberforceproceeds, " I am doubtful how to act in Lord Melville'saffair tomorrow, 11th. Duchess of Gordonsending for me to Bankes's. Lord Melville heard.I much affected at first. Excessively absurd speech.Debate till three o'clock. Whi thread able. I movedadjournment. 12th. Criminal prosecution agreed onin preference to impeachment; opposition's motion.Addington's party supported criminal prosecution.Neither Pitt nor Fox spoke. Melville's declaration,that never had nor would tell any man how the10,000 or 20,000 went, did him great injury.25th. The House sat late on changing the criminalproceedings against Melville to impeachment, whichcarried. A very unwise proceeding, rendering evenan acquittal by impeachment scarcely an acquittal." 101Throughout all these discussions he maintainedthe same tone. He was discharging a most painfulduty, for Lord Melville had been for years his intimateacquaintance. But he had no choice. " Youwill concur with me," he wrote to Mr. Hey, 102 " as tothe necessity of marking strongly our sense of such aninstance of misconduct. The rather because in truthit is not religion, but popular opinion, which amongus at this day is the general standard of practice.oi Diary. "* May 8.22S LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1805.This consideration, though I kept it back, had greatweight with me ; for if any one, after acting as LordMelville did, had been screened by his party frompunishment, and had been well received in the world,(and a man's own party is the world to him,) there isno saying what might have been the effect in a fewyears on the purity of our political system."But once in these proceedings he yielded to theimpulse of his feelings ; he would not join the deputationwhich carried up the Resolutions to St James's.To a friend who pressed upon him somewhat rudelythis last sacrifice, he answered, " I am a little surprisedthat it should be imputed as a fault to anythat they did not accompany the procession to St.James's. I should have thought that men's ownfeelings might have suggested to them that it was acase in which the heart might be permitted to give alesson to the judgment. My country might justlydemand that, in my decision on Lord Melville's conduct,I should be governed by the rules of justice,and the principles of the constitution, without sufferingparty considerations, personal friendship, or anyextrinsic motive whatever, to interfere ; that in allthat was substantial I should deem myself as in theexercise of a judicial office. But when the sentenceof the law is past, is not that sufficient ? Am I tojoin in the execution of it ? Is it to be expected ofme that I am to stifle the natural feelings of theheart, and not even to shed a tear over the verysentence I am pronouncing ? I know not what Spartanvirtue or Stoical pride might require, but I know1805 HIS PERSONAL FEELINGS. 229that I am taught a different, aye, and a better lessonby a greater than either Lycurgus or Zero. Christianityenforces no such sacrifice. She requires usindeed to do justice, but to love mercy. I learn not inher school to triumph even over a conquered enemy ;and must I join the triumph over a fallen friend?"His friendly feelings for Lord Melville had beenalways strangely blended with disapprobation of hisprinciples, which had greatly injured, as he thought,the purer character of Mr. Pitt. "His connexionwith Dundas was Pitt's great misfortune. Dundaswas a loose man, and had been rather a disciple ofthe Edinburgh school in his youth, though it was notmuch known. Yet he was a fine fellow in somethings. People have thought him a mean, intriguingcreature, but he was in many respects a fine, warmheartedfellow. I was with him and Pitt when theylooked through the Red Book, to see who was theproperest person to send as Governor General toIndia ; and it should be mentioned to Dundas's honour,that having the disposal of the most importantoffice in the King's gift, he did not make it a meansof gaining favour with any great family, or of obligingany of his countrymen, but appointed the fittestperson he could find [Sir John Shore]. Three severaltimes have I stated this fact in the House of Commons,and never once has it been mentioned in any ofthe papers."Lord Melville's conduct to himself after all thesepublic storms, was an instance of his better nature,and was always mentioned by him with unusualpleasure. '< We did not meet for a long time, and all230 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1805.his connexions most violently abused me. About ayear before he died, we met in the stone passagewhich leads from the Horse Guards to the Treasury.We came suddenly upon each other, just in the openpart, where the light struck upon our faces. Wesaw one another, and at first I thought he was passingon, but he stopped and called out, ( Ah Wilberforce,how do you do ? ' and gave me a hearty shake by thehand. I would have given a thousand pounds forthat shake. I never saw him afterwards."Mr. Pitt's engagement with the Lansdown-HouseAbolitionists was still unfulfilled. On the 7th of MayMr. Wilberforce had been " extremely occupied aboutthe Order in Council for stopping Guiana SlaveTrade again and again daily almost, at Lord Camden'soffice. Continual delays, but right to persevere."The proclamation was at last prepared, andforwarded on the evening of the 11th of May for Mr.Wilberforce's approbation. " My dear Pitt," hewrote as soon as he had read it, " I have been lookingover the Order in Council, and am very sorry to sayit is in a very unsatisfactory state. But as you willnot like to talk of this subject till after tomorrownight, let me only beg you to stop the insertion ofthe Order in the Gazette, or any other publication ofit, till we talk together. As it now stands, I reallythink we had better run the risk of losing all by tryingto carry the measure in parliament. The Gazetteis-printed tomorrow, so no time is to be lost.I am, my dear Pitt,ever yours,W. WILBERFORCE."1805. GUIANA SLAVE TRADE. 231Monday night was given up to " Fox's motion " onCatholic Emancipation. Grattan amazingly eloquent.Duigenan hard and rough, but forcible andmuch matter. Adjourned at half-past two. Tuesday.House till half-past four. Catholic Emancipation,carried against, 336 to 124. Babington and I in majority.H. Thornton, minority very uncomfortableabout it, for all wrong." The very next day he wasagain " busy with Stephen and Attorney Generalabout Order in Council," and soon after longed toenjoy " a charming spring day, but was forced totown to see Pitt on Guiana Order. It is so framedas to be worse than none." He worked hard to correctthese errors.Broomfield, May 25, 1805.My dear Pitt,You will not suspect me of having been inattentiveor procrastinating in the case of the Orderin Council ; and I can truly affirm on the contrary,that it has completely occupied the best of myworking hours since I saw you last. I now send acopy of it altered agreeably to your last suggestion,and with such other small alterations as are in thejudgment of persons best acquainted with the subjectindispensably necessary for making it at all efficient.Even with these emendations I fear greatfrauds will be practised ; but I trust the full flow ofBritish capital into Guiana will be at least checked.It seems highly desirable that the principle ofthe measure should be distinctly laid down in the232 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1805.front of the Order ; and if such of your Cabinet asare unfriendly to our cause mean honestly to joinin preventing British capital from going to Guiana,they will surely least of all object to the assertion ofa principle,, which will render it impossible for any oneto suppose that justice and mercy have had any sharein dictating the measure, and thence to charge themwith inconsistency in not being governed by thoseprinciples on the main question. In order to save youtrouble as much as possible, I send a written statementof reasons for such alterations as are necessary,and this, if you approve of it, you will probably putinto the hands of the Chancellor. Let me remind youthat we are now full late, and I know not what to say,when asked whether the Order in Council for prohibitingthe Guiana Slave Trade is in full force. If anyquestion arises in which you wish to confer with me,I will wait on you at your own time and place.I am ever, my dear Pitt,yours very sincerely,W. WILBERFORCE.Right. Hon. W. Pitt, &c. &c. &c."Ten days afterwards he still complains, " Pitt hasnot yet settled it too bad though he authorizedBankes and me to assure the meeting at Lord Lans-down'sthat he would do it. Sad work ! I write andcall, again and again." 103 " Procrastination," he tellsLord Lancaster, " in one whom you used to call theGeneral, has increased to such a degree as to havei< Diary, June 4.1805. TO LORD MUNCASTER. 233become absolutely predominant. Before the Easterholidays, a meeting of the parliamentary friends ofAbolition was called at Lord Henry Petty's. Fox,Grey, Bankes, and other chiefs attended; in all abouttwenty or twenty-one. We consulted what measureit would be best to take, and it was agreed that themost likely to succeed, was to address the King tostop the importation of slaves into the conquered settlements.I had been trying some time to persuadePitt to do this himself; the King's prerogative beingclearly sufficient. And therefore I told the meetingthat I was not without hopes of succeeding in thisway, at the same time acknowledging that I had entertainedsimilar hopes, and not without good grounds,during the last war, when it was notorious thesehopes had been disappointed. I saw certain significantwinks and shrugs, as if I was taken in by Pitt,and was too credulous and soft, &c. ; but I of coursesaw them as if I had seen them not. Well, Bankesand I were expressly commissioned from the meeting,to ask Pitt whether he wished to take this service onhimself or not, that we might determine whetherLord Henry Petty should give notice of it, or of someother measure. We had an interview with Pitt soonafter, and were directed by him to report his answer tothe meeting . . which had been adjourned for five daysto give time for receiving it . . that he would himselfstop the Guiana Trade. Accordingly Lord HenryPetty gave notice of the measure of abolishing theForeign Slave Trade. But as on further consideration,and consulting with Stephen, it appeared that it234 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1805.might be injurious in various ways to propose thislatter measure, till the former should be quite secure,it was put off from time to time, and at length tillnext session. Notwithstanding Pitt was thus pledgedto all the opposition, as well as to Bankes and myself,and though I have been from day to day, week afterweek, urging him to perform his promise, the pledgeis still unredeemed ; and this is an affair, probably ofno less than 12 or 15,000 human beings annually, andof suffering so much capital to be invested in a foreignsettlement which we must relinquish at a peace. Inthe last war we lodged eighteen millions of propertythere."This perseverance was at last rewarded. LordCastlereagh had become Secretary of State, andchiefly through his habits of business, though an anti-abolitionist,the cultivation of new lands in Guiana"was " at length (Sept. 13th) stopped. This is preventingthe importation of a vast number of poor creatures,who would otherwise, as in the last war, havebeen the victims of our great capitalists." 104 Thusfar the time the Trade was greatly checked. Theold islands were the only markets for our own ships ;whilst the colonies of Holland, France, and Spaincould only be supplied under the neutral 105 colours ofAmerica.IM w. Wilberforce Esq. to Lord Lancaster.106 The " Orders in Council" were, by a curious connexion, the offspringof this Trade. Mr. Stephen aiming only at its suppression publisheda masterly pamphlet (War in Disguise) upon the rights of neutralpowers. Fearing if he mentioned the Slave Trade, that the effect of hisarguments might be diminished by a suspicion of his motives, he confinedhimself entirely to the general question ; and from the abstract principles1805. LIFE IN PALACE YARD. 235He had been, as usual, overburdened with businessthroughout the session of parliament. " This livingin Palace Yard," he complains, 100 " is destructive tomy time. In the morning I rise between eight andnine (being useless if I have not had my full dose ofsleep). I dress, hearing Terry [his reader] from half-pastnine to ten. Prayers and breakfast at a quarterafter ten. From thence constant callers, or break -masters proper people and my house not clear commonly,and I able to get out, till near one. Then Ihave often to call at the public offices, and if a committeemorning, I have scarce any writing time beforedinner. Then after House, friends Babington, Grant,Henry Thornton, and others drop in, so that I getscarcely any time for thinking on political topics, orpreparing for debates. A residence near Londonwould withdraw me from company, and give me moretime. Yet I dread the separation which my leavingBroomfield would make from my chief friends, theThorntonss, Teignmouths, Stephens, Venn, Macaulay,with whom I now live like a brother."This general sketch may be easily filled in fromany page of his Diary taken almost at random.March 25th. Breakfasters, Mrs. Thompson, RowlandHill, Alderman Sutton, Dr. Mcdowell, and Mr.Martyn (Missionary). Babington, Carrington, andothers called. The house did not empty till past one,he was thus led to lay down, the celebrated " Orders" were subsequentlydrawn.10(5 Diary.236 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1805.when I went off to lodgings, and wrote for two hoursor more at Bernard's paper. Home dinner, my sisterand two nieces, Babington, and Mr. Richmond (whopreached yesterday at the Lock, both times volubleand pious, but rambling). House Fox presentedCatholics' petition. Home, and letters. 26th.Breakfast-bishop of Exeter and others. Callers.Pitt's and Lord Camden's offices. Bowie's Committee.Dined home Teignmouth, Henry Thornton,Macaulay, Babington, in family way. Evening, Grant,Babington, &c. talking over Tenth Report, which fillsevery mouth and mind. April 3rd. Grey breakfastedcallers very poorly. Busy on Mace's affair. Waroffice, Col. P.'s business. Home, dinner quietlyM. Montagu, Norton, the Mohawk Chief, BarringtonMrs. Stephen, &c. Much talk with Montagu aboutMelville's case he very strong. May 12th. Busywriting about Suppression of Vice Society to Bishop ofDurham, Lord Dartmouth, A. Parke, and others. ToGray's Inn Coffee House : Suppression of Vice Societyadjourned debate on artifice repelling artifice spokefor nearly an hour. Shocked at the extremes to whichthe justifiers of artifice hurried. D. dull, and mostempty of general principles. E. a lawyer, coarse, butable, their grand advocate went great lengths. May28th. Private meeting about use of fraud, when came toa compromise by their agreeing not to practise falsehood."Several days too were given up to the ProclamationSociety, which this year closed its operationsby prevailing upon Bishop Porteus to write and .Bromfield. 237postulate with some " Sunday concert ladies," 107 whowere just introducing this new form of dissipation.The session of parliament closed in the middle ofJuly, hut family circumstances detained him in theneighbourhood of London. " When you talked ofintruding on my leisure," he writes to Mr. Hey, whowas on a journey southward, " something between asmile and a sigh, and partaking of the nature ofboth, escaped me." His own impulse was to buryhimself in the depths of the <f real country assoon as parliament rose." " I long for the rocksand mountains of Cumberland; the very idea refreshesme, though it excites a little of the maladiedu pays. I do not know one worldly thing I shouldlike so much as bringing my family to share in thedelight with which I feed on your romantic scenery." 108Even in the recess, moreover, his Diary showsthat he could never command perfect quietness atBroomfield. " July 17th. Bernard called, and dineden famille much talk of his plans. A fine ardentmind. Many callers to-day, so that I get little done.22nd. Home to dinner, where, by accident, a strangeassemblage Venn, Pearson, Parish, Waugh, andBrougham : all silenced by each other. Pity ! " e( Howtrue it is, when we see the interior of things in thisworld, we always see mementoes of human weaknessand corruption. R. told me his uncle was peevishand impracticable , forgot himself. Age, infirmities,w Diary, April 6. Vid. the Bishop's letter in Hodgson's Life ofPorteus.i 09 To Lord Lancaster.238 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1805.hard task at times, &c. Alas ! alas ! earth is butearth, and its inhabitants earthly. O heaven, heaven,thou seat of perfect love and holiness, where allinfirmities will be done away ! " 109His feelings in general society took far more thanformerly this tone. " I was received at E. veryaffectionately, and was in hopes of getting someserious talk with them, but entirely failed ; though Ireally kept it in mind, yet, when actually with them,it strangely slipped away from me. I wished especiallyto talk with Lord N. He not so attentive as one couldwish to her, his baby, &c. very conceited, or ratheraffected. This sort of society is very distressing to me,especially with those I love, and wish to benefit," noHis feelings were again tried by " three of hiswarmest supporters in Yorkshire, who all solicited"of him " a living for M. I am forced to declineasking. I fear they will be affronted, yet God is ableto turn the hearts of men as the rivers of water." mThis was no unusual trial of his firmness. " I ammuch hurt by solicitations from my friend N. for aliving. It hurts me greatly to appear ungrateful toone who has been so kind to me, and it may materiallyaffect my interest also. But I must adhere to myprinciples, and trust the event to God. If I lose myseat really on this account, can I be removed snorehonourably ? It would be a minor martyrdom."His letters during this autumn bear marks of hisnearness to the fountain-head of political intelligence.He not unfrequently " drove into town to see Pitt,"'o9 Diary, July 21. no Diary, Aug. 1. m Ib. July 261805. TO MRS. HANNAH MORE. 239and " had much talk with him upon political topics,finding him very open and kind." 112TO MRS. HANNAH MORE.Near London, Sept. 9, 1805.My dear Friend,Having my pen in hand, I must chat with youfor a few minutes, though they must be but few. Iquite rejoiced in your having the Bishop of Londonunder your roof : I can picture to myself his innocentplayfulness and affectionate vivacity, and how veryhappy he would be with you, and you all with him.I wonder you could keep it all to yourself, for it isreally true, that when I heard he was to be with you,I was very near scribbling to you on the moment, towish you joy of an event which would give you somuch fair pleasure. How truly amiable he is !I have no comfort in public affairs, except thatour friend Lord Barham is at the helm ; for thoughnever man came to it in such trying times, (this isespecially true in his department,) yet I cannot buthope that we shall see an illustration of ' Him thathonoured Me I will honour.'tf With the experience of the last war fresh in myrecollection, how can I participate in those visions ofglory, in which I fear a friend 113 of mine is even stillready to indulge, though I am afraid they will never receivea local habitation and a name. Well the Lordreigned. We are more and more driven for comfortto that bottom, and it is sound anchoring groundwhich will never fail us.112 Diarv. "3 Mr. Pitt.240 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1805.Have you received any more intimations fromhigh places, about the disposition to act up to yourhints? I greatly rejoice in your having written thatbook, on every ground, both public and personal.Poor Lady Landgrave has been with us, and onthe whole as well as one could expect, though sadlyweather-beaten. Oh what a change will the nextworld make to her ! Her voyage has been tempestuous,but I doubt not she will reach the desired haven.And ' Oh the thought that thou art safe ! ' Yes, mydear friend, there is nothing else worth living for.May we more and more feel this great truth, and liveaccordingly."His want of confidence in the national counsels didnot arise merely from his "recollection of the last war."His spirits were lowered by the consideration of thenational sins. He reflected that there had been few,if any, symptoms of general amendment. " The parliamentaryrecognition of Sunday drilling has added,I must say, to the apprehensions which the SlaveTrade, and the contemptuous treatment of Christianityin our colonial possessions, from first to last,have so long infused. I have been of late makingstrong representations to Lord Castlereagh, on thedreadful state of morals in New South Wales. Ihave been assured on good authority, that of neartwo thousand children now in the colony, there arenot one hundred who receive any education at all." 114One quarter, however, offered a less gloomy,though not less affecting prospect ; and he did butM Letter to William Hey Esq. Nov. J.1805. TRAFALGAR. 241share the feelings of the nation, at the news of Nelson'svictory and death, when he was " so overcomethat he could not go on reading for tears." 115 Therewas too little of this chastened spirit in the officialannouncement of the great victory of Trafalgar. Thiswas Lord Lancaster's remark upon their tone.There would methinks have been something noble,dignified, and most uncommonly interesting in thegreat minister of the empire gratefully acknowledgingas it were before the whole people, the Divineblessing given to the arms of the country. Whatqwzzism could he have been afraid of, adopting thelanguage of the hero victors ? Lord Burleigh hadnot this fear when he made his reply to Walsingham.Lest you should not recollect it, I will briefly state it toyou. Sir Francis Walsingham had been waiting to conferwith him on some business or other, and at lengthLord Burleigh coming in from prayers, Sir Francisjocularly (which in the cant of the present day wouldbe styled quizzing,) said to him, ' that he wishedhimself so good a servant of God as Lord Burleigh,but that he had not been at church for a week past.'To which Lord Burleigh thus gravely replied : ' Ihold it meet for us to ask God's grace to keep ussound of heart, who have so much in our power ; andto direct us to our well-doing for all the people, whomit is easy for us to injure and ruin ; and herein, mygood friend, the special blessing seemeth meet to bediscreetly asked and wisely worn.' This single trait115 Diary.VOL. III. M242 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1805.of Lord Burleigh's character, standing upon mostexcellent authority, has always lifted him more in myestimation, than all his wise policies and councils.I should have been truly delighted and gratified, tohave had the public proof I have alluded to, thatsomewhat the same train of ideas governed the greatminister of our day. Lord Collingwood appears tobe a worthy successor of Nelson."Mr. Wilberforce heartily assented to these views.\Yoxall Lodge, Nov. 25, 1805.My dear Lancaster,Had I been in town you may be pretty sureyou would have heard from me of the signal victorieswith which the Almighty had vouchsafed to blessour naval arms. I well know how your heart wouldexpand on the intelligence. Would to God, my dearLancaster, (I say it seriously and from the heart, notwith levity, and therefore vainly,) that the nation ingeneral, and especially that our great men and rulers,felt as you seem to have done on the occasion ; thatthey had looked like you beyond second causes, andhad seen the kind hand of the Almighty Disposer ofall things, in the many, many deliverance our highlyfavoured nation has experienced.I knew that the coincidence of Buonaparte's declarationabout ships, colonies, and commerce, withthe deprivation he sustained of them, would not escapeyou. I was delighted with Collingwood's generalorders for a day of humiliation and thanksgiving.1805. TO LORD MUNCASTER. 243The latter I had heard of in the case of Lord Duncan'svictory and some others, hut I do not rememberto have ever heard of the mention of imploring pardonfor sins, as well as returning thanks for blessings.The former pleased me particularly, for nothing canmore magnify goodness than its being unmerited, andthat, on the contrary, punishment has been rather deserved.But, my dear Lancaster, how abominableit is, that though, as we have recently learned, LordNelson and several others have ordered generalthanksgivings on shipboard after victories, yet thatthese orders have never till now appeared in theGazette ; and consequently they have not been known,and have not produced their proper effect on the publicmind. And this opens a large chapter of our government'smisconduct. I mean that of our foolishly (forit deserves no better name) despising fanfaronade andgasconade so much, and being so much afraid of becomingliable to the dreaded shafts of quizzers, as toneglect effect altogether, and the importance of carryingalong with you the body of your people ; and forthat end, taking all proper occasions of warning andanimating them ; and again, of endeavouring to conciliatethe good-will and deprecate the envy of foreignnations. It is really provoking in the highest degreeto hear that, on the continent, some of those verycountries which have suffered the most from Frenchdomination, have yet wished success to the arms ofFrance in consequence of the supposed hauteur of ourcourt and all its ministers and agents. I heard someremarkable instances of this from a very intelligentM 2244 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1805.man, 116 who last year travelled through Italy andGermany. 117I am, my dear Lancaster,ever affectionately yours,W. WILBERFORCE."He was on a visit to Mr. Babington when he heardthe sad news of the armistice after the entire defeatof the Austrians and Russians at Austerlitz. Godcan preserve us apparently we shall be in the mostimminent danger." But the full evil of this blow hedid not learn until after his return to town. " Jan.21st. To London on parliament's meeting. Heardsad account of Pitt, and opposition put off intendedamendment." Austerlitz had struck a fatal blow at thehealth of this high-minded man, and a tie was aboutto be severed to which Mr. Wilberforce had owedmuch of the influence, and many of the difficulties,of his earlier years. " 22nd. Quite unsettled anduneasy about Pitt, so to town. Heard bad account.Called on various friends, and on Rose, who quiteovercome. He had been long at Putney talking toBishop of Lincoln. Physicians said all was hopeless.Rose suggested to me about paying Pitt's debts, andeven that I should make the motion. I thought, butI own on reflection, my judgment decidedly againstit. Consulted Bankes. He likewise contra. 23rd.Heard from Bishop of Lincoln that Pitt had died11(5 Mr. (now Lord) Brougham."7 See the sentiments of the Germans in Schiller's Antrim des neuenJahrhunddcrts.1806. DEATH OF PITT. 245about half-past four in the morning. Deeply ratherthan pathetically affected by it. Pitt killed by theenemy as much as Nelson. Babington went to dineat Lord Teignmouth's, but I had no mind to goout." U8TO LORD MUNCASTER.Broomfield, Jan. 25, 1806.My dear Lancaster,I almost feel criminal in not having written toyou, for the chance at least of your getting my letter;but really I knew not what to say ; I could have toldyou no more than you would have learned from thenewspapers ; and the reflections which the melancholyevent called forth in my mind, were rather such aswere fitter for verbal communication, than to be puton paper and trusted to the post.There is something peculiarly affecting in thetime and circumstances of poor Pitt's death. I ownI have a thousand times (aye, times without number)wished and hoped that a quiet interval would beafforded him, perhaps in the evening of life, in whichhe and I might confer freely on the most importantof all subjects. But the scene is closed for ever.Of course what I am about to say is in strict confidence.I have heard, not without surprise, that hisdebts are considerable, a sum was named as large as40 or 50,000. This must have been roguery, 119 for heiw. Diary.i In the year 1783, Mr. Pitt had requested Mr. Robert Smith to examinehis private affairs, which even then were somewhat embarrassed. A246 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1806.really has not for many years lived at a rate of morethan 5 or 6000 per annum. I do not say this lightly ;and he has had an income since he got the CinquePorts of 10,000 per annum. Now an idea wasproposed of the nation's paying them ; but I own, consideringthe time and circumstances in which he died,and the situation of the country, the burdens whichmust be laid on, and the sacrifices which must beborne,! should fear that . . however, through the mutualconnivance of parties, (Grenville related to Pitt, Fox,Windham, &c. connected with Grenville,) it mightbe carried in the House of Commons . . it might begrudginglypaid by the people at large, and create afeeling very injurious to his memory. Then it wouldbe truly said, the precedent might be a very dangerousone, and might lead to sad party practices.But again To whom are the debts due ? Ifto tradesmen, they ought to be paid, but might notdebts to other sort of people, rich connexions, &c.be suspected; and the very idea of the people'spaying these is monstrous. I must say, however,that considering the number of affluent men 120connected with Pitt, some of whom have got greatand lucrative places from him, I cannot doubt butthat, with perfect privacy and delicacy, a subscriptionmight be made, adequate to the purpose. *******This late event saddens rather than softens my heart,letter from Mr. Smith to Mr. Wilberforce fully bears out the opinionexpressed in the text.120 A list of sixty-three persons, who might be expected to contribute,,appears among Mr. Wilberforce's papers.1806. MR. PITT'S DEBTS. 247There is something weighing down to the spirits. Iam not in a humour to bear the babble of the day, soI keep quiet here, and therefore know nothing aboutparties. Farewell.Ever truly yours,W. Wilberforce."His own true generosity of mind naturally madehim sanguine as to the success of such an attempt,and on the afternoon of the same day he wroteTO THE RIGHT HON. GEORGE ROSE.A thousand thanks, my dear Rose, for yourletter. I will consider how I can best promote theprivate plan, of the success of which I have no doubt.I am only anxious measures should be taken withdelicacy. I am extremely pressed, having just thismoment got a pile of letters.Yours ever,W. Wilberforce.t ' Saturday, Jan. 25, half-past three o'clock.I have this instant seen the papers, and will certainlyattend ; 121 but I must say it would have beenbetter in my colleague to consult and combine moreabout it. If so, perhaps all opposition might havebeen prevented. But Lascelles acts from a warmand honest heart as ever man had.You should have told me how you yourself are."During the next week he was unceasingly Mr. Lascelles' motion for a public funeral for Mr. Pitt.248 LIFE OF Wilberforce. 1806.played " to get people to agree to a subscription to payPitt's debts. Tried many, but cold in general, exceptAttorney-general, [Perceval,] who warm andgenerous as always." 122 The matter required immediatedespatch. " That warmth of sentiment," saidMr. Perceval, " which opens and softens the heart,certainly has a tendency to remove all strictures, eventhose of the purse ; but the frame has a tendency toreturn to its habitual contraction." 123On the following day, therefore, he was againdriving about, trying about the debts. . Lord Cornwallis'sdeath heard of. Dined at Sam Thornton's,who agreed to try in the city once more." A largesum had been offered Mr. Pitt, chiefly by the citymerchants ; but he had at once refused their aid,lest the consciousness of such an obligation shouldintrude upon him when transacting public businesswith them. On the Friday he was for a third timetrying about the debts, but in vain," and heard " abad report from the city." And on Monday his planwas finally defeated by the motion about the debtsin the House of Commons. " I came out of theHouse after speaking on thanks to Lord Cornwallis."124 The sum of 40,000 therefore, which was dueto tradesmen, was discharged by the nation. Mr.Pitt's private friends had raised 12,000 in the autumnof 1801, 125 to relieve him from embarrassment ;and one amongst them who owed the most to theiDiary, Jan. 28. 123 To W. Wilberforce Esq. Jan. 29.i* 4 Diary, Feb. 3.125 This debt stood in the names of six persons, but had been advancedby various parties in sums of 1000 or 500 each.1806. MR. PITT'S CHARACTER. 249friendship of the minister, was anxious that theseclaims should be added to the public grant. Thisdegrading proposition was happily defeated ; but nottill Mr. Wilberforce had solemnly declared, that ifthe matter were proposed in parliament, he would(being one of the creditors) give it his most earnestand persevering opposition. It is pleasing to turnfrom this conduct to that of Mr. Perceval, who, witha large family and moderate fortune, at once offered1000 to the proposed subscription.And now nothing remained but to attend the relicsof the dead to the last earthly abode of talent andgreatness. When the motion for a public funeralwas made in parliament, he bore testimony to the inflexibleintegrity and the pure love of his countrywhich had actuated his departed friend. In answerto those who, because Mr. Pitt's continental policyhad been unsuccessful, would have withheld fromhim the last tribute of his country's respect, heshowed the strong claim of his domestic administrationto the gratitude of the nation. This is not theplace for his matured estimate of his friend's character,126 but his letters written at the moment afford alively picture of his first impressions. "Mr. Pitthad foibles, and of course they were not diminished byso long a continuance in office ; but for a clear andcomprehensive view of the most complicated subjectin all its relations; for that fairness of mind which disposesa man to follow out, and when overtaken to recognisethe truth; for magnanimity, which made him126 This may hereafter appear in a separate form.M 3250 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1806.ready to change his measures when he thought thegood of the country required it, though he knew heshould be charged with inconsistency on account ofthe change; for willingness to give a fair hearing toall that could be urged against his own opinions, andto listen to the suggestions of men, whose understandingshe knew to be inferior to his own; for personalpurity, disinterestedness, integrity, and love of hiscountry, I have never known his equal." 127 " Hisstrictness in regard to truth was astonishing, consideringthe situation he had so long filled."TO LADY Landgrave.Broomfield, Feb. 1, 1806.My dear Lady W.I was just about to take up the pen two daysago, when the account reached me of the melancholyevent, 128 which will naturally call forth stillmore painful feelings and more tender sensibilitiesin your mind. It is indeed very awful, and is sufficientto strike with seriousness the most inconsideratehearts, that just at this moment, when our old nationalfabric is assailed so powerfully from without,the Almighty seems to be taking from us our mainprops within; whatever was most eminent for talentsand public spirit and heroism Nelson, Pitt, and Cornwallis,all gone together. Yet the same events havevery different aspects. It is possible, (reasoning fromthe contents of the Holy Scriptures, whence alone wecan derive our scanty knowledge of the Divine principe7 To \V. Hey Esq. Feb. 12. l38 The death of Lord Cornwallis.1806. TO LADY Landgrave. 251pies of conduct,) it is possible, and I would hope, butI own with more than a counterbalancing of a contraryfear, that the Almighty may intend to show us ourfolly in trusting to an arm of flesh, and that He candeliver and protect us, when they are no more, inwhom our ungrateful and irreligious nation has beenused to repose its chief confidence.How do these events tend to illustrate the vanityof worldly greatness ! Poor Pitt, I almost believe diedof a broken heart ! for it is only due to him to declarethat the love of his country burned in him with as ardenta flame as ever warmed the human bosom, and theaccounts from the armies struck a death's blow within.A broken heart ! What ! was he like Otway, or Collins,or Chatterton, who had not so much as a needfulcomplement of food to sustain their bodies, while theconsciousness of unrewarded talents, of mortified pride,pressed on them within, and ate out their very souls ?Was he even like Suwaroff, another most usefulexample, basely deserted and driven into exile by thesovereign he had so long served ? No, he was in thestation, the highest in power and estimation in thewhole kingdom the favourite, I believe on the whole,both of King and people. Yes, this man who died ofa broken heart was First Lord of the Treasury andChancellor of the Exchequer. The time and circumstancesof his death were peculiarly affecting, and Ireally believe, however incredulous you may be, thatit dwelt on the minds of people in London for shallI say, as I was going to say, a whole week ? I reallynever remember any event producing so much appal'252 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1806,rent feeling. But London soon returned to its gaietyand giddiness, and all the world has been for manydays busied about the inheritance, before the late possessoris laid in his grave. Poor fellow ! It is aninexpressible satisfaction to me to be able to reflect,that I never gave him reason for a moment to believethat I had any object whatever of a worldly kind inview, in continuing my friendly connexion.I have been interrupted, and must very unwillinglyhasten to a conclusion. I had hoped to fill anothersheet, and without unmeaning apologies for prolixity.Let me however add a few sentences. As to poorPitt's death, I fear the account in the newspapers isnot correct. But I have not been able to learn manyparticulars. Indeed he spoke very little for somedays before he died, and was extremely weakened andreduced on the Wednesday morning, when he wasfirst talked to as a dying man. He expired early onThursday morning.Your Ladyship will conceive how this event hassaddened my heart. Of Lord Cornwallis's death, Ihave not heard many particulars, and you will doubtlessbe fully and minutely informed. But I havelearned from good authority, that the anxiety for thepublic good, and the earnestness in discharging theduties of his station, to the forge fulness of self, continuedentire ; and there were some remarkable proofsof it, to the very last.I have been labouring with great diligence, butunsuccessfully, to get poor Pitt's debts (amounting inthe whole to near 50,000) paid by the private .TO LADY Landgrave. 253tribulations of his friends, connexions, and admirers,rather than by the nation. I grieve lest the paymentby a vote of parliament should be made a precedent,though most unfairly, for the payment of other debts ;and lest, considering the heavy burthens lying andstill to be laid on the country, there should by and byremain in the mind of the bulk of the community anunpleasant feeling, which may have an effect on hismemory, and associate with it an impression of a veryundesirable kind. There are many who now join inthe general cry, who will not hereafter be very tenderof his credit,You are near the Mores, if you see them give mykind remembrances, and do me the favour to say Iwould write, but that I am up to the chin in business.May God bless and support your heart, my dearLady W. and cheer you under every trial ; giving youin proportion to your temporal trials, a more thancompensating taste of that peace which passeth allunderstanding, and that ' joy with which a strangerintermeddle not,' the peace and joy in believingthrough the power of the Holy Ghost. O blessedwords, ' The rest that remaineth for the people of God.'I hope Lord W. and all your Ladyship's familyare well ; always let me know of your and yourfamily's going on, for a deep interest will always betakenin your happiness by,my dear Lady W.your Ladyship's faithful friend and servant,W. Wilberforce.I have not time to read over my scrawl."254 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1806.At the funeral, February 22nd, he was one of thosewho lore the banner which preceded the coffin.Attended Pitt's funeral an affecting ceremony.What thoughts occurred to me when I saw the coffinletting down, and just before ! I thought of our appearancebefore God in heaven. May the impression bedurable." 129 It could not be without the deepestemotions that he beheld the earth close over one,who for five and twenty years had been the foremostman of his country. His sun had set untimely, hisdearest hopes had withered before him, and his powerhad passed to unfriendly successors. And as thoughin mockery of greatness, the adjoining statue of thefirst William Pitt seemed, said Mr. Wilberforce, tobe looking down with consternation into the gravewhich was opened for his favourite son, the last perpetuatorof the name, which he had ennobled. 130 " Ohwhat cause do I find for humiliation and gratitude,"he observes, " looking back to my own and Pitt'spublic life ! " 131 And how many fresh reasons had hefor thankfulness at being led in a path where politicaldisappointments had no power to wound him, beforehe was brought back to the same spot, after a secondquarter of a century, to mingle his dust with that ofhis illustrious friend !i2& Journal. 13 Con. Mem. "' Diary,CHAPTER XX.FEBRUARY 1806 TO MARCH 1807,Wilberforce's conduct towards new ministry Lord ChiefJustice in the Cabinet Cause of Abolition continues toadvance Foreign Slave Bill Slave Trade condemned byboth Houses Iron Tax Woollen Committee Report-preparationfor bringing forward the Abolition next yearDeath of Fox Dissolution of parliament Canvass forYorkshire Wilberforce's great popularity Returned withouta contest Publishes his book upon the Slave TradeParliament meets Abolition Bill passes the Lords, and readfor the first time in Commons He opposes ministers on thegrant of Maynooth College Critical state of Abolition BillIt passes into a law Congratulations His own feelings.THE death of Mr. Pitt dissolved the existing government,and the inheritance of his power was dividedamongst the followers of Mr. Fox, Lord Grenville,Mr. Windham, and Lord Sidmouth. It was Mr.Wilberforce's general practice to support the King'sgovernment whenever he was able ; and on this groundhe now disclaimed at once all intentions of systematicopposition. He wished too,, as far as possible, to conciliatetheir support in the approaching Abolitionstruggle ; and greatly to the annoyance of manyof his friends supported Lord Henry Petty in the256 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1806.contest for the representation of the University ofCambridge, which followed the death of Mr, Pitt.My suddenly promising Lord Henry Petty, (whichdone too hastily, partly from not thinking I had anyinterest, partly from being found in a state of wishingto show Lord Henry how much both I and the causefelt indebted to him,) has produced a sad degree ofrefinement. Dear Dean 1 much hurt about it for mysake. I am accused of changing sides, and voting foraman, who was going to make a motion which mighthave terminated in the impeachment of Pitt. Thenall sorts of calumnies against Lord Henry Pettyeducated by Priestley, &c. I received letters fromDean, volumes; Simeon, cum multi alias. Fox, Ihear, has had an explanation with the King, assuringhim that not only friendly to the House of Hanover,and him, though not to late ministry ; but also thathe would not bring on measures offensive to him Catholicquestion, &c. I have been very anxious aboutLord Ellenborough. Fox, &c.'s doing. Lord Sid-mouthwould have had Lord Buckinghamshire ; butthe opposition said they had friends of equal or superiorpretensions, who in that case must be broughtforward' 2Yet even to purchase support upon this question, hecould not sacrifice his own independence. " Ourgreat cause," he tells Mr. Gisborne, 3 " has been considerablyaccredited by what has passed at the Cambridgeelection. Lord Henry Petty got a great deal ofsupport, owing to his known zeal in it. His opponent1 Milner. * Diary, Feb. 13. ' Feb. 11.1806. ABOLITION PLANS. 257Lord Palmerston lost much owing to his being supposed,mistakenly I believe, to be our enemy ; andnumbers declared they would not, though satisfied inall other points, vote for an anti-abolitionist. So farwell. The Chancellor of the Exchequer comes fromCambridge in a good state of mind quoad hoc. Foxa decided friend. Grenville ditto. Lord Spencer Ibelieve favourable, but not very strong. Lord MoiraI doubt ; Sidmouth, Ellenborough. Erskine talkingfriendly to me, but always absenting himself. LordFitzwilliam I am not quite sure, but I think favourable.Windham contra. But the great point wouldbe to get if possible the royal family to give up theiropposition. Stephen had a plan suggested by hiswarm zeal, that we should send a deputation to thenew ministry, to make a sort of contract that wewould befriend them as we did Pitt, i. e. give themthe turn of the scale, &c. if they would promise us tosupport the Abolition as a government measure. Theidea is inadmissible, both on grounds of rectitude andpolicy, (the two parties would infallibly have differentideas of the practical extent of the obligation, andmutual misunderstanding would ensue,) yet I thinkwe ought to contrive that the effect intended by itmay be produced ; and though I dare scarcely be sanguinewhen I recollect with whom we have to do, yetI cannot but entertain some hopes that the wish tomollify, and even conciliate, a number of strange impracticableand otherwise uncomfortable fellows bygratifying them in this particular, may have itsweight ; at least it will tend to counteract the fear ofoffending the West Indians."258 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1806.Upon these independent principles he acted fromthe first, and was compelled to oppose one of the firstmeasures of administration. "I feel strongly' hetells Mr. Babington, "the mischievous effects ofmaking the Chief Justice of England a politician, bygiving him for the first time a seat in the Cabinet."So far as regards Lord Ellenborough himself, Ishould welcome the introduction into the motleyCabinet which has been now formed, of his love ofgood order, his vigorous understanding, his undauntedfirmness, and so far as I know them, I am disposed toadd, his sound constitutional principles. But really,whether the mischievous consequences of subjectingthe decisions of our courts of justice to the influenceof party attachments be considered, or (what mayperhaps be of full as much importance) the producingin the public mind a general persuasion that this biasexists, it seems to me the most injurious blow ourconstitution has sustained since the revolution." 4So strongly do I feel it, that if no one else does it,I know not how I can forbear bringing the subjectbefore parliament." These objections he openlydeclared in the debate upon the subject on the 3rd ofMarch, without causing any separation between theLord Chief Justice and himself. Their friendly intercoursehad been maintained since their meeting on thecontinent in the summer of 1785; and he now " wroteto Lord Ellenborough on the evils of his having aCabinet office, thinking it most manly and fair to stateobjections to himself." 5 He "returned a very handsomeanswer ;" and when quitting office thirteen4 Letter to Henry Bankes Esq. s Diary, Feb. 4.1806. ABOLITION PROSPECTS. 259months later, he again alluded in a friendly mannerto Mr. Wilberforce's opposition ; " Well Wilberforce,I hope I have not done much mischief after all."The leading members too of the new governmentunderstood his principles; and to his great joy enteredheartily into his Abolition views. On this subjecthe had many interviews with Fox, whom he describesas " quite rampant and playful, as he was twenty-twoyears ago, when not under any awe of his opponents.Consulting about Abolition. Fox and Lord HenryPetty talked as if we might certainly carry our questionin the House of Commons, but should certainlylose it in the House of Lords. This looks but ill, asif they wished to please us, and yet not forfeit Princeof Wales's favour, and that of G. R. 6 and otheranti-abolitionists." 7 Notwithstanding these expressions,he never questioned the sincerity of Mr. Fox'sattachment to his cause ; and he learned afterwardswith pleasure, that " the Prince had given his honourto Fox, not to stir adversely." 8 The prospect wasnow brightening. " Our Slave business rathermends. William Smith saw Lord Moira, who willconfer with the Prince of Wales." 9 After manyconferences, in the following week, " with LordGrenville, Lord Sidmouth, Fox, Lord Henry Petty,Stephen," 10 he determined that a Bill for the prohibitionof the Foreign Slave Trade (which would fix theadvantages gained in the last year) should precede6 The King. 7 Diary, March 5.8 W. Smith Esq. to W. Wilberforce Esq. Nov. 17.9 Diary, March 13. "> Diary.260 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1806.his general measure. This naturally followed Mr.Pitt's Order in Council ; and would have been movedby Lord Henry Petty in the former session, but forthe dangerous illness of Lord Lansdown. It wasjudged right to intrust this measure in the Commonsto one of the law officers of the Crown ; and LordGrenville agreed to introduce it in the Lords, assuringMr. Wilberforce that he should be " happy topromote the object in any way." 11 The subject wasimmediately entered upon. " The Attorney-generalPigott" proceeded at once " to give notice ofForeign Slave Bill, about which had taken pains.Gives notice quite wrong, and we all sadly discomposed."12 Wrote to Fox," who " said that theOrder Book should be altered to make it right." 13The measure now proceeded, though " the agent forJamaica conceived himself bound by his instructionsto oppose it." 14 "How wonderful," says Mr. Wilberforce," are the ways of Providence ! The ForeignSlave Bill is going quietly on. How God can turnthe hearts of men ! Lords Grenville and Henry Pettywish my general Abolition Bill not to come on, tillthe Attorney-general's Bill carried through. Ibelieve they are right, and at all events must giveway to their wish. Perceval sentit idem." 15 Whilethis Bill was passing though the Commons, a similarone was introduced into the House of Lords, whereit was carried triumphantly on the 10th of May.11 Lord Grenville to W. Wilberforce Esq. March 25.Diary, March 27. Ib. March 28.14 Attorney-general to \V. Wilberforce Esq. April, 1806.15 Diary, April 5.1806. FOREIGN SLAVE TRADE ABOLISHED. 261I saw our strength," says Lord Grenville, " andthought the occasion was favourable for launching outa little beyond what the measure itself actually required.I really think a foundation is laid for doingmore and sooner than I have for a long time allowedmyself to hope." 1G Mr. Wilberforce rejoiced inthis success. " Sunday, 18th. We have carried theForeign Slave Bill, and we are now deliberatingwhether we shall push the main question. O Lord,do Thou guide us right, and enable me to maintain aspiritual mind amid all my hurry of worldly business,having my conversation in heaven." 17He had intended to follow up this measure by thegeneral Bill, but after " meeting Fox at Lord Grenville's,and holding some anxious consultations withthem, and also with " his " own friends about theexpediency of proposing the general question thisyear ; when it was almost decided to try," 18 he " mostreluctantly gave up the idea on Lord Grenville's sureopinion, that no chance this session in the House ofLords ; the bishops going out of town, &c. But weareto have a general resolution for Abolition both inCommons arid Lords. How wonderful are the waysof God, and how are we taught to trust not in manbut in Him ! Though intimate with Pitt for all mylife since earliest manhood, and he most warm forAbolition, and really honest ; yet now my wholehuman dependence is placed on Fox, to whom thislife opposed, and on Grenville, to whom always rather16 To W. Wilberforce Esq. May 17.'7 .Journal, Sunday, May 18. is Ib. May 25.262 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1806.hostile till of late years, when I heard he was morereligious. 19 O Lord, Thou hast all hearts in Thy disposal: oh that it may be Thy will to put an end tothis abhorred system."In the present feelings of the country more couldbe done for Abolition by Lord Grenville and Mr.Fox, than Mr. Pitt was ever able to attempt ; yetthey could not make it a ministerial question, oreven secure the concurrence of the whole Cabinet.Two of its chief members were its persevering enemies.The majority however determined to supportthe resolutions which were to bind the Houseto a speedy adoption of the general measure. " ACabinet council," writes Lord Grenville, " is fixedfor tomorrow, the result of which will I trust besuch a notice in the House of Commons as we talkedof;" and on the 4th Mr. Wilberforce summoned Mr.Stephen to a private " consult about the resolutionwhich Mr. Fox is to move, that after having madeup our own minds, we may make our report tohim." The debate came on upon the 10th, when hemoved an address, calling on the King to use hisinfluence to obtain the co-operation of foreign powers ;a measure which it obviously would not be soproper for any of the King's ministers to bring forward."20The resolutions, which were proposed by the leadingministers, declared the Slave Trade to be " contrary to19 Vid. p. 179. " You don't like Grenville," Pitt had said to him formerly," and Grenville knows that you don't."2 William Wilberforce Esq. to H. R. H. the Duke of Gloucester,June 9.1806. COUNTY BUSINESS. 263the principles of justice, humanity, and sound policy ; "and that the House would " with all practicableexpediency" proceed to abolish it. " We carried ourresolutions 100 and odd to 14, and my address withouta division. If it please God to spare ( the health ofFox, and to keep him and Grenville together, I hopewe shall next year see the termination of all ourlabours." 21 But gratifying as it was to know thatthe days of this execrable Trade were 'numbered, oneevil was likely to follow the announcement. This hadnot escaped him. Before the end of May he hadconsulted Mr. Stephen on the need of te some expedientfor preventing the sudden increase of the SlaveTrade, from the passing of a denunciating resolutionagainst it." 22 And he soon afterwards suggested toMr. Fox the necessity of a temporary enactment forpreventing" such an " influx." " With Fox for anhour and a half. He very rational and unaffected." 23Before the session closed, a Bill was passed rapidlythrough both Houses to prevent the employment inthe Trade of any fresh ships.During all this time county business had pressedhard upon him. Some of the taxes proposed by the newgovernment were most injurious to his mercantile constituents." Budget. Lord Henry Petty 's first exhibition.Very well, but not quite first-rate." 24 " LordHenry Petty gave up the private brewing tax. Foxon his coming in said, ' I'd rather get my bread anyv Diary, April 10.42 W. Wilberforce Esq. to James Stephen Esq. May 27.93 Diary, June 7. 24 Ib. March 2S.264 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1806.way than by being Chancellor of the Exchequer'" 25A projected tax on un wrought iron, was that whichthe manufacturers of Yorkshire most condemned.This he was a principal instrument in defeating. " Itpleased God," he says, 26 " that I got a good deal ofcredit in the iron business, having made myselfmaster of it." This attention to commercial matters,and still more his conduct in the woollen trade inquiry,were highly valued in his county, and producedno small effect in the elections which so unexpectedlyfollowed. The woollen trade inquiry involved " avery fatiguing parliamentary attendance." The committee" had sat above five weeks," upon the 25th ofMay, and " continued till within a few days of therising of parliament." 27 During all which time henever but one day was prevented from attendingit." 28 The inquiry had been called for by the workmenand domestic clothiers, who wished to subjectthis important manufacture to the most arbitraryrestrictions the workmen being desirous of revivingan obsolete law against machinery, and the domesticmanufacturers of preventing the production of clothon the large scale in factories. Great part of thetrade of Yorkshire was at this time in the hands ofmen of small capital, who, with the aid of their ownfamilies, prepared their goods at home, and sold themin the adjoining cloth halls.Between this valuable race of men and the enterprisingcapitalist he had now to mediate. For when,Diary, June 8. * Ib. May 25.27 Diary. To Mr. Hey, Aug. 1.1806. SUNDAY DRILLING. 2G5after a long examination of witnesses, the Committeemet to agree on their Report, " after wasting twoor three mornings about it, reading it round a tablea sad way ; they gave the preparation of it up to" him,in a very confiding, but really very friendly manner."He "returned to Broomfield in the evening,"intending at once to set about his task ; but the followingweek was crowded with engagements. Tuesdaywas " the House of Lords debate on Fox's SlaveTrade Resolution. Most gratifying, Ellenboroughespecially ; and Lord Erskine though theatrical.Carried it, 42 to 21. Lord Sidmouth as usual." 29Wednesday morning he was attending a committee,and not home till late in the evening. On Thursdayand Friday he was " in town all day, and both nights atthe House on Windham's Training Bill. Sunday drillingdiscussed." 30 This evil custom he successfully resisted." The shocking effects of it " he " had heardnot only from the clergy, but from all who weredecent and moral ;" and when the Bill for a levyen masse was brought forward, he at once " calledabout it on Windham, whom " he found " very obstinate."" Lord Grenville telling me, frankly, that heagreed with me; and that he had told Windham thatif the bishops should propose the alteration in theHouse of Lords, he could not oppose it. More talkwith Windham about Sunday drilling. He had givenup so far as to make Sunday drilling depend onKing's ordering it, but had struck out ' necessary,' orany thing to guide ministers' discretion. When IDiary, Tuesday, June 24. 30 Ib. Saturday, June 28.VOL. III. N266 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1806.feared all was over, he went out and accepted thewords ' shall deem necessary.' " 31 On this success heheard from Bishop Porteus.Dear Sir,Your note of Friday last did indeed give methe sincerest satisfaction; and I thank God most devoutlyfor giving success to our efforts in a matter ofsuch essential importance to the interests of moralityand religion, and the due observance of the Lord'sday, on which the very existence of religion dependsin this country. I wish we may have equal successin another great point on Friday next, in the Houseof Lords. These two great events would add muchto my comfort and pleasure in the present summer. Iam, dear Sir,Very sincerely yours,"Fulham, June 16, 1806." B. LONDON.He took to himself no credit for this triumph.How wonderfully," are his reflections on it, " doesGod teach us to look to Him ! In the Sunday drilling,the House of Commons against us, and Wind-hamhimself against us, yet by Windham's havingadmitted the clause, I hope AVC shall keep it in."All this had interrupted the preparation of hisReport, and even on Saturday, when he was " intenton getting on with it, he had been forced to write tothe Bishop of London about the Sunday drilling."It was to be presented on the Monday, when he "put3i Diary, June 12.1806. REPORT OF WOOLLEN COMMITTEE. 267off the meeting of the Committee, thinking it wouldbe better afterwards to have taken a day more, anddone it well. And so it proved. Nobody asks afterwardshow long it took, but how well done. Speakercomplimented me much upon it. I carried it almostfinished to the Committee, and all of them delightedwith it, and most pleasingly liberal and kind." 32It was a masterly composition ; laying clearly downthe true principles upon which the trade must beconducted ; befriending the domestic clothier whilstit freed the manufacturer from all needless and harassingrestrictions.The Report is excellent," writes a leading merchantfrom Huddersfield. 33 " I could not help sayingthat it was your composition, and I feel satisfiedthat I did." "Henry Lascelles, as well as others," ishis own reflection, 34 "were most liberal and handsometowards me in all that regarded Report, doingfull justice to it without an apparent grain of envy ordetraction. How much better a praise than that ofdrawing up a good report ! "He watched meantime with an observant eye theprogress of the new government. " Fox appears,"he thought in the spring, " to be rather yielding toGrenville's foreign politics against peace." ^ "Ihear from Lascelles that administration is highly unpopularon account of Windham's treatment of thevolunteers; and the Princess of Wales's examinationalso creates much talk and dissatisfaction." 36Diary, July 1. 33 j u i y icy igQG.11 Diary, Sunday, July 13. Ib. April 5. 36 ib. j u jy 30.N 2268 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1806.Windham is a most wretched man of business, noprecision or knowledge of details, even in his ownmeasures."But the state of Mr. Fox's health soon occupiedall his attention. June 27th. " William Smith withus after the House, and talking of poor Fox constrainedly; when at last, overcome by his feelings, heburst out with a real divulging of his danger dropsy.Poor fellow, how melancholy his case ! he has notone religious friend, or one who knows any thing aboutit. How wonderful God's providence ! How poora master the world ! No sooner grasps his long-soughtobject than it shows itself a bubble, and heis forced to give it up." ec I am much affected by hissituation. In great danger apparently. Oh that Imight be the instrument of bringing him to theknowledge of Christ ! I have entertained now andthen a hope of it. God can do all things. His grace isinfinite both in love and power. I quite love Fox for,his generous and warm fidelity to the Slave Tradecause. Even very lately, when conscious that he wouldbe forced to give up parliament for the session atleast, he said " he wished to go down to the Houseonce more to say something on the Slave Trade." 37TO WILLIAM HEY ESQ.Broomfield, Aug. 1."My dear Sir,How affecting an instance of the precariousnature of all human enjoyments is exhibited in Mr3 " Journal, June 29.1806. FOX'S ILLNESS. 269Fox's present situation ! No sooner is he able tograsp the prize, after which he has been so manyyears stretching in vain, and which, now that his greatrival is no more, he might hope to possess without acompetitor, than, behold, the bubble bursts in hishand, and discovers the hollowness of all sublunarygood. But I cannot help thinking that Mr. Fox had,even before his illness, begun to taste that the gratificationsof ambition are less sweet in the enjoymentthan in the expectation. And many of his partisans whohad anticipated a sort of golden age from his administration,begin to find that matters go on very muchafter the old sort. 38 I have myself long ceased to expectmuch from any men who are destitute of true religion.But then as I do not look for so much good from themen of the world, whose talents and even politicaland moral principles I approve in the main ; so neitherdo I apprehend as much evil from the government ofwhich I disapprove. I have long thought the remarkin Mr. Hume's Essays very wise ; wherein he counselsmoderation in our political expectancies, either ofgood or evil especially in a country where the constitutioncontains so many safeguards against evil asours does. I own my chief fear of the party now inpower, has long been grounded rather on the loose,immoral principles of many of them. But LordsGrenville, Spencer, Sidmouth, Fitzwilliam, and latus" How like is one government to another ! We are expecting a riot inWestminster, and our light horse called out. What a triumph to the oldgovernment ! " Letter from Henry Thornton. Esq. to W. WilberforceEsq.270 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1806.terry 1 hope Lord Howick, are of a better quality ; andI must do Mr. Fox the justice to say, that I have everyreason to feel grateful to him for the conduct he hasobserved in relation to the Abolition of the SlaveTrade ; and Lord Grenville deserves the same commendation.I am, my dear Sir,very sincerely yours,W. WILBERFORCE."The cause of Abolition was now thought by meningeneral to be gained. Immediately after the Resolutionsof June 24th, he was " congratulated " by afriend, the owner of a large West India property, "onthe Abolition of the Slave Trade being carried, awork which you have had at your heart these twentyyears. You will say I am superstitious, but I do notthink I have ever done well in the world since I votedagainst it. Nothing has succeeded with me. I donot mean to say I am distressed, but my money hasseemed so much dross, it turns to no account, or likesand is blown away. As you know my hand writingI will not put my name, and only add that I am, mydear W., very affectionately yours." 39Let our gratitude be testified to that man," saysa contemporary reviewer, 40 " who has begun and ledthrough this glorious struggle who has devoted toits success all his days and all his talents whohas retired from all recompence for his labours, save30 To W. Wilberforce Esq. June 27.Eden. Rev. No. XVI. July, 1806.1806. ABOLITION PLANS. 271the satisfaction of doing good to his fellow-creatureswho, giving up to mankind what others have sacrificedto party, has preferred the glory of living in the recollectionof a grateful world to the shining rewards ofa limited ambition. We now rejoice to contemplatethis distinguished person, standing as it were on thebrink of his final triumph, in the greatest battle everfought by human beings, and an object we reallythink of just envy to the most ambitious of mortals."But he knew that the struggle was not yet over,and until it was, he would not rest. " 1 am sick ofbustle, and long for quiet, but I will not leave thepoor slaves in the lurch." He found only a new motivefor exertion in seeing that " the Abolition lookedmore promising than for many years." 41 No measurewas omitted which the most watchful prudence couldsuggest. The London Committee, which had reassembledin 1804, after an interval of seven years,and again held itself ready to act " subject to thecall of Mr. Wilberforce," 42 met regularly this year athis house " in Palace Yard;" 43 and he made arrangementsin various quarters for providing the evidencewhich the House of Lords might possibly require.Frequent too were his discussions with Lord Grenvilleon the measures which should be prepared for the ensuingsession. He found " Lord Grenville very openand friendly. He much desires to abolish by high andincreasing duties; I strong against it." 44 " I do notrelish the principle, and I foresee a danger from our*> Diary, June 28. Minutes of Committee, March 23, 1804.Diary, July 16. Ib. Aug. 12.272 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1806.lowering our tone, and not rendering the Slave Tradea crime to be punished accordingly. Lord Grenvillelistened to me very attentively, but I cannot saythat he appeared to be convinced by my arguments ;yet from all that passed I am clear that Lord Grenvillewill give way to us very handsomely, if we cannotbring ourselves to come in to his opinion." 45 Hecalled the same day on " Barham, and talked withhim some time about his plan of cultivating withChinese." 46 " He is really a generous fellow, and heseems to be actuated by a warm spirit of patriotismand philanthropy. I should therefore, as well as onaccount of his having been such an honourable exceptionto the conduct of his brother planters, behappy to subscribe towards his scheme ; but that, asI frankly told him, I feared that if it should fail,which I could not but expect, (because his Chinesewould be seduced away from him,) it would be stated,however unfairly, as the plan of the Abolitionists,and as a proof of its being impossible to cultivate theWest India islands by any other means than Slavelabour. I have absolutely no right to trifle with, orrun the risk of impairing the credit of, any of OUTgreat principles." 47Nor were his labours over, when leaving theneighbourhood of London towards the end of August,45 To W. Smith Esq. Aug. 18. " We want parliament and the countryto practise a notable piece of self-denial, and to do a magnificent act ofjustice, to pass a kind of self-denying ordinance; and we can onlyhope that a parliament will do this heroic deed in some fit of heroism."Henry Thornton Esq. to W. Wilberforce Esq. Aug. 26.Diary. To W. Smith Esq. Aug. 18.1806. ADDRESS ON THE SLAVE TRADE. 273he " slipped into the snug and retired harbour ofLyme, for the purpose of careening and refitting." 48He had long designed writing an Address upon theSlave Trade, and he now set resolutely to this task.What was once known on that subject is now almostforgotten, and so many new members have comeinto parliament, that even for their sakes it is desirableto state what we do really hold." " Esteemingit also as one of the greatest honours of my life . .the greatest political honour , that I have been calledforth by Providence to be the advocate in this greatcause, I think I ought to leave behind me someauthentic record of the real nature and amount of thequestion." 49 He had long postponed this work, that itmight come out just before the subject was debatedin the House of Lords. " A pamphlet thrown in justinsuch circumstances, may be like a shot which hitsbetween wind and water ; it might prove of decisiveefficiency. It will be well to supply people who wishto come over, with reasons for voting for us. For allmen are not of the liberal, or rather lavish, turn ofLord De B. who, when a friend who had asked him tovote with him on a certain private bill, was going ontostate the reasons he had to urge in support of thevote he wished his Lordship to give, ' Oh,' replied thepeer, f let alone your reasons, surely it is the part ofa friend to give my vote without reasons, or againstthem.' My idea is to state the chief arguments thatmay be urged to prove the injustice and cruelty ofthe Slave Trade ; its pernicious effects on the happierLetter to Z. Macaulay Esq. & To H. Bankes Esq.N 3LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1806.ness of Africa, and its obstruction of her civilization.Then to be very short upon the middle passage, andmore particular on the West Indian branch of thesubject."With this he was now busily engaged. " Going onas usual in my Abolition tract ; reading the evidence,and writing. Last night when going to bed heardthere was a fire : a splendid, terrific scene. Night quitecalm, so a river of smoke ran up to the sky, and whenit had got perpendicularly high, stretched away likeanother milky way. Two houses burnt." * Here hewas soon followed by the account of Mr. Fox's death.So poor Fox is gone at last. I am more affectedby it than I thought I should be." 51 " How speedily hashe followed his great rival ! Throw too gone. Independentlyof all other considerations, there is somethingwhich comes home to a man in the gradualquitting of the stage of those who are parts of thesame dramatis personae as himself. Even I seem tomyself to be reminded that I am verging towards theclose of the piece." 52 " Well, may we also be ready.I presume even tardy congratulations will not beunwelcome to a member of government on the braveryof our fine fellows in Calabria. How nobly theyhave sustained the credit of their country ! Windhammust be at least a foot higher. I hope he will notgrow proportionably more alienated from the volunteers."53In the midst of these quiet home occupations 'he50 Diary, Sept. 28. 5I To Lord Sidmouth, Sept. 19.& To Mrs. Hannah More, Sept. 15.1806. LETTER TO THE FREEHOLDERS. 275was " shocked by a letter from Lord Grenville announcinga dissolution of parliament." 54 " Sadlyunsettled by the news. I now see I had better havegone off at once, as Lancaster says an oppositionlikely, and that they speak sanguinely as to success."55 No time was to be lost. Upon the 21st he wason his way to Yorkshire. At " Sandford saw Fawkes'sadvertisement in the Courier, and first knew of opposition.Travelled on through Salisbury. Landlordasked me for Cheap Repository tracts, sayingthose I had left had done great good, had reformedsome of his men, had done himself good, and publictoo." 56 On his road he addressed the following letterto his constituents.TO THE GENTLEMEN, CLERGY, AND FREEHOLDERS OFTHE COUNTY OF YORK.Nottingham, Oct. 24, 1806.Gentlemen,The very unexpected tidings of an intendeddissolution of parliament, found me in the oppositeextremity of the kingdom, where I was residing witha view to the restoration of the health of a part of myfamily. Having learned from letters received on theroad that an active canvass has been carrying onduring my absence, I have hastened to you with theutmost expedition ; and to as many of you as the timeand as circumstances will allow, it is my earnest wishto pay my personal respects. But may I not be permittedwithout presumption to express a hope, thatDiary, Oct. 15. 55 Ib. 18. ^ Diary.276 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1806.a faithful service of two and twenty years may haveprevented your minds from being found so utterlyunoccupied, as that the mere circumstance of yourbeing previously canvassed by another candidateshould have been sufficient to pre-engage you ? I amaware of the unseemliness of speaking of myself; butbeing now called to account to you for my executionof the important office which you have four timescommitted to me, I must unavoidably become anegotist. Conscious then that a member for Yorkshireis honoured with one of the most dignified trustswhich a British subject can receive at the hands ofhis countrymen, I have endeavoured, it is not for meto say with what success, to maintain unimpaired thecredit of that high station, by an independent anddiligent discharge of its various duties. To your localconcerns, some of them, both from their importanceand from the numbers they affect, justly claiming thelarger appellation of national interests, I have attendedassiduously. But I have felt it my duty also toallot as large a share as possible of my time andthoughts to public and general questions ; and in nopreceding period of English history have so many ofthese, and of such extreme importance, come beforethe House of Commons in an equal space of time. Inperforming this most important part of my parliamentaryservice, I have had no personal objects eitherof interest or ambition. I have looked neither toemolument nor aggrandizement; remembering that Iwas the representative of Yorkshire, and that, especiallyin these days, and with my peculiar connexions,it became me to be strictly independent. I have been1806. LETTER TO THE FREEHOLDERS. 277the slave of no party ; and if for the most part I havesupported the measures of a distinguished statesmanand patriot, now no more, it has been because I havejudged them best calculated to promote the welfare ofmy country. When I have thought otherwise of anyof them, I have publicly and actively opposed them ;at no small cost of personal feeling, from appearingfor the time to be numbered among the politicalopponents of a man, whose friendship constituted oneof the highest honours of my private life.Such, I can truly affirm, has been the general courseof my parliamentary conduct for two and twenty years ;and having thus spent the best part of my life in yourservice, I trust that you will not lightly cast me off.Is it too much to say that this would be to teach themembers for great counties, and especially those whomay hereafter represent our own, which, from the highplace it occupies in the scale of national importance,should hold out an example to all the rest, that hewho would secure the continuance of your support,must resort to other expedients, and rest his hopeson other ground, than that of an upright, diligent, andindependent discharge of the duties of his station ? Onthat basis I have built hitherto, and not in vain. Itrust you will not at length inculcate on me a differentlesson a lesson which, however, I frankly own to you,I can never learn. Grateful for all your liberal anddisinterested kindness, which, let the event be whatit may, will never be erased from my heart,I remain, Gentlemen,Your devoted Servant,W. Wilberforce,"278 LIFE OF Wilberforce. 1806.On the 24th he ' ' got to Mansfield. Dined, andhigh charged. Called My Lord, and like Swiss innfrauds. At Rotherham, Joseph Walker's, heard ofLord Milton's active canvass and success for Fawkes,and that they knew not what part to take, beingignorant whether I should offer. It has been said inseveral places I meant to retire."There were some other threatening appearances.A very unfair advantage," he heard from Mr.Cooksonon, "has been taken at the expense of Mr.Lascelles and yourself, of the exasperated state of theclothiers in every direction of our Riding, as well asof the general class of workmen, who all make commoncause with them, against any opposition to theircombination system. I do not say that Fawkes hasfomented this in any degree ; there was no need.But matters are strangely altered. The clothierswho were before the Committee are violent beyondall conception, and the whole body in the two hallswould not, we are perfectly convinced, produce tenvotes for Mr. Lascelles. In Saddleworth they haveall promised one vote for Mr. Fawkes to Sir GeorgeArmytage and the Walkers of Crow-nest : ' If Mr.Wilberforce joins Mr. La'scelles, they will giveplumper to Fawkes.' Here the rage against Mr.Lascelles is not less. A contemptuous expressionthat he is said to have uttered, is bandied about withgreat effect. Many are very sore against you, andall the Presbyterians are with Fawkes.ef Mr. Lascelles has the unqualified support of all thelanded gentry and nobility. The intent is certainlyto affright you into giving up. But I see no reason1806. ANGER OF THE CLOTHIERS. 279why you should suppose that your old friends willdesert you ; honour, consistency, honesty, forbid it."A second letter from Mr. Cooksonon, written two dayslater, but received together with the first, was moreencouraging. " I am extremely sorry for Mr. Las-celles;yet self-preservation, as far as is compatiblewith friendship to him, is a fair principle. Theclothiers are, to a man, exasperated against him. Buton every side you have their second vote. In canvassing,this plain mode is observed on our side ;Your vote for your two worthy representatives.'I never will give them both a vote ; I have promisedFawkes.' ( To whom will you give your other ? 'Mr. Wilberforce.' ' Very well.' The trustees ofthe Cloth Halls are searching every corner, and takedown the very galloway which each voter can bring,or rather which bring the voters. If they dared askplumper they would ; but we have avenues enow tosecure one vote for you in all the five districts, withthe exception of some Presbyterians and tenants.Mr. Lascelles has applied to every lord and thanein the county for one vote, and where Lord Fitsand his party are not paramount, he will carryone vote. He has even their interest for it while hekeeps apart from you.A convention of your friends on Monday morningseems essential."I was going to Halifax," he says, " but I now seeI was providentially summoned to York, to hear intelligence.At Doncaster about twelve. BaconFrank came to tell me the state of things there'sLIFE OF WILBERFORCE, 1806.abouts. Sir G. Cooke, Brighton, and all, with Las-celles,second votes. Heard of Fawkes's friends'active success. On Saturday, 25th. To York, and atLancaster met Lascelles, who going to York to consultWoolley. The first thing after I got tp York Iwrote to urge him to guard Markham, if really hisfriends, not to give Fawkes their second votes, whichhowever have done. Eat at Gray's, who most kind;Burgh came, and I wrote till one o'clock near seventyletters. Sunday. Minster and Richardson's. Sadlybroken in on, though a little time to self. Monday,27th. Friends meeting at York, and we consulted.Creyke, Bethel, Sir M. Sykes, there by breakfast;by dinner, R. C. Bradley, Sir R. Hildyard, RichardThompson, (T. Thompson said he was not of consequenceenough to come, but most active and kind,desiring to be put down for 500 ; but I was clear,subscription time not till after victory on nomination,)Cooksonon, Nay lor, A. Turner, &c. Dined afterconsultation, during which I wrote near seventy letters.Evening to Leeds, where by twelve o'clock.Chatted with W. Hey till about one."Leeds, Oct 28, 1806.My dear Stephen,One line in answer to your kind letter, to saythat I thank God all looks very promising, and Ireceive such marks of cordial affection as can onlyproceed from the overruling influence of Providence.I have little, if any, doubt of ultimate .CANVASS. 281cess, so far as one may speak of any such thing ascertain.Ever affectionately yours,W. Wilberforce.James Stephen Esq."Tuesday. Went with merchants to Hall. Mostkindly received. Then Whitehall, after speechifying.Drawn to the inn and home by the people. Friendsmet in the evening. Cloth Hall trustees called, andagreed to canvass for me. A most violent cry againstLascelles among the clothiers, but not for matter butmanner of committee business. I heard that if hehad come with me to the Hall, they would have letme pass, and then shoved down cloth in his way tostop him. One trustee told me that I treated himlike a gentleman. That never so insulted. That ifI had not got him a hearing, he should not have hadone. Wednesday. Off" after breakfast to Wakenelcl.Called at Naylor's in the country, and on to Barns -ley, where Edmund met me Mr. Clarke and abouttwenty others very friendly. On to Sheffield, wherea large party waiting for me Anderson, Hooker, andWalker, and fifty or sixty. Meant to go to Cutlers'Hall, and thence to Town Hall ; but populacewould drag us to Town Hall, where joined andthanked by cutlers for Iron-tax opposition speechifiedthem, and afterwards people, from Hall steps.Immense concourse. Sea of faces. I endeavouredto walk, but soon forced to take to carriage anddragged all round for half an hour (several run282 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1806.over, but not much hurt) ; and to Angel again,where dined. Some queer talk between Lascelles'sand Fawkes's friends for second votes. Lascelles atfirst for several days canvassed for self only, and declaredto Cooksonon and several others that he meantto be perfectly neutral. Several of his real friends givetheir second votes to Fawkes, but my prime friendsremain steadily friends to him, yet only so as not to endangerme ; and the manufacturers every where busyfor me. Lascelles's friends now talk of not taking anypreference over me, and show wish to join interests."He had often noticed the manly and independentconduct of Mr. Lascelles during the ten years thatthey had been associated in the representation ofYorkshire, and now saw with great regret the turnaffairs were taking. " It seems pretty clear already,"he tells Mrs. Wilberforce, "that I shall be firston the poll, if it comes to one, and, I am verysorry to say it, Mr. Fawkes the second. Some ofMr. Lascelles's friends have been in a degree thebringers-on of this business, from over-estimatingtheir strength, and thinking that they could turn meout without great difficulty; whereas almost all therespectable people who are not connected with greatmen, when it comes to the point of choosing betweenLascelles and me, give him up without hesitation. ' ?ffrTo return to the Diary. " Thursday, 58 up earlyand off before breakfast for Bradford. Fifty orsixty gentlemen on horseback met me a little wayfrom town, and conducted me to the inn. After*7 To Mrs. Wilberforce, Oct. 28. w Oct. 30.1806. GREAT POPULARITY. 283cold collation and breakfast, to Cloth Hall and speechified: afterwards wrote letters ; and they escortedme a mile or more on horseback on the road toLeeds. On Friday, off with William Hey to Wakefieldmet a mile off, and drawn by people into townto inn, where addressed the people in the marketplacevast crowd, and dragged in carriage againto Naylor's, and thence to Dawson's. Letters, andoff for Dewsbury, where dragged, and addressed again.Carriage broke and stopped. Called Mr. Poole's.Heckmondwyke, dragged, and speechified againdreadful roads. Reached Pye-nest, two miles beyondHalifax, (Edward's,) by a quarter past seven, eveningfound party of fifteen or sixteen just sitting downto dinner, having waited for me. I grazed hardagainst loaded waggon when dark, going opposite directions.One inch nearer, had infallibly been broken,and probably overset. Providential ; but astonishingnot an accident of any kind to speak of since leavingLyme ; and I have borne little inclemency of weatherand fatigue, much beyond what I thought possible.Saturday, after breakfast large party of gentlemencame on horseback from Halifax to Pye-nest to conveyme to town, though a very rainy morning. Thehorses drew me up the hill, and the people to ClothHall, about a mile. Much hurt on first entering toread account of Samuel Thornton's defeat. Somehissed, and kept crying, Fawkes for ever ; I doubtnot, from believing, not unreasonably, that somesecret junction between Lascelles and me. (I havesince found the hissers were the ringers, who had284 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1806.been, by a little foolish zeal of our friends, preventedringing for Fawkes.) I walked round the Hallimmense concourse, and afterwards addressed thepeople from the steps. Then Col. Sutton descantedon Lascelles's merits, and asked why not also there.Edwards explained. They would chair me to the inn.One man threw something which hit me on theforehead, happily not hard, and I kept watchingafterwards. Amazing squeeze, and a very awkwardoperation. Taken to the Talbot. Bad, especially goingthrough the gorges of the gates and narrow streets.Wrote letters till dinner, and Mr. W. Lawson camein about three, and told me report that Lascelleshad resigned. Dinner, and we sent to W. Walker'sfor the letter, which written by Fawkes's brother.About eight o'clock I received a letter, express fromLascelles, to announce that he resigned. DickeyWalker, Thomas Atkinson, Mr. Whitacre, EdwardW. Rawson, &c. &c. two rooms full ; about sixty-fiveto seventy in all. Home, Pye-nest, and bed at one.Sunday. 59 Old church, Halifax. Dr. Coulthurstpreached. Monday. Letters all morning, till withEdwards to Whitacre's, Wood Hall, near Huddersfield.Mr. Radcliffe and party, supped and bed.Tuesday. 60 After breakfast Huddersfield to inn, whereR. H. Beaumont, and many others. Went roundHall, and back to inn, where speechified the people."From this point he returned towards York, wherehe was met by tidings of similar successes. " Russelland Bourne exceedingly active and zealous ; and40 Nov. 2. * Nev. 4.1806. ELECTION. 285though few friends at York to form a personable committee,yet, by activity and good-will, almost everyvote secured thereabouts. Burgh and young Grayindefatigable." Ol " You have become as familiarwith a set of monarchs to your carriage, as Sesostrishimself," wrote Dr. Burgh, 62 " and accordingly forgetto tell us when they are harnessed and taken out oftheir stables for use ; but you ought to tell us, forhowever absurd, it is a circumstance that works upa popular paragraph with great effect. We sincerelyrejoice in your success, and have now to report stillfurther sources of satisfaction." He returned toYork on the 5th, the day before the nomination.Sir Robert Hildyard moved, and C. Buncombeseconded me. Then I spoke, and satisfactorily, butforgot much I meant to say. Then Fawkes, able, butrather too florid. All quiet." e3After the election he paid a few visits omittedduring his brief canvass, and before the beginningof December, was again settled in his house atBroomfield.TO CAPTAIN BEDFORD, R. N.Near London, Dec. 7, 1806.My dear Sir,I hope you would suggest to yourself as a pleafor my silence, when I ought to have answered one ortwo very friendly and most interesting letters, whichI received from you, that a contested election forYorkshire finds a candidate in pretty abundant employmentboth for tongue, legs, and pen.61 Diary. & Oct. 29. fe Diary, Nov. 6.286 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1806.I have great reason to be thankful for the kindnesswith which I was received. Indeed I can onlyascribe it to that gracious Providence which cancontrol at will the affections of men. I never tookpains, though feeling the deepest sense of my constituents'kindness, to cultivate an interest ; nay more,I have been very deficient in all personal attentions,owing to my health requiring me to live as quietlyand regularly as I can, during the recess from parliament.I never attend races or even assizes, whichmembers for Yorkshire before me used to do ; and yetI have been elected five times, and never with moreunanimity than the last. It really shows that thereis still some public spirit among us ; and that if amember of parliament will act an honest and independentpart, his constituents (such at least of themas are themselves independent) will not deserthim. Believe me always, with cordial esteem andregard,My dear Sir,Yours very sincerely,W. WILBERFORCE."As soon as he returned home he " renewed hisSlave Trade pamphlet," and continued hard at workupon it; quitting it only to engage in the necessarypreparations for the approaching campaign. " Ishould be glad to talk with you about our SlaveTrade proceedings," Lord Grenville had written tohim. 64 " My idea is to present to the House of54 Nov. 5.1806. PLANS FOR NEXT SESSION. 287Lords within the first days of meeting, a Bill simplyabolishing the Trade, and declaring the being engagedin it to be a misdemeanour punishable at law.Should the subject be at the same time entered uponin the House of Commons ? I rather think Yes,but I should wish you to decide for us." All nowproceeded favourably. Lord Holland confidentiallyinformed him, that " in the proposed treaty withNorth America, an international condemnation of theSlave Trade was already contemplated ; " 65 while fromPortugal, the only country able at this time to carryon the Trade, Mr. Brougham told him, that " themeasures lately adopted by England," had " producedan evident effect' and he adds his expectation, thatas we are generally accused of being rather toofond of colonies, and allowed to know something aboutships and trade, our example may open the eyes ofthe Portuguese." 66Although the hearty co-operation ot the ministrywas of the utmost moment to him, he would not buyit by a servile deference. " Lord Grenville," hetells Mr. Babington, after one of their interviews,thought there would be no opposition to Abbot.I am to second his being made Speaker. I offered andhe accepted, and I told Lord Grenville I had done so.rather fearing from what I had heard, they meant toput up Adam." 67 Except upon this occasion, (Dec,15th,) he continued intent upon his work till near thes*To W. Wilberforce Esq. Dec. Ib. Nov. 9.V To T. Babington Esq. Dec. 2.288 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1807.end of January. At length, on the 27th, he madea great effort to finish the book : which I did aboutsix o'clock, and sent it to London, and it is to be outupon the 31st, by dint of extreme exertion, and sentto the Lords." 68Near London, Jan. 30, 1807.My dear Lancaster,You are always so considerate as well as sokind, that I am persuaded you would suggest to yourselfthe real cause of my silence, that I was writingagainst time, endeavouring to bring out my piecebefore the debate should come on in the House ofLords. I shall barely succeed ; being promised thatit shall be distributed among the peers tomorrowevening. It has been run up in a hurry, and yet Ican't quite say of unseasoned timber, for the reasoningsand most of the facts are the same which havebeen in my mind for years. So much for myself.You are I think the first friend to whom I havewritten for several days ; I was going to say, and Ibelieve truly, for some weeks. Lord Henry Pettyacted it very powerfully last night, better certainlythan I ever knew him perform before. I would havesent you, but for my not thinking of it, a printedpaper which is circulated in London, in order to explainthe new financial measures. But the plan isLord Grenville's, as he told me himself this morning.I am tired of thanking you for game, though you arecs Diary.1807. BOOK AGAINST THE SLAVE TRADE. 289never tired of sending it. Farewell. Every blessingattend you ; above all, the best.Yours ever,W. Wilberforce."He had expected much from the critical appearanceof this book ; and he was not disappointed. " Itsbeneficial effect," writes Mr. Roscoe, 69 ee could notescape the observation of any one, who attended thediscussion in the Lords." Its effect was greatlystrengthened by its mild and generous temper towardsthe defenders of the system. " In admiringyour triumph' writes Mr. Hayley, 70 " I also admirethe lenity with which you adorn it. You treat youropponents with the mild magnanimity of a Britishadmiral, who when the thunder of his cannon hasreduced the ships of his enemies, exerts his fortitudeand skill to rescue them from utter perdition." Hiscontinual appeal to higher views of human conduct,must in those perilous days have struck some thoughtfulminds. " Is this a time," asks Dr. Burgh, aftermentioning how the Council of Armagh had assignedthe Slave Trade, which had existed between Englandand Ireland, as the judicial cause of the miserieswhich befell them both ; 71 " is this a time to neglectthe admonition ? Let us deride our ancestors as weplease, and deny the connexion of these two things,as cause and effect, with ever so much levity, we yetTo W. Wilberforce Esq. Feb. 16. ?o Ib. March 21.7i To W. Wilberforce Esq. Oct. 4, 1806. Vid. Giraldus Cambrensis inWanton's Anglia Sacra.VOL. III. O290 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1807.cannot deny their coincidence ; and it is not the partof wisdom, by continuing the evil on our part in theway of experiment, to challenge a repetition of thepenalty at the hand of infinite justice."This sentiment is brought out with great force inseveral parts of the Letter to the Freeholders of Yorkshire." It is often rather in the way of a gradual decline,"he says 2 " than of violent and sudden shocks,that national crimes are punished. I must franklytherefore confess to you that in the case of my country'sprosperity or decline, my hopes and fears are notthe sport of every passing rumour ; nor do they rise orfall materially, according to the successive report wemay receive of the defeats or victories of Buonaparte.But he who has looked with any care into the pageof history, will acknowledge that when nations areprepared for their fall, human instruments will not bewanting to effect it : and lest man, vain man, so aptto overrate the powers and achievements of humanagents, should ascribe the subjugation of the Romansto the consummate policy and powers of a JuliusCaesar, their slavery shall be completed by the un-warlikeAugustus, and shall remain entire under thehateful tyranny of Tiberius, and throughout all thevarieties of their successive masters. Thus it is, thatmost commonly by the operation of natural pauses,and in the way of natural consequences, Providencegoverns the world. But if we are not blind to thecourse of human events, as well as utterly deaf tothe plain instructions of revelation, we must believe72 Letter on the Abolition of the Slave Trade, p. 349.1807. NATIONAL PUNISHMENTS. 291that a continued course of wickedness, oppression,and cruelty, obstinately maintained in spite of thefullest knowledge and the loudest warnings, mustinfallibly bring down upon us the heaviest judgmentsof the Almighty. We may ascribe our fall to weakcouncils or unskilful generals ; to a factious and overburdenedpeople ; to storms which waste our fleets ;to diseases which thin our armies ; to mutiny amongour soldiers and sailors, which may even turn againstus our own force ; to the diminution of our revenues,and 'the excessive increase of our debt: men maycomplain on one side of a venal ministry, on theother of a factious opposition ; while amid mutualrecriminations, the nation is gradually verging to itsfate. Providence will easily find means for theaccomplishment of its own purposes."As soon as his book was out he was again engagedin action. The approaching debate called for everyexertion. " Grenville told me yesterday he couldnot count more than fifty six, yet had taken pains,written letters, &c. The Princes canvassing againstus, alas." 73 It seemed clear that he would have noeasy triumph. Two Cabinet ministers never withdrewtheir opposition, and the Dukes of Clarence and ofSussex declared openly against the Bill, speaking,as it was understood, the sentiments of all the reigningfamily. Yet the ice of prejudice was rapidlydissolving ; and when he visited Lord Grenville onthe morning of the debate, " he went over the list ofpeers, and was sanguine, counting on above seventy73 Diary, Jan. 31.o 2292 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1807.in all." 74 The same evening came the crisis of thestruggle. " House of Lords, Abolition Bill till fivein the morning, when carried, 72 and 28 proxies to28 and 6 proxies. Grenville's famous speech. Dukeof Gloucester highly respectable. Moira and Hollandvery good. Westmoreland out-blackguards theblackguard. Sidmouth beyond his own precedentin this cause. Lord Selkirk sensible and well-principled.Lord Rosslyn good and sensible. LordEldon humiliating. Clarence worse in point of executionthan usual. Brougham, Babington, and Ichatted for three quarters of an hour, and bed pastsix." 75The next day he again attended the " Houseof Lords. Bill in Committee. Opponents wantingus to strike out from the preamble, f justice and humanity.'Lord Lauderdale very good." 76 The fateof the Slave Trade now seemed indeed to be sealed.The Bishop of Durham, the Bishop of London,and many others, both last night and to-day, shookme by the hand aid congratulated me. Stephen andI went home with Lord Grenville about the Bill." 77He had given notice in the Commons, upon the 29thof January, that if it was delayed he should thereoriginate a corresponding measure. But it passedrapidly the Upper House ; and on the 10th of February" came from the Lords. A few words fromGascoigne, Hubert, &c. and Lord Howick." 78 Thenext day he told Lord Lancaster7* Diary, Feb. 3. ' 6 II). Feb. 4. ^ Ib. n Ibw Diary1807. TO LORD MUNCASTER. 293"London, Feb. 11,1807My dear Friend,At length we can announce to our friendswhen the Abolition Bill will be contested in theHouse of Commons. On Friday sen'night, Feb. 20th,(it was settled last night too late for the post,) counselwill be heard ; and if they should detain us till it betoo late to enter with decency into the debate, thebattle will be on the following Monday, 23rd instant.Our opponents are making their utmost exertions,and by what I hear, are proceeding with considerableart and plausibility, so that I am afraid of the stedfastnessof such of our friends as may not be rootedin principle. It gives me the most cordial satisfactionto know that you mean to attend ; the more so,because it has been rumoured you would not, 79 thoughI stoutly maintained that I was sure you would, unlessprevented by some insuperable obstacle.I have been so pressed for several days past, as tohave had no time to look at newspapers, but I amtold they gave no account of the debate in the Lords.This is much to be regretted, for Lord Grenville'sspeech especially was one of the most statesman-likeI ever heard, and it was universally acknowledged todeserve this character. It may seem, except to afriend to whom I may think aloud, indelicate in meto praise it, because the close of it contained one ofthe handsomest compliments to me that ever was delivered.It would have made your warm, affectionate79 Lady Lancaster had died Nov. 23, 1806.294 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1807.heart overflow with tenderness. Certainly LordGrenville has acted nobly, and he deserves the morepraise, because for many years I did not behave sowell to him, nor even think so well of him, as I* oughtto have done. Also his natural temper is not thatof warmth. The high tone of morals which he tookmay be essentially beneficial to the country, as it wastruly honourable to himself. The young Duke ofGloucester did himself very great credit, both fortalents and principles. Lord Moira's speech was alsoexcellent. Lord Selkirk (have you read his excellentpublication, Scotch Emigration ?) spoke most sensibly,but with so low a voice that he could scarce beheard. Our old friend Lord Eldon grieved me.Sidmouth fretted and hurt me. Westmoreland bespatteredme ; but really it was a double pleasure tobe praised by Lord Grenville and abused by LordWestmoreland. The Duke of Clarence was lessfluent, at least less able, than formerly. Our successaltogether greatly surpassed my expectations. I mustbreak off. Kind remembrances.Ever affectionately yours,W. WILBERFORCE."He had learned from frequent disappointments tolook at the promise of success with a calm and temperedjoy ; but more from excess of anxiety thanany exact apprehensions of danger. " I receive congratulationsfrom all, as if all done. Yet I cannotbe sure. May it please God to give us success.Lord Grenville's speech concluded with a most .ABOLITION BILL IN THE COMMONS. 295some compliment to me, and several peers now speakwith quite new civility. How striking to observePitt and Fox both dead before Abolition effected,and now Lord Grenville, without any particulardeference from Court, carries it so triumphantly ! Butlet us not be too sure." 80 Again the next day (t AnAbolition Committee. Looking at the list of theHouse of Commons. A terrific list of doubtful.Lord Grenville not confident on looking at Abolitionlist ; yet I think we shall carry it too. Several WestIndians with us. How popular Abolition is, just now !God can turn the hearts of men." 81 " What an awfulmoment is this ! " is his entry two days later. 82 " The.decision of the great question approaches. May itplease God, who has the hearts of all in His hands,to turn them as in the House of Lords ; and enableme to have a single eye, and a simple heart, desiringto please God, to do good to my fellow-creatures, andto testify my gratitude to my adorable Redeemer."During the following week, counsel was heardagainst the Bill on behalf of the West India plantersand merchants, (nearly all of whom opposed it,) andof the agents of Trinidad and Jamaica, who petitionedthe House severally against it. But oppositionnow brought out more clearly the strength of theAbolitionists. " Lord Howick in earnest and verypleasing. Our prospects brighten." 83 And on theday before the second reading " Never surely had Imore cause for gratitude than now, when carryingso Diary, Feb. It. s. jb. Feb. 13.Journal, Sunday, Feb. 15. 83 Diary, Feb. 20.296 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1807.the great object of my life, to which a gracious Providencedirected my thoughts twenty-six or twenty-sevenyears ago, and led my endeavours in 1787 or1788. O Lord, let me praise Thee with my wholeheart : for never surely was there any one so deeplyindebted as myself; which way soever I look I amcrowded with blessings. Oh may my gratitude be insome degree proportionate." 84It was in this spirit that he entered the Houseupon the 23rd of February. " Busy for LordHowick in the morning. Friends dined beforeHouse. Slave Trade debate. Lord Howick openedembarrassed and not 1 at ease, but argued ably.Astonishing eagerness of House ; six or eight startingup to speak at once, young noblemen, &c. andasserting high principles of rectitude. Lord Miltonvery well. Fawkes finish, but too much studied, andcut and dried. Solicitor-general excellent ; and atlength contrasted my feelings, returning to my privateroof, and receiving the congratulations of myfriends, and laying my head on my pillow, &c., withBuonaparte's, encircled with kings his relatives.It quite overcame me." 85 The House was little lessaffected by Sir Samuel Romilly's address. When heentreated the young members of parliament to letthis day's event be a lesson to them, how much therewards of virtue exceeded those of ambition ; andthen contrasted the feelings of the Emperor of theFrench in all his greatness with those of that honouredindividual, who would this day lay his head upone* Journal, Sunday, Feb. 22. 85 Diary, Feb. 23.1807. DEBATE IN THE COMMONS. 297his pillow and remember that the Slave Trade wasno more ; the whole House, surprised into a forgetfulnessof its ordinary habits, burst forth into acclamationsof applause. They had seen the unweariedassiduity with which, during twenty years, he hadvainly exhausted all the expedients of wisdom ; andwhen they saw him entering with a prosperous galethe port whither he had been so often driven, they welcomedhim with applause " such as was scarcely everbefore given," says Bishop Porteus, " to any man sittingin his place in either House of parliament." 86 Sofull was his heart of its own deep thoughts of thankfulnessthat he scarcely noticed these unusual honours." Is it true," Mr. Hey asked him, 87 " thatthe House gave you three cheers upon the conclusionof the Solicitor General's speech ? And if so, wasnot this an unprecedented effusion of approbation?"To the questions you ask me," he replies, M " I canonly say that I was myself so completely overpoweredby my feelings when he touched so beautifully on mydomestic reception, (which had been precisely realizeda few evenings before, on my return from theHouse of Lords,) that I was insensible to all thatwas passing around me."The debate proceeded with little show of opposition,except from one West Indian planter, who gave himan opportunity of replying in a speech " distinguishedfor splendour of eloquence and force of argument;" 8tf Hodgson's Life of Porteus, p. 221.7 To VV. Wilberforce Esq. Feb. 28. To W. Hey Esq. March 2.39 Ann. Rego3298 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1807.and then came the cheering issue. " At length divided,283 to 16. A good many came over to PalaceYard after House up, and congratulated me. JohnThornton and Heberr, Sharpe, Macaulay, Grant andRobert Grant, Robert Bird and William Smith, whoin the gallery." w It was a triumphant meeting.Well, Henry," Mr. Wilberforce asked playfullyof Mr. Thornton, "what shall we abolish next?"The lottery, I think," gravely replied his sternerfriend. " Let us make out the names of these sixteenmiscreants ; I have four of them," said WilliamSmith. Mr. Wilberforce, kneeling, as was his wont,upon one knee at the crowded table, looked up hastilyfrom the note which he was writing" Never mindthe miserable 16, let us think of our glorious 283."This was Reginald Heberr 's first introduction to Mr.Wilberforce. Heberr had entered the room with astrong suspicion of his principles, 91 but he left it sayingto his friend John Thornton, " How an hour'sconversation can dissolve the prejudice of years!"Perhaps his witnessing this night the Christian heroinhis triumph after the toil of years, may have beenone step towards his gaining afterwards the martyrcrown at Trichinopoly.The victory was thus gained, but its fruits wereto be gathered in with care. The first idea had beento prohibit the Slave Trade, but to enact no specificpenalties against its illicit practice. But "we agreed'*> Diary, Feb. 23.91 Heberr had resided in the same parish with Sir Richard Hill; and heLad imagined that his sentiments, which he deemed disaffected to thechurch, were shared by Mr. Wilberforce.1807. PROGRESS OF THE BILL. 299he writes to Mr. Stephen after a conference withLord Howick and Romilly, 92 " that the division oflast night has quite changed the state of things, andthat it is highly desirable now to put in the penalties.It was settled to send the clauses to Vivian, and todesire you and him to meet and talk them over together."The next day was appointed for a public fast.I was forced to write to the Duke of Gloucester,from whom, as also from Lord Grenville, most kindand pious letters of congratulation. Then St. Margaret'schurch. Returning, talked with Stephen onSlave Trade Abolition Bill. Then Lord Howicksent for me about clauses, and not back till late." 93Lord Grenville had written, " suggesting the expediencyof taking advantage of their present strength torender the Bill as perfect as possible," 94 and desiringto see the clauses prepared. " How astonishing,"says Mr. Wilberforce that evening, " is our success,and the eagerness and zeal of the House now,when the members have been so fastidious as scarceto hear a speech about it ! six or eight getting up atonce, and the young noblemen especially. Rose andCastlereagh went away without dividing. Roscoemild, quiet, unaffected, and sensible. Poor Lancastercame up. Brougham useful to Lord Howickabout Slave Trade. Every body taking me by thehand ; and several voting with us for the first time." 95For some weeks, however, he continued " veryFeb. 24. 93 Diary, Feb. 25.Lord Howick to W. Wilberforce Esq. Feb. 25.Diary, Feb. 25.300 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1807.much occupied, making other matters bend to theAbolition," 96 But on one important occasion of adifferent kind he took an active part, opposing theincreased grant which ministers designed to give tothe Roman Catholic College at Maynooth. Popery,he was convinced, was the true bane of Ireland, andhe deemed it nothing less than infatuation to takeany steps for its encouragement. This opinion hefearlessly asserted. " I am not," he said, w " one ofthose men who entertain the large and liberal viewson religious subjects, insisted on with so much energyby the honourable gentlemen on the other side ; I amnot so much like a certain ruler, of whom it has upona late occasion been so happily said, that he was anhonorary member of all religions." It was much tothe credit of the government that this open oppositionin no degree diminished their zeal for Abolition ; andfour days afterwards, when Lord Howick proposedto him that the declaration concerning justice andhumanity should be omitted from the preamble of theBill, he added, " In this, however, and in every thingelse connected with this question, I should wish to beguided as far as possible by your opinion. The wholemerit of this great victory is yours, and in contributingmy humble assistance, I should be most unwillingto setup my judgment in contradiction to yours, upona matter on which you have so much better a right,and are so much better qualified, to decide." 98 Tothis politic change he gave his consent. " Do notM Diary. to March 4.9s Lord Howick to W. Wilberforce Esq. March 8.1807. PROGRESS OF THE BILL. 301suppose' he says," " that I have given up the wordsJustice and Humanity. The preamble has not sufferedin its substantial force, nor have we descendedfrom our moral elevation." Upon the 16th came onthe " debate on third reading of Abolition Bill. Imade no use of all the information I had collected.Long debate. Windham sophistical. I answeredhim warmly, and I was told, well." 10 " 18th. Carriedup the Bill to the Lords ; " at which time it was supposedto be " clear that government was out, or asgood as out." 101 This "filled him with alarm aboutthe Abolition Bill, lest it should fall through betweenthe two ministries, neither being responsible,and the Bill perhaps being thrown out by the absenceof friends, and the attendance of sturdy Africans andWest Indians, the Princes taking the lead." To hisjoy he was assured by Mr. Perceval, whose attachmentto the cause was above all suspicion, " thatLords Eldon and Hawkesbury, as well as Castlereagh,declare that now they will lend themselves to anythingneedful for giving effect to the measure. Hesaid that he would write to the Duke of Cumberland,who the King's confidant, and takes on him to be theleading man." 102But the honour of passing such a measure was notto be reserved for the new administration. Upon the23rd of March he " travelled about all morning betweenSpeaker, Leigh, and Lord Grenville ; parliamentaryoffice, and Whitman's ; about error in the AbolitionTo Rev. Francis Wrangham, March 11. 10 Diary, March 16.io Ib. March 18. 109 lb. March 21.302 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1807.Bill." The debate upon the third reading in theLords came on, the same evening, and the Bill waspassed. " Lord Westmoreland's coarse opposition.Lord Grenville's congratulation." Two days afterwards,on the feast of the Annunciation, it " receivedthe royal assent . . the Lord Chancellor, Lord Auckland,and Lord Holland, being the royal commissioners".. and passed into a law. It was the lastact of the old ministry. " A meeting of the SlaveTrade Committee in Palace Yard, knew it not tillafterwards." 103And now his labours were indeed completed. Congratulationspoured in upon him from every quarter.To speak," wrote Sir James Mackintosh from theother Indies, 104 " of fame and glory to Mr. Wilberforce,would be to use a language far beneath him ; but hewill surely consider the effect of his triumph on thefruitfulness of his example. Who knows whether thegreater part of the benefit that he has conferred onthe world, (the greatest that any individual has hadthe means of conferring,) may not be the encouragingexample that the exertions of virtue may becrowned by such splendid success ? We are apt petulantlyto express our wonder that so much exertionshould be necessary to suppress such flagrant injustice.The more just reflection will be, that a shortperiod of the short life of one man is, well and wiselydirected, sufficient to remedy the miseries of millionsfor ages. Benevolence has hitherto been toooften disheartened by frequent failures; hundreds*o3 Diary, March 25. to* Bombay, July 27, 1807.1807. CONGRATULATIONS. 303and thousands will be animated by Mr. Wilberforce'sexample, by his success, and (let me use the word onlyin the moral sense of preserving his example) by a renownthat can only perish with the world, to attackall the forms of corruption and cruelty that scourgemankind. Oh what twenty years in the life ofone man those were, which abolished the SlaveTrade ! How precious is time ! How valuable anddignified is human life, which in general appears sobase and miserable ! How noble and sacred is humannature, made capable of achieving such truly greatexploits ! "No selfish exultation disturbed his heartfelt joy.God will bless this country," was his almost propheticdeclaration. " The first authentic account ofthe defeat of the French has come to-day." " Thecourse of events " hitherto had been " such as humanwisdom and human force " had " in vain endeavouredto control or resist. The counsels of the wise " hadbeen infatuated, the valour of the brave turned tocowardice. Though the storm " had " been raging formany years, yet instead of having ceased, it " appearedto be increasing in fury ; the clouds which " had " longbeen gathering around," had, " at length, almost overspreadthe whole face of the heavens with blackness.In this very moment of unexampled difficulty anddanger, those great political characters, to the counselsof the one or the other of whom the nation " hadbeen used to look in all public exigencies," hadboth been taken from us." 105 But from this time105 Letter to the Freeholders of Yorkshire.304 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1807.the tide was turned. In the very year which closedthis hateful traffic, that series of events began, whichended in the victories of Wellington and the fall ofBuonaparte.For himself, all selfish triumph was lost in unfeignedgratitude to God. " I have indeed inexpressiblereasons for thankfulness on the glorious result of thatstruggle which, with so many eminent fellow-labourers,I have so long maintained. I really cannot accountfor the fervour which happily has taken the place ofthat fastidious, well-bred lukewarmness which used todisplay itself on this subject, except by supposing it tobe produced by that almighty power which can influenceat will the judgment and affections of men." 106"How wonderfully the providence of God hasbeen manifested in the Abolition Bill ! I will hereafternote down all the particulars. The presentministry no sooner have got it through than they aregoing out. Again, had we not altered the preamble,by leaving out the words ( justice and humanity,'preserving the full force, there might have been aplea, since the news of an insurrection, for the Lordsreconsidering ; they might have found means of puttingit off for another year, and our hopes might have beendefeated. Again, Lord Grenville and Lord Howickwere earnest for two Bills ; one the general principle,and the other the penalties and regulations. I moststrongly against this, even when every one elsegave way ; which not usual with me. If divided, thesecond Bill would probably have been lost. Then theK* 3 To the Rev. Francis Wrangham.1807. HIS FEELINGS IN SUCCESS. 305moment the ministry began to venture the country'shappiness on a popish foundation, they find theirground cut from under themeOh what thanks do I owe the Giver of all good,for bringing me in His gracious providence to thisgreat cause, which at length, after almost nineteenyears' labour, is successful ! " 107w Journal, March 22.CHAPTER XXI.MARCH 1807 TO JUNE 1807,Change of ministers Wilberforce's embarrassment His judgmentof the plan of encouraging popery County patronageLetter to Creyke Parliament suddenly dissolved Hon.Henry Lascelles and Lord Milton candidates for YorkshireMagnitude of the contest Extraordinary canvass Immensesubscription for Wilberforce His speech at Hull Electionstratagems He is lowest on the poll, but soon heads hiscompetitors Zeal and liberality of his friends.MR. WILBERFORCE had been no unmoved spectatorof the recent change of ministry. Most anxiously forthe sake of his great cause, had he watched the severalsteps which led to their rupture with the King.March 19th. I hear that ministry gave up all,and the King was not satisfied without a solemnpledge that they would never propose again to himany extension of power to Roman Catholics. I seenot how they could consent to that ; though it hasbeen a very foolish thing to bring the second questionl forward, having resolved not to press thefirst." 2 " 20th. Called at Lord Grenville's, who explainedto me all the business, and showed me theThe Bill for admission of Romanists into the army, &c.Their admission into parliament.1807. NEW MINISTRY. 307King's and the Cabinet's letters. The ministry gaveup all ; but reserved the right both of stating theirown private opinion, and of proposing from time totime, such measures as they might deem necessaryfor the well-being of the country. Peace will probablybe made between France and Russia this winter,and then Buonaparte will bend the whole force of hisempire against us, and invade Ireland. Then, it is said,unless we can appease the Roman Catholics, whathope have we of stemming the torrent ? Still I feelno comfort in grounding our safety on such a bottom.On this the King thought they would always be teasinghim with some new proposition, and taking anyfavourable occasion for pressing their measure ; ergo,better decide at once. He asked Lord Grenvillewhether the opinion he had stated was the final decisionof the Cabinet, and on their saying, Yes ;f Then,' said the King, ' I must look about me.' 'With these expectations of an immediate rupture,he could not but feel alarm. Nor was his anxietyover with the passing of the Abolition Bill. He wasbound by his general principles to support the newministry. " It is in one grand particular the samequestion as in 1784. My then principles, to which Istill adhere, would govern my vote, even if I did notthink so favourably of their leader, Perceval, as I do." 4But this he could not do without the appearance of ingratitudetowards those who had assisted him so warmlyin the Abolition struggle. Even to appear ungratefulgave him no little pain ; but the law of duty was3 Diary, March 20. * Diary and letter.308 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1807.absolute, and he obeyed it strictly, finding only anew proof that "politics are a most unthankful business."" The debt of gratitude' he told his constituents,"which is due to the late ministry from myself, Ishall ever be ready to acknowledge, and by all legitimatemethods to repay ; but I have no right to recompensetheir services by my parliamentary support.That is not mine to give or withhold at pleasure." 5I am glad to find," was therefore his conclusion,that Bankes, Babington, and I, and Grant, andHenry Thornton too, all settle down into trying thenew ministry, and treating them as their measuresshall deserve." While moreover he acquitted thelate ministry of all blame in their treatment of theKing . . " the Yorkshire papers charge them with deceivinghim : nothing more false I verily believe," 6 . .he was from the first suspicious of the course upon whichthey were entering. " My situation and feelings," hetold Mr. Wrangham as early as the 24th of March,are very embarrassing from the conflicting considerationsand emotions which come into play. On theone hand, Lord Grenville, Howick, and Henry Pettyhave acted most zealously and honourably in thebusiness of Abolition, and the success of that greatmeasure, (for, blessed be God, we may now say it hassucceeded, though in form the Bill has two stagesmore to pass through,) is, under a gracious Providence,to be ascribed to their hearty efforts. Yet on theother hand I feel deeply impressed with a sense of theimportance of not embarking on a Roman Catholic5 Speech at York. Diary.1807. DANGER OF FAVOURING ROMANISTS. 309bottom, (if I may so term it,) the interest and wellbeingof our Protestant empire."On this ground he had boldly resisted the ministerialgrant for enlarging the college of Maynooth,even when the tardy success of twenty years oflabour seemed to be endangered by such honest opposition.The more he reflected upon this matter,the clearer became his judgment against the line ofpolicy upon which the old ministry were entering :twice in the following session he pressed upon theHouse, that it was not greater political privileges,but a moral and religious education, which the IrishRomanists required. No efforts were spared to gainhim over ; but there was a simplicity of view in allhis public conduct, which made such attempts absolutelypowerless. " You have the power to do moregood at present," Sir J. C. Hippisley wrote to him,than any other man in the kingdom. " And fromthe Rev. Sydney Smith he heard " I hope, now youhave done with Africa, you will do something forIreland. There is no man in England, who, fromactivity, understanding, character, and neutrality,could do it so effectually as Mr. Wilberforce. Andwhen this country conceded, a century ago, an establishmentto the Presbyterian church, it is horribleto see four millions of Christians of another persuasioninstructed by ragged priests, and praising theirCreator in wet ditches. I hope you will stir in thismatter, and then we will vote for the consulship forlife, and you shall be perpetual member for Yorkshire."310 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1807.To Mr. Hey he cautiously opened this increasingbias of his judgment.TO WILLIAM HEY ESQ.London, April 2, 1807.My dear Sir,I am uncomfortably circumstanced in respectto the late ministry. They (at least the leadingmembers of the Cabinet) supported the Abolition Billso strenuously, and were to such a degree the instrumentsof our success, that it gives me pain to appearto desert them, so soon as they have done me all thegood they could. I am glad that I happened sometimeago to state to Lord Grenville my difference ofopinion as to the right policy to be observed towardsthe Roman Catholics in Ireland ; that after all youcould grant them, so much would still remain behindas to prevent their being ever cordially attached to aProtestant government, of which a Protestant churchestablishment formed a part; that so long as thebulk of the Irish should be Roman Catholics, theProtestants and the friends of Great Britain would be,in truth, a garrison in an enemy's country; and thatour great endeavour ought to be to enlighten, andthereby, as I trust, to convert the Roman Catholics :much, I verily believe, might be done in that way intwenty or thirty years; and on the contrary, the collegeof Maynooth, . . a vote for the doubling the foundationof which passed a few weeks ago, so as to sendout four hundred Roman Catholic priests every fourf years; the most pernicious measure, in my judgment,1807. DANGER OF FAVOURING ROMANISTS. 311which has been assented to for many years, . . thecollege of Maynooth alone will, if not checked, increasebeyond measure the Roman Catholic body.I will frankly confess to you, that though at first Ifelt hurt by the sudden change, from the prospect ofparty contentions, with all their evils, &c. (and gratitudehad a share in producing the pain,) yet on coolreflection, I begin to become not only reconciled toit,but thankful for it, as the means of arresting avery dangerous progress on which we had entered.But all this I say in strict confidence ; for I shouldappear the most ungrateful man living, to those whodo not or cannot discriminate between personal feelingsand public duty."To another Yorkshire gentleman he writes a fewdays later.TO RALPH CREYKE ESQ. MARTON, Arlington.London, April 11.My dear Sir,I have been wishing for two or three days towrite to you, but have not had the opportunity ; andhaving been preyed on by a succession of visitors onbusiness, till I have been despoiled of my wholemorning, I must now be as short as possible ; but I amunwilling to delay writing altogether.I hear Mr. Duke Constable 7 is dangerously ill,and I am, of course, reminded of you. It has alwaysappeared to me that such situations as those which he7 Receiver-general for Yorkshire.312 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1807.has so long filled, ought to be allotted to those countrygentlemen, who, without having such large fortunes(taking their families into account) as to render anaccession of income of no importance to them, havedischarged those most useful, though perhaps leastrequited, of all public duties, the offices of justice ofpeace, commissioner of taxes, militia officers, &c.The superior ability with which you have filled allthese various situations, as well as your long-tried disinterestedness,activity, and patriotism, in short, yourcharacter, whether for public merits or private worth,(I really must forget for once that I am writing toyou, and speak as I should express myself of you,)point you out so clearly as the man who, in our part,has best entitled himself to national remuneration ;that I am persuaded if the old process were repeated,your name, like that of (I think) Themistocles, wouldbe given in second by all, and would be read byall, in each instance with one single exception,as first, when the question was, who best deservessuch a recompence of his services ? I have beenseveral times applied to by respectable friends, but tothe few to whom I could speak openly I have hintedyour superior claim. I now write to inquire whetheryou would like the situation, supposing it to fall vacant ?It has been usual, I believe, for the county memberto be complimented on these occasions ; though I findit is not always so, for Lord Uxbridge is just givingaway the Receiver-Generalship for Warwickshire. Ican only say, that if I should have any voice in thedisposal of the situation, when it becomes vacant,1807. COUNTY OFFICES. 313there is no man in whose favour I should with asmuch willingness exert myself as yourself; and whilethe consciousness of your well-founded claim wouldgreatly relieve me from the unpleasantness of askinga favour of administration, I should rejoice in thehappy coincidence between the dictates of public dutyand the impulse of private friendship. I scarcely needadd, but it is better always to be perfectly explicit,that I cannot promise to apply at all events for theoffice when vacant, because my so doing or not mustdepend on the way in which, at the time, I may happento be circumstanced with the government of theday. But you and I understand each other so well,as to have no difficulties on this head. The valueof the office I am told is about 1000 per annum, buton particulars we may confer after I receive yourgeneral decision.Now a word or two about your letter just received.I have written to Gambier on the subject, and shouldbe most happy to compensate the hard usage of whichI must say your nephew may justly complain ; but Iam under some difficulty myself, arising from my presentsituation as connected with the state of parties.I have been highly obliged by Lord Grenville's,Howick's, and H. Petty's conduct respecting theAbolition, and yet I am bound by a sense of duty tosupport the present government. But I know I shall,by so doing, incur much misrepresentation andcalumny ; and as I shall be closely watched, I am veryanxious that it should not be stated in the papers thatMr. W. had just been asking a favour of the presentVOL. III. P314 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1807.Admiralty; as I remember Lord Harrowby beingparagraphed for a much better thing. I own yournephew's claim is in my judgment a claim of equity ;and what, if you or I were inheritors of an estate undera will, we should feel ourselves bound, in a similarcase, to satisfy. Still, matters are stated generally ;and partly from indolence, partly from the opposite tocandour, (I won't use a harsh word,) men will notlisten to explanations. Here is all my difficulty ; butI hope to get over it, if not just now, yet by and by."' The late ministers are rushing on, in my judgment,to their own destruction. Their policy as a party,as well as higher considerations, should urge them tomoderation now, and to making their stand againstthe measures of the new government. But who, asMacbeth says in his feigned passion, can be at oncetemperate, &c.Farewell. With kind remembrances to your sonand daughters,Believe me ever most truly yours,W. WILBERFORCE.The late majority, which I was prevented fromjoining by a real, and for a time serious, indisposition,has removed my fears of a dissolution of parliament."Under this belief he was looking forward to a busysession. " To Canning's, Secretary of State's office ;about German merchants (Hanseatic ships release)confiscated property. Important subjects are nowWhitbread's Poor Bill speech printed political state1807. PARLIAMENT DISSOLVED. 315of things, and my awkward situation Apprentice Bill,Smithfield Market Bill Woollen ManufactureBill Londonderry Committee, of which chairman.I shall have to take part in approaching debates." 8In the midst of these anticipations he was " astonishedby a letter from Perceval announcing a dissolution."This was most unwelcome intelligence. The angryfeelings which had cost Mr. Lascelles his election inthe last year were by no means allayed ; and partyspirit had been stirred to an unwonted pitch by latepublic events. He learned at once that his old colleaguewould again take the field ; that Mr. Fawkes,though a man of large fortune, shrunk from the expensesof a contest ; and that Lord Milton came forwardin his place. No one could foresee the result ofsuch a collision. In their calmer hours indeed allmoderate men might think their own victory dearlypurchased by the loss of their independent representative; but such feelings would be forgotten in thedelirium of the conflict : while it was more than probablethat the leaders in the strife would view with nogreat dissatisfaction, a result which would share againbetween their families the representation of thecounty. Whatever was its issue, the contest must beruinous to any man of ordinary fortune. f( LordHarewood" was " ready to spend in it his wholeBarbadoes property," 9 and Wentworth House wasnot less threatening in its preparations. Mr. Wilberforce'sfortune would stand no such demands ;ff and the plan of a subscription," said a leading polit'Diary. 9 Ib,p 2316 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1807.titian in an adjoining county, " may answer. very wellin a borough, but it is hopeless where things must beconducted upon such a scale as in the county ofYork." Many of his friends dissuaded him fromentering on the contest ; but the moral importancewhich he attached to it, determined him to venturethe attempt, and after (f sending on the 25th ofApril, expresses to Leeds and other places," andhearing on the 27th " the King's speech read by theSpeaker round the table to standers-by . . recommendationof union caught at by opposition " 10 . . heset off himself for York.Nothing passes away more rapidly than the interestof an ordinary election contest. But that whichengaged all Yorkshire in 1807, deserves more lastingremembrance. It was even then unique ; and since,from the changes of 1833, it can never be repeated, amore minute account of its events may possess muchinterest for the future student of English manners inthe beginning of the nineteenth century. He leftLondon upon the 28th, after " a narrow escape frombreaking my leg " (an accident which would have beenfatal to his hopes) "just when setting out Deo gratiahow are we always in His hands ! " n Upon the 29thhe entered Yorkshire, and was immediately engagedin the full bustle of the contest. " Halted afternoonat Doncaster. Heard for certain Lord Milton standing.But I doing well at Doncaster. Travelled on toYork, where about twelve. Sent for Burgh, andtalked to him till almost one ; all my friends going to10 Diary. " Ib.1807. CONTEST FOR YORKSHIRE. 317Cambridge for Gibbs and Palmerston. I in a scrapefrom having recommended Lord Henry Petty. Iwrote to Perceval fully, because he canvassing forme."A meeting of his friends had been held on thepreceding day at York ; but whilst " Mr. Lascellesand Lord Milton had already engaged canvassingagents, houses of entertainment, and every speciesof conveyance in every considerable town," 12 six importantdays elapsed before any number of his friendscould be brought together. At length, upon the 4thof May, his principal supporters met at York, andagreed to establish local committees throughout everydistrict, in the hope that voluntary zeal would supplythe place of regular canvassing agents. Meanwhilehe himself set out upon a hasty canvass of the WestRiding, and traversed all its more populous parts withhis usual rapidity and success. " Time was," as hesaid the year before, " when I did not dislike suchscenes ;" 13 but he had now reached a calmer age, andsickened at a contest." u In the tumult of popularapplause which waited on his canvass, " I look forward,"he tells Mr. Hey, " with pleasure to the prospectof a quiet Sunday with you, and rejoice that halfthe week is gone by ; yet I am daily, hourly experiencingthe never-failing mercies of Heaven." " I haveoften told you," he writes from Mr. Hey's to Mrs.12 Manuscript Account of the Election of 1807, by David Russel Esq." After all," said the Duke of Norfolk, who had been an activepartisan of Lord Milton's, " what greater enjoyment can there be inlife, than to stand a contested election for Yorkshire, and to win it byone ? "14 To Lord Lancaster.318 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1807.Wilberforce, " that I never enjoy this blessed day somuch as during a time of peculiar bustle and turmoil.It seems as if God graciously vouchsafed a presentreward for our giving up to Him a liberal measure ofthat time and attention, which worldly men woulddeem necessary to the success of their worldlyplans."The nomination came on at York upon the 13th,and nearly every hand was held up in his favour.Morris's excellent speech. Lord Milton prettywell. I but middling only in reply, so seemed spirited."So far all was promising ; but how the expensesof the approaching contest could be safely met, was amost serious question. The nomination was followedby a meeting of his friends, at which this subjectwas brought forward. He at once " declared withmanly firmness, that he never would expose himselfto the imputation of endeavouring to make a seat inthe House of Commons subservient to the repair ofa dilapidated fortune." 13 He claimed therefore thepromises of support which had been liberally mad,and called upon the county to assert its independence.Those who were present on that day, can still rememberthe effect produced by his appeal ; and it wasreplied to nobly. " It is impossible," said a gentleman,who rose as soon as he sat down, " that we candesert Mr. Wilberforce, and therefore put down myname for 500. " This example spread ; about18,000 was immediately subscribed; and it was resolvedthat his cause was a county object, and that15 Annual Register.1807. SPEECH AT HULL. 319he should not even be permitted to put down his nameto the subscriptions opened to support his election. 16The next day he set off to spend the few dayswhich preceded the election in a canvass of the EastRiding. On reaching Hull he was met by a greatbody of freeholders at the hall at Inculcates ; " andwhen standing up to address them, it seemed," saysan eyewitness, 17 " as if he was struck by the scenebefore him the fields and gardens where he hadplayed as a boy, now converted into wharfs or occupiedby buildings ; and pouring forth the thoughtswith which the change impressed him the gradualalteration of external objects, and the still greateralteration which had taken place in themselves headdressed the people with the most thrilling effect."Gentlemen, To a mind not utterly devoid offeeling, it must ever be peculiarly interesting to visit,after a long absence, the residence of childhood andof early youth. This is now my situation ; and everyobject, and many of the faces I behold around me,are such as were familiar to me in my earliest years ;while I am reminded of many friends and connexions,some of them near and dear to me, who are now nomore. The emotions thus excited really distract mythoughts ; but I can truly assure you, that whateverdeficiency may be thereby occasioned in the expressionof my sentiments, will be more than made up by16 On the motion of Spencer Stanhope Esq. seconded by Charles BuncombeEsq. now Lord Petersham, chairman of his committee. MS. Accountof the election.l ? Rev. Mr. Dykes.320 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1807.those feelings of gratitude and attachment which atthis moment powerfully affect my heart. I am naturallyled to retrace the journey of life, until I reachthe period when I first became the object of yourpublic notice ; for it was your kindness, gentlemen,which first called me into public life, and in myearliest manhood placed me in the honourable situationof your representative. While I filled thatoffice I endeavoured to discharge its duties with industryand fidelity, and when I ceased to be yourimmediate representative, I did not cease to feel aninterest in your welfare. With many of you, indeed,I continued still to be connected in the same relation.Of the manner in which I discharged my parliamentaryduty, and of the principles by which it wasregulated, it is not for me to speak. I may be saidto have lived in public ; my conduct has been opento you all, and I have the satisfaction of knowingthat in general it has been honoured with your approbation.I was no party man measures, not men,were the object of my concern. I formed early afriendly connexion with that great minister who solong presided over the counsels of this country, andour friendship was dissolved only by his death. Incommon with most of you I, in general, approved hismeasures, and had the satisfaction of finding thedictates of public duty coincide with the impulse ofprivate friendship. But I never addicted myself to himso closely as not to consider every question and everymeasure with impartiality and freedom ; and I supportedor opposed him as my judgment and conscience1807. SPEECH AT HULL. 321prescribed. Suffer me, gentlemen, to condole withyou for a moment, on the loss of that great man, andto pay a just tribute to his memory. You know, incommon with the world, the force of his talents, andthe splendour of his eloquence ; but they who werethe companions of his private hours can alone sufficientlytestify the warmth and incessant activity ofhis patriotism, and how, negligent only of his ownpersonal interest, he was unceasingly anxious for thesafety and prosperity of his country. Great howeveras was the respect and attachment I entertained forhim, I yet sometimes opposed his measures, at nosmall cost of private feeling ; while he on his part wasliberal enough to give me credit for my motives, andto continue to receive me with unabated confidenceand regard. It gratifies me to believe that in themain you concurred with me in the general approbationof his measures ; and while it must be confessedthat he lived in times of peculiar difficulty anddanger, we have had the satisfaction during his administrationof finding our country gradually advancingin internal prosperity. [Great emotion andapplause.]"" I congratulate you on the improvement which wewitness, and 011 the increased population and affluenceI have observed in every part of our great county.In the West Riding, which I have just visited, Ihave been beholding the effects of manufacturing industry; here I see those of commercial enterprise ;and these very fields, in which I so often walked andplayed in my infancy, are now filled with the habitat3322 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1807.tions of men. But it gratifies me both there andhere to find that you are not so absorbed in the pursuitof your particular schemes, or the promotion ofyour personal interests, as not to be attentive also tothe public welfare, and to be ready to come forth atyour country's call, whatever be the service she mayrequire of you ; whether it be to defend her with yourarms, or to serve her no less effectually in administeringher justice. Here, gentlemen, we see the happyeffects of our free constitution, which, under the blessingof Providence, has been the instrument of dispensinggreater civil happiness for a longer period,and to a greater body of men, than any system ofpolitical government in any other age or quarter ofthe world. I am glad, gentlemen, to know that I amaddressing those who, like myself, revere this excellentconstitution, and assign its just nature to each ofits respective parts ; who know that all the threebranches of it are equally necessary, and who understandthat liberty and loyalty can co-exist in harmoniousand happy combination. Gentlemen, so longas you thus understand the constitution under whichyou live, and know its nature, so long you will be safeand happy ; and notwithstanding the varieties of politicalopinion which will ever exist in a free country,you will present a firm and united front against everyforeign enemy. Great countries are perhaps neverconquered solely from without, and while this spiritof patriotism and its effects continue to flourish, youmay, with the favour of Providence, bid defiance tothe power of the greatest of our adversaries. On1807. SUNDAY DURING THE ELECTION. 323these prospects let me congratulate you, and let meassure you that if, through your kindness, and that ofthe other freeholders of Yorkshire, I should oncemore receive the honourable trust which has nowbeen five times reposed in me, it will be my care towatch over your interests and promote your welfare."The next day was Sunday, and he was able to " blessGod that his mind was pretty free from politics." " Iwalked with him," says the Rev. Mr. Dykes, " for aconsiderable time. We called upon various friends, andI was much struck to see how totally he had dismissedfrom his mind all thoughts of the approaching contest.His conversation related entirely to subjectswhich suited the day. He was speaking particularlyabout the words ( being made meet for the inheritanceof the saints in light,' and seemed free from anysort of care about what was coming."He returned to York on the day of election, (Wednesday,May 20th,) and here things assumed an unexpectedaspect. The show of hands was against him ;and on that day he was second, the next lowest, onthe poll. This was in part owing to the want of conveyances,and to the impossibility of giving to volunteersupporters the order and arrangement of professionalagents. " There was among Lord Milton'sfriends, and in a degree among Mr. Lascelles's, aunity, discipline, and disposition to obey orders andact from a common impulse which belong to a formedparty, and are found in proportion to the degree ofparty spirit which prevails. We had nothing of this ;but the exact opposite a mixture in our cabinet of324 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1807.a number of heterogeneous particles, and no commonimpulse either felt or obeyed." 18 Appearances wereso unfavourable, that when his friends met at dinnerafter the conclusion of the poll " I can see, gentlemen,clearly enough how this will turn out," said thebarrister who had come from London as his professionaladviser ; " Mr. Wilberforce has obviouslyno chance, and the sooner he resigns the better."But if the combinations of regular discipline weremore prompt in their effect, the vast muster of independentfreeholders on the third day proved them to beno match for the voluntary zeal to which he trusted.No carriages are to be procured," says a letter fromHull, " but boats are proceeding up the river heavilyladen with voters : farmers lend their waggons ; evendonkeys have the honour of carrying voters for Wilberforce,and hundreds are proceeding on foot. Thisis just as it should be. No money can convey all thevoters ; but if their feelings are roused, his election issecure."Now were seen the effects of his never having closedhis doors against the legitimate claims of his constituents." At that time," writes one of them,* 9 " applicationsto county members on public topics by privateindividuals were rarely made, and more rarely attendedto. Mr. Wilberforce's conduct in such cases istherefore the more worthy to be held in remembrance.In 1804, 1 had stated to him the hardship which manyof the volunteers suffered from the militia ballot,and through his interest an exemption for voluntary.& Mr. Little of Warrington.1807. ZEAL OF THE FREEHOLDERS. 325tears who were rated not above 20 yearly taxation,had been introduced into the Bill then before theHouse of Commons. I now had an opportunity ofshowing my gratitude by canvassing the country withhis letter in one hand, and an address to the volunteersin the other."A vast number of freeholders from the North Riding,headed by Sir Robert Hildyard, entered York onthe morning of the third day, and would probablyhave divided their support between Wilberforce andLascelles, had not the danger of their long-tried representativeinduced them to give him single votes.Another large body, chiefly of the middle class, fromWesley Dale, was met on their road by one of hiscommittee " For what parties, gentlemen, do youcome ?" " Wilberforce, to a man," was their leader'sreply. " During the early stage of the poll, such partiesarrived at York at every given hour of time, both byday and by night, by land and by water ; such wasthe loyalty and independence of this class of the Yorkshirefreeholders, and such was their determinationto support their old and favourite member, who hadfaithfully served them and their country during threeand twenty years." 20My having been left behind on the poll," hewrites to Mrs. Wilberforce on the evening of Friday,seemed to rouse the zeal of my friends, (I shouldrather say, of my fervent adherents,) they exertedthemselves, and have mended my condition. Youwould be gratified to see the affection which is borne20 MS. Account, &c. p. 62.326 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1807.me by many to whom I am scarcely or not at allknown. Even those who do not vote for me seem togive me their esteem. I am thankful for the weather'(the preceding days had been rainy and boisterous,)and indeed I am thankful for a quiet mind, whichis placed above the storm."The total numbers during the two remaining daysof this week were,W. L. M.2847 2698 3032 Friday, May 22nd. Third day.4269 3894 4158 Saturday, May 23rd. Fourth day.Raising him to his usual situation at the head of thepoll. He now wrote as follows to Mrs. Wilberforce.York, Sunday night, May 24.I am robbed of the time I meant to spend inwriting to you, at least of a great part of it ; but you willbe glad to hear that I have spent on the whole a verypleasant Sunday, though this evening is of necessitypassed in my committee room. I have been twice atthe Minster, where the sublimity of the whole sceneonce nearly overcame me. It is the largest and finestGothic building probably in the world. The city isfull of freeholders, who came in such numbers as tocover the whole, area of the place (a very large one)where the service is performed, and every seat andpew were filled. I was exactly reminded of the greatJewish Passover in the Temple, in the reign of Josiah.It is gratifying to say that there was the utmost decency,and not the smallest noise or indecorum ; no1807. TO MRS. WILBERFORCE. 327cockades or distinctive marks. Indeed, I must say,the town is wonderfully quiet, considering it is anelection time. I am now writing in a front room,and I sat in one for two hours last night, and therewas not the smallest noise or disturbance ; no more Ideclare than in any common town at ordinary times.How beautiful Broomfield must be at this moment! Even here the lilacs and hawthorn are inbloom in warm situations. I imagine myself roamingthrough the shrubbery with you and the little ones ;and indeed I have joined you in spirit several timesto-day, and have hoped we were applying together atthe throne of grace. How merciful and gracious Godis to me ! Surely the universal kindness which I experience,is to be regarded as a singular instance ofthe goodness of the Almighty. Indeed no one hasso much cause to adopt the declaration, that goodnessand mercy have followed me all my days. I blessGod my mind is calm and serene, and I can leave theevent to Him without anxiety, desiring that in whateverstate I may be placed, I may adorn the doctrineof God my Saviour, and do honour to my Christianprofession. But all is uncertain, at least to anyhuman eye. I must say Good night. May Godbless you. Kiss the babes, and give friendly remembrancesto all family and other friends. If it hasbeen as hot to-day with you as with us, (the windeast, thermometer 77, in the shade, about twelve,)you must have suffered greatly. Every blessingattend you and ours in time and eternity.Yours ever most affectionately,W. WILBERFORCE."328 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1807.Upon the following day the three parties polledrespectively, W. 1641; L. 1402; M. 1037; thusincreasing the interval between the first and thetwo other candidates. " Wilberforce," writes Mr.Thornton,, (who with Mr. Stephen and the twoGrants came down to me when they heard I was insome danger," 21 ) " continues to be the winning horse.His popularity is owing chiefly to his being thoughtan honest man, but partly also to the admiration ofhis talents." 22 His opponents were not disposed towitness his success without a struggle. Every artwhich election tactics are supposed to justify, wasfreely used. " Owing to the assurances I had receivedof the friendly wishes of Lord Fitzwilliam, the Dukeof Norfolk, and others, and the promised support of allthe clothiers, and of nine-tenths or more of LordMilton's supporters, I had given a pledge-to remainneutral. This was quite wrong I should have madea conditional engagement, and then the Historianswould not have dared to act as they did. All possibletricks were played to deprive me of votes. First,I was safe. When the effect of this, which made melose the votes both of Satellites and Historians, wasexpended ; then my committee would not pay thetravelling expenses of any of Milton's split votes-thiswas defeated ; though positive falsehoods told, andprinted in hand-bills, to colour and sustain it. Andat last the cry of my having joined Lascelles wasraised. This conduct of Lord Milton's friends shameful; since, by seeing the poll books, they must haveknown that I was not connected with him. Then,21 Diary. ** To Mrs. Henry Thornton.1807. THE CLOTHIERS. 329f No coalition, and Milton a plumper ' was mounted ;and he would bring up none else. Then the mob-directing'system twenty bruisers sent for, Forby theyoung ruffian, Gully, and others. With all this wascombined great regularity and method in arrangement,numerous agents, and constant returns, andcanvassing, and even economical expenditure, so faras compatible with immense establishment." 23The charge of a coalition with Mr. Lascelles was thatwhich most injured him, for he had none of the assistancewhich such a junction would have secured,whilst it cost him the votes of all the warm partisansof Lord Milton, and of the whole body of the clothiers.Their personal quarrel with Mr. Lascelles, publiclyavowed in the Cloth Hall at Leeds, spread throughthe other trades, and went far to change tie politicalrelations of a vast body of freeholders. Saddleworth,which twelve years before had poured forth its " Billymen" in support of Mr, Pitt, now voted two to onein favour of Lord Milton. 24 This charge he could23 Diary and Con. Mem.2< In the clothier districts generally, different classes voted as follows :W. M. L. W. M. L.Blacksmith 62 67 65 Grocer 30 26 27Bricklayer 86 116 108 Gentleman 340 23(5 394Butcher 99 118 111 Husbandman 159 172 187Collier 12 27 13 Maltster 57 66 66Clerk 130 33 155 Merchant 131 43 149Clothier 331 1081 273 Schoolmaster 28 24 34Cloth dresser 43 61 39. Shoemaker 93 129 97Cotton spinner 75 79 70 Stuffinaker 15 20 12Dissenting Minister J 23 Tanner 39 35 39Dyer 37 38 39 Weaver 111 149 113Druggist 354 Woolcomber S3 110 70Farmer 1017 812 1192 Yeoman 312 403 3a3330 LIFE OF Wilberforce. 1807.have refuted if he had been heard,, but the main objectof the " mob-directing" gang was to make this impossible.After the first few days it was only by greatskill in managing a most unruly audience, that hecould ever gain a hearing. " While Wilberforce wasspeaking the other day," writes Mr. Thornton,the mob of Milton interrupted him : he wasattempting to explain a point which had been misrepresented; he endeavoured to be heard againand again > but the cry against him always revived.Print, print cried a friend of Wilberforce in thecrowd, ( print what you have to say in a hand-bill,and let them read it, since they will not hear you.'They read indeed cried Wilberforce ; ' what, do yousuppose that men who make such a noise as thosefellows can read?' holding up both his hands ; ' no menthat make such noises as those can read, I'll promiseyou. They must hear me now, or they'll knownothing about the matter.' Immediately there was afine Yorkshire grin over gone thousand friendlyfaces."The poll was kept open for fifteen days, and untilthe twelfth he was daily in the full turmoil of thisnoisy scene. " Breakfasted daily at the tavern coldExclusive of the two chief clothier districts, and of the wapontake ofTicklish, (from Sheffield to Doncaster,) in which Lord Milton had a vastpreponderance, the votes of the remaining nine apostates were asfollows :W. M. L.9410 6320 8856The standard of the clothiers was an old leather apron, the sign oftheir craft; and if one of their body appeared on the other side, theywould shake it in his face, " What the vote against t' apron ! "1807. FINAL MAJORITY. 331meat at two addressed the people at half-past fiveor six at half-past six dined, forty or fifty, and sat withthem. Latterly the people would not hear me, andshameful treatment. On Sundays allowed to be veryquiet, to dine alone > arid go twice to church." ** His temperof mind in the midst of this confusion was such asis rarely preserved in the rude shock of such a contest.It was necessary* says Mr. Russel, one of his mostactive and friendly agents, " that I should have someprivate communication with him every day. I usuallyput myself in his way therefore when he came infrom the hustings to dress for dinner. On each dayas he entered I perceived that he was repeating tohimself what seemed the same words : at length I wasable to catch them, and they proved to be that stanzaof Cowper'sThe calm retreat, the silent shade,With prayer and praise agree,And seem by Thy sweet bounty madeFor those that follow Thee.' "Upon the twelfth day of the contest his active labourswere suspended by a violent attack of epidemicdisorder, which confined him to his room during thefour days it still lasted. But though to all the otherrumours, that of his being dead was added, his victorywas now secure. From the third day he continued tohead the poll, and the final numbers as declared bythe High Sheriff were, for Wilberforce, 11,806,Milton, 11,177, Lascelles, 10,989.Diary.332 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1807.TO MRS. HANNAH MORE.York, June 8, 1807.My dear Friend,I almost feel criminal for having sent you notidings during our long and laborious contest. Forthe last four days I kept my room ; having at lastonly fallen ill under a complaint which had pulledclown many strong men around me many days before.Had I not been defrauded of promised votes, I shouldhave had 20,000. However it is unspeakable causefor thankfulness to come out of the battle ruinedneither in health, character, or fortune. The post isgoing off.Ever affectionately, with kind remembrances,WILLIAM WILBERFORCE."It is a grand contest," wrote Mr. Thornton fromYork, " and fills one with great ideas." It was agreat victory, and strikingly refutes the favouriteargument of those who maintain stoutly the necessityof party connexion for political efficiency. " No man,"they allege, 26 " in this country ever obtained anygreat personal power and influence in society, merelyby originating in parliament measures of internalregulation, or conducting with judgment and successimprovements however extensive, that do not affectthe interests of one or other of the two great partiesin the state. Mr. Wilberforce may perhaps be mentionedas an exception ; and certainly the greatness,26 Vid, Edinburgh Review, for Sept. 1818.1807. ELECTION. 333the long endurance, and the difficulty of the struggle,which he at last conducted to so glorious a termination,have given him a fame and popularity whichmay be compared in some respects with that of aparty leader. But even Mr. Wilberforce would be atonce demolished in a contest with the leaders ofparty."Yet in this great contest the independent candidatetriumphantly succeeded. <c It gives me pleasure asan Englishman' writes Lord St. Helen's, 27 " that inacounty which from its size and population has beenjustly styled an epitome of the kingdom at large,the claims of sheer personal worth and services haveobtained so decided a preference over those of titleand wealth, even when accompanied by no ordinaryrecommendations of a higher and better sort." Everynerve had been strained by the two great partieswhich were opposed to him. " Nothing since thedays of the revolution," says the York Herald, " hasever presented to the world such a scene as this greatcounty for fifteen days and nights. Repose or resthave been unknown in it, except it was seen in amessenger asleep upon his post-horse, or in his carriage.Every day the roads in every direction to andfrom every remote corner of the county have beencovered with vehicles loaded with voters ; and barouches,curricles, gigs, flying waggons, and militarycars with eight horses, crowded sometimes withforty voters, have been scouring the country, leavingnot the slightest chance for the quiet traveller to urgew Lord St. Helen's to W. Wilberforce Esq334 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1807.his humble journey, or find a chair at an inn to sitdown upon."The mode in which the expenses of his contestwere defrayed was not less remarkable than the factof his success. When it had lasted little more thanaweek, 64,455 had been subscribed; and muchof it from places with which he had neither politicalnor personal connexion. Contributions poured inunasked from London, Edinburgh, Birmingham, Colchester,Leicester, and many other towns. " Myexertions," wrote the Rev. Thomas Robinson ofLeicester, " for you in the last election proceeded notfrom the partiality of friendship, but from a strongsense of duty. With contested elections in this placeI never interfere ; but yours was an excepted case ;and from your parliamentary conduct you had anirresistible claim for support, not only upon the countyof York, but upon the kingdom at large." " Hereare the first characters of whom the metropolis of theworld can boast," said one of the West Riding addresses,tf stepping forward not merely with their goodwishes, but with their purses and their hearts opened.For a long series of years they have witnessed theparliamentary career of our invaluable friend hismanly eloquence, his astonishing activity, his undauntedperseverance, his unexampled disinterestednessand shall Yorkshiremen maintain a cold indifferencetowards him ?" The answer of his own county tothis appeal was one gratifying feature in his triumph.So great were the numbers who insisted upon comingat their own charges, that whilst the joint expenses1807. SUBSCRIPTION. 335of his two opponents amounted to 200,000, thewhole charge of bringing to the poll his great majoritywas but 28,600. Forty-six per cent, wasreturned upon the Yorkshire subscriptions. Thoseof the south consisted of two sums of 10,500; oneprovisional, which was returned entire ; the other absolute,of which one-half only was employed. " Never,"says Mr. Wilberforce, 28 " shall I forget the spontaneouszeal with which numbers of all ranks cameforward, subjecting themselves often to great troubleand fatigue, coming from considerable distances attheir own expense, with other gratifying marks ofattachment and esteem."Some of these instances are worth recording. Afreeholder presented himself to vote, whose appearanceseemed to imply that the cost of his journeymust be an inconvenient burden to him. The committeetherefore proposed to him that they shoulddefray his expenses. This he instantly declined.When however it appeared that he was a clergymanof very small means, who had travelled (and often onfoot) from the farthest corner of the county, they renewedthe same suggestion ; and named a certain sum,which they pressed him to accept. " Well, gentlemen,"he said at last, " I will accept your offer, andI request you to add that sum in my name to thesubscription for Mr. Wilberforce's expenses."How did you come up ? " they asked an honest countrymanfrom the neighbourhood of Rotherham, whohad given Mr. Wilberforce a plumper, and denied28 Mr. Wilberforce's Letter to the Freeholders.336 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1807.%having spent any thing on his journey. " Sure enowI cam all'd-way hint Lord Milton's carriage."Perhaps it may be thought' says Mr. Wilberforcein the Letter which after the election he addressed tothe freeholders, " that we too much neglected pride,and pomp, and circumstance ; the procession, and themusic, and the streamers, and all the other purchaseddecorations which catch the vulgar eye. That ourmore sober system was recommended to me byeconomical motives, I will not deny. This economymay perhaps by some be thought to be carried too far ;yet when it is recollected that it was not my money,but that of my kind and public-spirited supporters,which was expended, no liberal mind will wonder atbehaving earnestly wished to be parsimonious. Butshall I confess for my friends as well as for myself,that we acted from the impulse of our taste, no lessthan from that of our judgment, when we declined allcompetition in parade and profusion ? Our triumphwas of a different sort. We may perhaps have toomuch indulged our love of simplicity ; but to our eyesand feelings, the entrance of a set of common freeholderson their own, and those often not the best,horses, or riding in their carts and waggons, oftenequipped in a style of rustic plainness, was far moregratifying, than the best arranged and most pompouscavalcade."This Letter, in which he answered the charge of asecret coalition with his former colleague, was a concessionto the opinion of his friends. His ordinaryrule was to reply to no such attacks. " Stephen told1807. LETTER TO THE FREEHOLDERS. 337me," he says, on one of these occasions, " of the chargebrought against me of lying to the York corporation,when I got the living for Overtop " [a newspaperslander, which was not only untrue, but without foundationin truth] . " I determined on letting it sleep, onlyauthorizing denial. One must live down such charges."At another time he writes, "These calumnies andmisconceptions will gradually die away, overborne bythe general course and conduct of my life, both previousand subsequent ; just as the natural vegetationof the soil by degrees obliterates all traces of the atfirst unsightly spot from which weeds or thistles havebeen extirpated." But in this case he was persuadedto reply. " You and the county," urged Mr. Thornton,must go together to the end of your life, but remember,that though Yorkshire knows what was done, therest of England knows nothing about it." His Letteris an admirable specimen of perfect self-defence withoutrecrimination. It absolutely annihilated theslander against which it was directed, except withthose who, as Dr. Coulthurst says, " would continueto believe it though you should bray them in amortar."VOL. III.CHAPTER XXII.JUNE 1807 TO DECEMBER 1808.His feelings on reviewing his success Session concludedBrighton Attack on Copenhagen Return to BroomfieldJohn Powder Illness New session African Institutionanniversary Roman Catholic question Attack on MissionsBishop Porteus Spanish patriots East-BourneLetters of friendship Enforcement of Abolition Review ofFox's History Settlement at Kensington Gore.THREE months had witnessed those two great triumphs,the Abolition of the Slave Trade and theYorkshire election ; and unnumbered congratulationspoured in upon the chief actor in them. At the closeof a letter of this stamp, Hayley subscribes himselfTanto domini serves, tanta virtutis amatory ;" andadds apologetically, " Please to remember, that topraise excellence is the privilege of angels and poets."It is interesting to trace the secret safeguards whichkept his simplicity of mind untainted amidst suchsuccess and flattery. " Surely," are his private reflections," it calls for deep humiliation, and warm acknowledgment,that God has given me favour withmen, that after guiding me by His providence to thatgreat cause, He crowned my efforts with success, andobtained for me so much good-will and credit. Alas,1807. JOURNAL. 339Thou knowest, Lord, all my failings, errors, infirmities,and negligence in relation to this great cause ; butThou art all goodness and forbearance towards me.If I do not feel grateful to Thee, oh how guilty must Ibe brought in by my own judgment ! But, O Lord, Ihave found too fatally my own stupidity; do Thoutake charge of me, and tune my heart to sing Thypraises, and make me wholly Thine." " When I lookback on my parliamentary life, and see how little, alltaken together, I have duly adorned the doctrine ofGod my Saviour, I am ashamed and humbled in thedust ; may any time which remains, Lord, be betteremployed. Meanwhile I come to the cross with allmy sins, negligence, and ignorances, and cast myselfon the free mercy of God in Christ as my only hopeand refuge. Lord, receive and pardon me, and give meThy renewing grace. Oh how inexpressibly valuableare the promises of Holy Scripture ! Thy ways, OLord, are not as our ways ; Thou art infinite in love,as in wisdom, and in power. O may I never forsakeThee ; guide me, guard me, purify me, strengthen me,keep me from falling, and at length present me faultlessbefore the presence of Thy glory with exceedingjy-There is something so stupendously great in thesalvation of God, that when we are enabled to havesome realizing sense of it, one is ready to cry out,Not unto me, O Lord, not unto me ;' surely I amutterly unworthy of all Thy goodness and love. Sothou art, but Christ is worthy ; and He shall see ofthe travail of His soul, and shall be satisfied. And allQ 2340 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1807.the company of the redeemed, with the holy angels,and surely with myriads of myriads of beings, accordingto their several ranks, and orders, and faculties,and powers, shall join in adoring the infinite love ofthe Redeemer, and shall make up the chorus of thatheavenly song, ( Worthy is the Lamb that was slain,to receive honour, and glory, and blessing,' &c. Ohmay I bear a part in that bright and glad assemblage !Who will, who among them all can, have more causethan myself for gratitude and love ? Meanwhile mayI prove my gratitude on earth, by giving up myself toThy service, and living universally to Thy glory. OLord, enable me to be thus wholly Thine."O Lord, I humbly hope that it is Thou who knock -est at the door of my heart, who tallest forth thesemore than usually lively emotions of contrition, desire,faith, trust, and gratitude. Oh may I hear His voice,and open the door and let Him in, and be admitted tointercourse and fellowship ; may I be really a thrivingChristian, bringing forth abundantly the fruits of theSpirit to the glory of God. O Lord, I am lost inastonishment at Thy mercy and love. That Thoushouldst not only quit the glory and happiness ofheaven to be made man, and bear the most excruciatingtorments and bitter degradation for our deliveranceand salvation ; but that Thou still dearest withus, though we, knowing all Thy goodness, are stillcold and insensible to it. That Thou strives with ourperverseness, conquered our opposition, and still wait-estto be gracious ; and that it was in the fore-knowledgeof this our base ingratitude and stupid perversion.JOURNAL. 341ness, that Thou didst perform these miracles of mercy,That Thou knowest me, and my hardness, and coldness,and unworthy return for all Thy goodness, whenThou called me from the giddy throng, and shoneinto my heart with the light of the glory of God, inthe face of Jesus Christ. O well may we exclaim,Thy ways are not as our ways, nor Thy thoughts asour thoughts ; but as the heavens are higher than theearth, so are Thy ways higher than our ways, and Thythoughts than our thoughts.' O Lord, I cast myselfbefore Thee, O spurn me not from Thee ; unworthy,though I am, of all Thy wonderful goodness. . . Ogrant me more and more of humility, and love, andfaith, and hope, and longing for a complete renewalinto Thine image. Lord, help me and hear me. Icome to Thee as my only Saviour. O be Thou myhelp, my strength, my peace, and joy, and consolation; my Alpha and Omega ; my all in all. Amen."I have far too little thought of the dangers of greatwealth, or rather of such affluence and rank in life asmine. O my soul, bethink thee of it ; and at the sametime bless God who has given thee some little knowledgeof the way of salvation. How little also have Iborne in mind that we are to be pilgrims and strangerson the earth ! This impression can be kept up inthose who are in such a state of prosperity and comfortas myself, by much prayer and meditation, and bystriving habitually to walk by faith and to have myconversation in heaven." " O Lord, direct me to somenew line of usefulness, for Thy glory, and the good of342 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1807.my fellow-creatures. I have been thinking of lesseningthe number of oaths." 1The new parliament met upon the 22nd of June,and he was soon engaged in close attendance on it,being " chiefly in Palace Yard, having fewer motivesto draw me to Broomfield, my family being now atBrighton, and much parliamentary business." Thiscontinued till the second week in August. Upon the3rd he was in the House when " Whitbread's Bill wasdiscussed, and took a warm part for it." 2 Upon the13th, when the Houses were prorogued, he thus reviewsthe session. " Canning has done most ably this session.Perceval ill, and below himself; owing we suppose tohis wife's illness fagging him, and keeping him up atnight. M. spoke again ; but though very cleverly andbitterly, according to his own theory, yet I thinkthere is a want of pathos which will prevent his everhurrying others along, or rising to the first, or even tothe top of the second rank. I never can be sufficientlygrateful to my friends, both in Cambridge,London, and many other places, for the kindness withwhich they contributed and exerted themselves in mysupport. At Reading, Maidenhead, and other placesthereabouts ; in Birmingham, Bristol, Newport Pag-nell,Woburn, Worcester, Colchester, &c. subscriptionswere made. My Hull friends were excessivelyactive and kind."He had not hitherto been able to acknowledgeall "this friendly zeal, but at Brighton, where, as1 Journal. * Diary.1807. BRIGHTON. 343soon as the recess began, he joined his family,he set at once about the task, and found his " timecompletely engrossed in writing letters, being engagedin it for five or six solid hours daily." 3 "Ihave only lately called for the book which containsthe names of those kind friends, who, in what appearedthe most critical emergency, stepped forth to myaid in my late Yorkshire contest ; for I am now enjoyingmy first season of leisure since the election." 4When I look back on the last few months, in thecomparative sequestration of this place, I becomemore and more deeply impressed with a sense of theirkindness. You will not conceive that I am lessgrateful to them because I trace it to a still highersource, and look with humble and I hope thankfulwonder at the Divine goodness, which so influenced inmy favour the affections of men." 5Here he was" much amused by London in lustringyet a fine pure air, clear sea, and good houses. 6 19th.The weather delightful still busy on letters Vennnext door some discussions about education, &c.Lord and Lady Bathurst here. 20th and 22nd.Dined Bathurst' s Lord and Lady H. there. Whatunfavourable circumstances great people are under !24th. Allotted time to serious reflection awful suspensewhilst doubting what we shall hear from AdmiralGambier." 7 On the day following the capitulationthe Admiral wrote to him.Diary, Aug. 24. * To Rev. Charles Simeon, Sept. 14.To W. Hey Esq. Aug. 15. Diary, Aug. 18. ^ Diary.344 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1807.Prince of Wales, off Copenhagen, Sept. S, 1807.My dear Friend,,I am sure you will be happy to hear that ithas pleased God to bless our endeavours here for theservice of the nation, and that we are in possession ofthe whole Danish navy at Copenhagen, consisting ofeighteen sail of the line, eleven frigates, and elevensloops, with a number of gun-boats, &c.Providence has favoured us in a most remarkablemanner from the moment of our departure from England,every circumstance concurring to our help. Mostthankful ought we to be for so favourable an issue inthe attainment of an object of such importance, witha comparatively trifling loss. The poor Danes havesuffered very much, and great distress must be felt bythe inhabitants of Copenhagen. Having much uponmy hands, I can only desire you will offer my affectionateremembrances to Mrs. Wilberforce.Yours ever most truly,J. GAMBIER."How shocking," were his own reflections, 8 " arethe accounts from Copenhagen ! Alas, alas ! I cannotbut greatly doubt the policy of changing so great anumber of men from cold into most willing and energeticallies of France. They must think us the mostunjust and cruel of bullying despots. There is, however,the consolation of believing that our governmentreally conceived themselves to be acting justly."8 Diary, Sept. 19.1807. DANISH EXPEDITION. 345My friends doubt about the Danish business Iown the policy doubtful ; but our right clear, if self-defenceclear. They would have become our openenemies very shortly. Still our national characterinjured. Oh that nations trusted more to God ! andthen if we had on Christian principles forborne, declaringwe would not expose our good to be evil spokenof, I doubt not we should have been protected." 9 " Icannot but doubt of our acting properly in applyingto our own use all the Danish property." 10TO WILLIAM HEY ESQ.Near London, Nov. 27, 1807.My dear Sir,I have been deeply impressed by accounts Ihave received of the sufferings of the inhabitantsboth of Copenhagen and Buenos Ayres. I wish youhad hinted to me your opinion of the former measure.Religious people, in general, I understand, condemn itstrongly as utterly unjust and indefensible. For myown part, after much (I trust impartial) reflection, Iam convinced that under all the circumstances of thecase, the Danish expedition was just. But it hasgrieved me exceedingly to hear lately, that our governmentintend to confiscate for our own benefit all theships and stores which have been brought away.Surely it would be both right and politic to confineourselves within the strictest limits which are compatiblewith our essential safety. It was absolutelyessential to deprive the Danes of a fleet, which,9 Diary, Oct. 20. ' Ib. Nov. 14.Q 3346 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1807.combined with that of Russia, would otherwise havesoon conveyed a French army to Ireland or Scotland,or have forced us to detach to the north so large aproportion of our naval strength, as would have left usopen to attack in the south and west of the twoislands. But it cannot be absolutely necessary toappropriate to our own use the value of our seizure ;and our so doing will tend to bring into doubt ourmotives in undertaking the expedition, and therebyinjure our national character.I would not, however, exercise at the expense ofour sailors and soldiers the generosity for which Icontend. They should have the usual reward, but itshould be paid by ourselves, not out of the proceeds ofthe Danish seizures. Believe me, my dear sir, to beaffectionately yours,W. WILBERFORCE."Though," as he told a friend, 11 " he scarcely everin his life had found it so difficult to keep" his " abstractreasonings on the case from being trampledunder-foot by the host of feelings which the generalview of the whole scene called into action ; " yet hewas firmly convinced of the soundness of these principles.He took great pains in making up his mind ;talking the matter over at length " with Lord Sid-mouth,who " was " most decided against the expedition,and clear that the Danish army was inHolstein for the purpose of resisting the French;"and with " Gambier, who was quite satisfied of the11 Letter to S. Shore Esq.1807. DANISH SEIZURE. 347rectitude and extreme utility of the Danish expedition;speaking in high terms of the Divine goodness,and of the protection of Providence." 12 Hisfinal judgment on the question is expressed in a marginalnote, to a strong condemnation of the planwhich appeared in the Edinburgh Annual Register.The true answer to this We sent against Copenhagena force so great, as reasonably to induce us tohope that the Danish fleet would be surrendered withoutbloodshed, because there could be no disgrace inyielding without a struggle. But government didwrong in using the fleet we took. We should havekept it as a sacred deposit, to be restored on thetermination of the war." " I own to you however,"he tells Mr. Babington, " that I doubt if I shouldhave dared to advise the expedition, if I had been inthe Cabinet ; and I have not seen any where a justificationof the measure, which is to me at all satisfactory,or which takes the ground or states the principleson which alone I have rested its defence."But while he defended the expedition, he was readyto " weep with those that weep ; " and as shortlyafter he would not consent " to deprive our mostinveterate enemies of those common alleviations whichGod's providence allows to our suffering nature;" 13so here he rejoiced that " the chief injury to Copenhagenwas not sustained by the bombs, whichwould have been murderous instruments, but by theDiary, Nov. 19.13 Mr. Wilberforce's speech, Feb. 4, 1808, on the admission of Jesuits'bark into France.348 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1807.rockets, which set the houses on fire without injuringthe inhabitants ;" and he forthwith proposed " a subscriptionfor assisting the poorer of the individual sufferersto rebuild their houses." It is delightful tosee the rugged countenance of necessary war thusbrightened by acts of Christian charity, which, bytheir healing influence, repress the brutalizing effectsof conflict, blessing equally the givei\ and receiver.Much of his time, it will be seen, in the followingbusy spring was spent in like exertions for the coloniesof Denmark.The remainder of this autumn was spent at Broom-field.Here he was within reach of much valuablesociety. " Oct. 26th'. Evening, John Powder came, atruly amiable and most able young man, and aboveall, truly pious, and charmingly pleasant. Sat chattingwith him too long. Much talk about education.He agreed that public school inadmissible, from itsprobable effects on eternal state. He staid with metill Thursday, and Mr. Henry Thornton met him, andwe had much talk a truly pleasing and excellentman. Nov. 12th. Dinner home Grant's two sons,and Powder, and C. Noel very pleasant, rational,conversable evening." At Broomfield too he was readyto bring his influence to bear on passing matters.To African Institution meeting, and back to dinner.To town about Sierra Leone business, saw AdmiraltyBarrow. To Perceval's, and chatted with him, chieflytete-astute, two hours; talked with him freely on 'suresuperbiam,' &c. Called public offices about CountZenobia. To town to see Canning and Perceval1807. PORTUGUESE SLAVE TRADE. 349interview with them about Africa and New SouthWales, and Lubeck sequestration. Morning, to townand Canning about Portugal and America. (Bis-sao Slave Trade, and Mr. Graham about religious instructionof convicts)" Here he broke one of his ownrules, " never to mention more than one subject toofficial men at one interview, for if I do I find that allare overlooked." He was more successful with Mr.Canning, who wrote him wordForeign Office, Oct. 26, 1807.Dear Wilberforce,I have broken ground about Bissao ; and donot despair, if things should take a favourable turn,of being able to obtain not the cession of the settlement,(for there is I find other trade of value attachedto it,) but an abandonment of the Slave Trade at theplace for a valuable consideration you must understand.What will you offer ?Yours 'sincerely,GEORGE CANNING."But these opportunities of service were purchasedat an expense of time which he was constantly regretting.Not that his study was wholly deserted, forhe mentions " reading poetry in the evening ;" and atother times, " Paley's Natural Theology, AdamSmith, popular pamphlets, Banquet's Value ofCommerce clever, but rash, and in parts unfair, butnot designedly ; a man should always have a friend torun over his writings Cobbett too, and Edinburgh350 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1807.Review, and Eclectic ; Mrs. Hutchinson's Memoirsof Col. H. beautiful ; Spence Against Foreign Commercesad stuff, a vile mingle-mangle of blunderingconclusions from Adam Smith, Economists, &c. ;Lowe on State of West Indies oil without vinegar ;Concessions to America the Bane of Great Britain ;Excellent critique on Malthus, in Christian Observer,which Powder's I am sure ; Lay of Last Minstrel.A little poetry sometimes walking out, but almostalways I read out of doors. Looking over East Indiadocuments for civilizing and converting natives,Buchanan's Ecclesiastical Establishment, and WrongsCivilization of Hindoo."TO THE REV. FRANCIS WRANGHAM.Near London, Nov. 23, 1807.My dear Sir,I must either delay writing to you for someperiod of leisure, (and when may that arrive ?) or suppressmuch which the perusal of your rich and interestingsermon would otherwise call forth. To me it isdoubly interesting, from the deep interest I have longtaken in the fate of our oriental fellow-subjects. Youmay probably have heard, that the late melancholytragedy at Vellore, has furnished to the adversaries ofChristianity an occasion for endeavouring to obstructthe efforts which were using for its diffusion. Our pastcrimes, according to the ordinary dispensations of Providence,are now in the way of natural consequencesproducing our punishment. The servants of the East1807. CHRISTIANITY IN INDIA. 351India Company, who through the scandalous neglectof , (I will not fix the charge,) lived among pagansfor many years, without the opportunity of attendingpublic worship, or any other ordinances of religion ormeans of grace, being now come home with largefortunes, and numerous connexions, and considerableinfluence, manifest their heathenish principles by openlyespousing the cause of the Veda against the Scriptures,and the Hindoo against the Christian faith.How far this is gone you will judge, when I tell you thata quondam servant of the Company has been latelypublishing a pamphlet in the shape of a letter to thechairman, of which it is the direct object to reprobatethe translation or circulation of the Holy Scripturesin Hindostan; and so confident was the author in therectitude and wisdom of his own opinions, that hecalled on the chairman one morning to express hissurprise that the Court of Directors had not publiclydeclared their determination to suppress so perniciousa practice. But I grieve to hint to you, (this howeverin confidence,) that I have some reason to fear, lestthe idea of its being both equitable and politic to leaveour East Indian subjects in their present deplorablestate, may have found a place in the minds of someof a very high description, even of your profession.I trouble you with all this detail for the purposeof pressing on you the duty of endeavouringby all possible means to counteract these monstrouserrors. To me, I frankly declare that oursuffering our East India subjects, nay tenants, forsuch they are, to remain, without an effort to the352 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1807.contrary, under the most depraving and cruel systemof superstition which ever enslaved a people, is,considering all our own blessings, and, which youtruly urge, the safety and excellent policy of theattempt if judiciously and temperately made, thegreatest by far, now that the Slave Trade has ceased, ofall the national crimes by which we are provoking thevengeance and suffering the chastisement of Heaven.We are the more criminal, because there is not apretence for connecting the Vellore transaction with theMissionary labours. On the contrary, wherever theyhave taught, the good has been unmixed with, uncompensatedby, evil. May I hint that you wouldprobably render a public service by informing themind of my colleague on the whole of" this subject.But I hope you will not confine yourself within sucha narrow limit, but will continue to work in the fieldin which you have already laboured so successfully.Before I conclude, allow me to ask whether Tennant'sWorks, from which you sometimes quote, containmuch that is useful to one who should read witha religious and moral eye. I think I see you intimatea predilection, in which I fully share with you, as Ihave often told my friend Mr. Grant, for Lord Wellesley'sEast India college. I own, considering the immenserevenues of our East Indian empire, I wouldhave economized any where rather than there. Theinstitution surely will not answer the same ends, if itbe continued on a contracted scale. It must be elevatedhigh, it must be rendered brilliant and dazzling,to attract the notice of surrounding nations,1807. COLLEGE AT CALCUTTA. 353and attract their various literati. I greatly deploreits having been so shorn of its beams, and wish itrestored to its primeval splendour. But I must breakoff, being extremely pressed for time, and compelledto employ myself on less interesting topics. Excusemy hasty scrawl, and believe me, my dear sir,Yours very truly,W. Wilberforce.P. S. Are the Lettres Edifices interesting ? Ido not possess, and indeed never saw, them."Amidst these employments he complains grievouslythat his ee days pass without finding time for anyvested labour. I long to be able to write somethingnew of a religious kind, as it really would be read ; "and "the experience of these few months taught"him "that" he "must spend his autumn till parliamentmeets in some quieter place, where I may see more ofmy family, and myself study more, and think more.My incessant visitors and visited while here compelme to write my letters in the morning, and thatbreaks in upon and consumes all my time."The following note to Mr. Stephen, with a letterto Mr. Simeon written soon after the birth of hisyoungest child, give a lively picture of these interrupteddays.Broomfield, inter shavendum, Thursday.My dear Stephen,I think you had better send Lord C. yourintelligence concerning the slaves. His nick-name is354 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1807.Viscount C. I wish to have a quiet day with youhere, though I am sorry to say, that as yet I am in asmuch bustle as during the sitting of parliament.If Rachel be as good in Theology as in beef-speaking,she is high indeed.Yours ever,W. WILBERFORCE."TO THE REV. CHARLES SIMEON.Sept. 24, 1807.My dear Friend,I can say but three words, but I know you willthink they are words of joy, and which call for thankfulness.Mrs. W. has brought me another boy, andboth mother and child are as well as possible. PraiseGod with me. I have been continually interruptedall this morning : it is now dinner time, and I have asingle gentleman already arrived. One set of morningvisitors has been a party of Swedes, two of themnoble, who have been recommended to me ; and asthey are going to Cambridge, and wish for letters ofintroduction, I name them to you.Ever affectionately yours,W. WILBERFORCE.P. S. These same Swedes, two at least, are greatmen in their own country."This busy life was broken in upon in the middle ofDecember, by a sudden attack of dangerous illness.Dec. 20th. A good deal of pain in my side, and my1808. ILLNESS. 355breath much affected. 22nd. Pitcairn called andbled me thought the complaint very serious inflammationon the lungs the last I should have feared.How are we reminded of our continual dependenceupon God ! 23rd. Better, I thank God, but still in aticklish state. 25th. Surprisingly recovered, I thankGod." This amendment continued without anycheck; and upon the first day of the new year, heacknowledges f( the great mercies I have received ofthe Lord. How good has God been to me in recoveringme so rapidly from a very dangerous disease,and during the course of it, preserving me from anygreat suffering, and giving me every possible help andcomfort ! My dear kind friend the Dean 14 came uptous. My servant very obliging. Pitcairn verykind and attentive, and my dearest wife all tendernessand assiduity. I was taken ill on the 18th of December,and though not yet down-stairs, I am almostmyself again. O Lord, bless to me this dispensation !Cause me to live in a more practical sense of theshortness and uncertainty of all human things ; and ohbring my soul, more effectually than ever hitherto, toGod in Christ, and give me a large measure of ThySpirit. May J be enabled to live by faith above theworld, looking for a better country, with my heart supremelyset on it. O Lord, I know too well my ownweakness, but Thou canst strengthen the weakest, andhast promised that Thou wilt, if we earnestly pray toThee. Lord, be with me, and strengthen me. Enableme to maintain a closer walk with Thee ; and while Ii* Milner.356 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1808.live a life of faith and hope, having my affections setonthings above,, may I discharge the duties of mystation, so as to let my light shine before men, andadorn the doctrine of God my Saviour in all things.Amen, and Amen."Amongst the memoranda of a day " set apart "shortly afterwards, 15 the meeting of parliament beingat hand, " for prayer and meditation, and other religiousexercises, with moderation in food," afteracknowledging " God's mercy in his late recoveryfrom sickness," he prays " above all for the love ofGod and my Redeemer, that this blessed principlemay be like the main-spring of the machine, promptingall the movements, and diffusing its practicalinfluence through every disposition, action, plan, anddesign. And (if it be consistent with the Divinewill) for a more assured hope of the favour of Godand Christ. May the God of hope fill me with alljoy and peace in believing. O Lord, do Thou break,soften, quicken, warm my cold heart ; and teach meto feel an overflowing love and gratitude, or rathera deep and grateful sense of obligation, not as a transienteffusion, but as the settled temper and disposition,the practical habit of my soul : that so I mayhere begin the song of praise, to be sung with morepurified and warmed affections in heaven, Worthyis the Lamb ; and blessing, honour, glory, and power,&c." 16His Journals and correspondence will describe,almost without addition, his return to ordinary occurJan. 16. l6 Journal.1808. RETURN TO BUSINESS. 357nations, and the full wave of business which soonovertook him. " Pray do not go," was HannahMore's New-year's greeting, " to that death-doingHouse of Commons too soon. Remember the wiseprecept, f Reculer pour rrifeux sauter ; ' a precept Isuppose taken from boys playing at hop, step, andjump. I was happy that your incomparable Dean waswith you. God Almighty bless you."fc The Dean is most urgent in his injunctions ofcare lest a relapse a second attack might be fatal.In what a state are public affairs ! Portuguese courtmigrated to Brazils pregnant with important consequencesespecially in Abolition connexion. Russianwar. Our decree concerning neutral trade I fearit will produce American war. Buonaparte now busyin Italy it is supposed planning partition of Turkey.This man is manifestly an instrument in the hands ofProvidence ; when God has done with him, He willprobably show how easily He can get rid of him.Meanwhile may we be of the number of those whotrust in Him, and all will be well. Lord, prepareand fit me for discharging the duties of my station, inamanner honourable to my Christian profession, anduseful to my fellow-creatures. I am gradually regainingstrength. Reading Ingram's pamphlet on Causesof Increase of Methodism. Able, written in an excellentspirit, and much most useful matter, and manyexcellent practical suggestions, and most candid suggestions; but from its defects it is evident that all hisefforts would be labouring in the fire. Reading alsopapers on Neutral Question, and Orders in Councilas respecting America ; and West Indian Report on358 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1808.State of Islands. Cowper's Letters what a happyart both of conceiving and expressing he possesses !Also refreshing memory on historical events of last fewyears. O Lord, teach me to see Thy hand in allthings, and to refer all to Thee, bearing in mind continuallyThy overruling providence, and casting allmy care on Thee. Buonaparte's violent and mostimpudent decree ; passing by all he had ordered anddone, and treating our retaliating Order in Council asif it was an original act. Oh the corrupted currentsof this world ! Well ! ' the Lord reigned,' and itshall be well with those that fear Him. 17 9th. ReadingStephen's papers on American war ; running overFranklin's Life. Stephen again offered a seat in parliamentby Perceval in the most handsome way. Iam on the whole for his accepting it. It comes tohim a second time ; not of his seeking. He agreeswith Perceval passim, and with the government as totheir grand scheme of policy Order in Council ; indeedit is his measure. If there should be any reasonfor his. giving up his seat, Perceval and he would notmisunderstand each other. He truly conscientiousabout it. Reading pamphlets about East IndianMissions." On this subject he enters in the followingletter.TO W. HEY ESQ.Near London, Feb. 5, 1808.* -* * * * * *You must have collected from the pamphlets thathave been advertised, that the subject of East Indian!7 Diary.1808. EAST INDIAN MISSIONS. 359missions has been interesting the public mind ; butpossibly you may not have heard how active andearnest c the enemy ' has been (in writing to you Imay call things by their true names) in stirring upopposition to any endeavours for diffusing Christianinstruction throughout our East Indian empire. Amotion has been made in the Court of Directors byone of the most able, experienced, wealthy, and well-connectedmembers of their body ; the effect of whichwould have been to bring home all the missionaries,to recall Buchanan by name as a culprit, and to prohibitthe circulation or even translation of the Scriptures.The Court seemed in general but too well-disposedto such proceedings, but the most strenuous effortswere made by Mr. Grant and Mr. Parry, Lord Teign-mouthand others, and happily the first attempt wasdefeated by a considerable majority; and we hope that,though it is dreadful to think what is the generalopinion and feeling of the bulk of the higher orders onthis whole subject, we shall be able to resist all the endeavoursthat are used to bar out the light of truth fromthose our benighted fellow-subjects. Mr. Perceval hasstood our friend. Buonaparte, by all accounts, ispreparing on a great scale for an expedition to theEast ; and should this country use the powers of itsgovernment for the avowed purpose of shutting theScriptures out of our Indian empire, how could we hopethat God would not employ his French army in breakingdown the barriers we had vainly and wickedly beenrearing, and thus open a passage by which Christianlight might shine upon that darkened land. The360 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1808.Dean's warnings have kept me out of town hitherto,but on Monday next I hope to return to London, andto attend parliament. Farewell, my dear sir.I am yours most sincerely,W. WILBERFORCE."He now resumed his attendance at the " Housealmost every night," where he complains of the " debates"as "poor compared with former times; yetPerceval improved, and Canning extremely clever."The House was now engaged in warm and repeateddebates on the Order in Council, and he was " muchperplexed about it. H. Thornton against, Stephenmost strong for it ; Perceval not very strong ; Canningevidently disliking it." The working too of theAbolition Bill called for his continual watchfulness.You have crossed the Red sea," was the timelycaution which his friend Dr. Burgh mingled with hiscongratulations, 18 "but Pharaoh may follow your steps,and aim at some abridgement of the deliverance ; keepthen prepared to craze his chariot wheels, and disappointevery effort of men who have not only opposedyou, but mingled their opposition with predictions ofwhat smugglers and other nations may do, and evenwith threats of repeal at home." To maintain this guardthe African Institution had been founded ; and underthe presidency of the " Duke of Gloucester, LordsGrenville and Howick and Mr. Perceval consentedto join it." It was of great moment to keep up thespirit of this body ; and the 25th of March, the day oni* March 28 1807.1808. ABOLITION BILL ANNIVERSARY. 361which the Abolition Bill had received the royal assent,was fixed for its first anniversary. It was " a magnificentday, between five and six hundred people, tenortwelve noblemen, and forty or more M. Pes Dukeof Gloucester in the chair. We were afraid beforehand,and doubted about putting it off."He was now again in the full stream of business.Much worried, many committees. East Indianlottery woollen committees. Friends at dinner beforeHouse. Letters." 19 "From the 4th of April till the 9thin town. Debate about Reversion Bill, and I spoke withmore freedom than usual. Sad artificial work ! Tier-neymade most play. Robert Dundas unaffected andpleasing, 11th. To town, Proclamation Society aboutSmithfield market. 14th. Heard that Danish Davis'sStrait 20 settlers had not been attended to, andtalked with Pole and Gambier about them. Was todine at Broomfield, but stopped in town, and drove toShadwell dock, Col. Hellish, about them. " For amonth he steadily renewed these applications, and atlast succeeded in procuring the despatch of vessels onthis work of mercy. Upon the 29th, came on theMaynooth college debate no preference of protestantismover popery hinted ; and yet with whatconcern did I hear to-night that Dr. Duigenan madea Privy Councillor. Opposition contended for completingthe college so as to supply all the RomanCatholic priests wanted. Perceval for 250, (vice9 Diary, April 2.30 They consisted principally of Greenlanders under the charge of theMoravian brethren, and depended for sustenance on supplies fromEurope.VOL. III. R362 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1808.400,) for which the building already completed."Upon the 5th of May the " House " was " again onMaynooth business, and very hot and violent even tobitterness. I spoke I hope not violently, but, alas !much bitterness in many. I reproached for Methodism.My own final judgment not made up on theCatholic Question I strongly incline to their cominginto parliament, though not to their seeing with othermen's (priests') eyes." He was arriving slowly at hisultimate conviction, that in the elective franchise wehad already given to the Romanists the power forwhich they were contending ; and that the continuanceof the disabilities only irritated whilst it strengthenedthem ; that external pressure kept them from disunion,whilst a protestant profession made their representativesmore dangerous. Yet he was not so sanguine asto deem this Bill a panacea.I have read," he says, 21 " the article 22 on theIrish Catholic Question which you mention. Someparts of it are very able, but the fundamental error init, and in all the reasonings on the same side, appearsto me to be this : They assume, that grant what iscalled Catholic Emancipation, and all obnoxious distinctionsare done away ; whereas, not to mentionseveral grievances of the lower orders, the greatestremains in full force, namely, that a set of ' hereticteachers ' should usurp the honours and emolumentsof ( the Catholic Church.' Throughout all ranksof ecclesiastical functionaries every true Sosia sees21 To the Rev. Francis Wrangham.22 In the Edinburgh Review.1808. ROMAN CATHOLIC QUESTION. 363a false Sosia fattening on his right. Pursue the trainof ideas." In the present session he lifted up hisvoice against the system of agitation by which themeasure was already driven forward, pointing out itsinconsistency with the principle of the Union as laiddown by Mr. Pitt, that admission into parliamentmight hereafter be granted to the Roman Catholicswith greater safety, or withheld from them withgreater justice." " May 28th. Catholic Question.Grattan's speech excellent and temperate. I spoke, andthough abstaining from all reflections on popery, andarguing the question on grounds of time and circumstances,I was extremely abused." 23 " We have hada very long and most unpleasant debate," he writesthe next day. " It is grievous to see that we are onlynominally a Protestant people." 24 " Alas, they aredriving the Roman Catholics to rebellion. How madto be thus stimulating them, by telling them they areenslaved and oppressed ! It is irreligion and immoralityof which Ireland is sick. These popery hasincreased and fomented." 25Business meanwhile was increasing on his hands.Private cases abounded. Clients of every kind crowdedhis ante-room and breakfast table ; and friends flockedround him at all hours, and assembled daily at hiseasy and hospitable dinner. The parliamentary attendancewas "the most severe" he "ever knew;"so that though " the country was exquisitely beautifulin the first burst of spring, or rather summer," heDiary. 84 To James Stephen Escj. May 22.SA Diary, May 26.R 2364 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1808.never got to Broomfield, being often absent from"his " family from Monday morning to Saturday night,or even Sunday morning." 26 In truth he was everwatching at his post, the ready supporter, both in andout of parliament, of every moral and religious question.Every morning he was at ee the SmithfieldMarket Committee, in the hope of altering the Mondaymarket," though the "room was hot" and "littledone. Parties so strong ours most respectable,theirs far most numerous ; so much so that painful topersevere, but we must please God, and assert Hiscause." " Shattered from a 'bad night, from beinguneasy at not having reprobated M. A. Taylor'sshameless declaration, 27 f that interest alone to be ourguide, not right or justice.' The House only laughed,and he mistook it. I was over-persuaded, but I deeplyrepented, and still am sorry." The right dischargeof these peculiar duties called for a forbearing temper,no less than for vigilance and firmness. " The EdinburghReview" had "just published a violent paperagainst East Indian Missions. The effect of theirpaper about Methodism in the last number " wasperceptible in the House of Commons, and " he " sawthat we are likely to be more run at. Oh that I mightfeel more the power of Divine things ! " ^This temper soon found vent in the debates upon aBill devised by Bishop Porteus, for securing bettersalaries to curates. It was bitterly assailed by theWhig opposition, as infringing upon vested rights, andthreatening injury to the established Church. A fierce26 Diary. 2 ? On the Expedition to the Dardanelles. 2S Diary.1808. BISHOP Porters. 365attack" was made "by Windham and Dr. Lawrenceupon a certain party in the Church favoured by one of thebishops. I find I am very obnoxious just now to opposition,and I much suspect this is retaliation for politicaloffences. May God only enable me to do my duty." 29It was in vain that he protested his " admiration forthe Church of England, resulting from long experience,and a careful study of its doctrines." " Methodism" was " sneered at," and he " reproached with it."Such insinuations could not be repelled. " Somepersons call you a Calvinist, and every man a Methodistwho says his prayers ; a stupid and provokingerror, which the old Duke of Bridgewater had themerit of making entertaining, from the singularabsurdity with which he always called Bishop Porteus,6 that confounded Presbyterian,' they having hadsome canal difference of interests." 30 Neither the agenor the mild virtue of " the truly simple, benevolent,and pleasing " Bishop could save him from assault.A year before, he told Mr. Wilberforce, that hehad lost much of his " activity of mind and body ; andno wonder, after a laborious life of seventy-five years.With the third reading of the Slave Trade Bill endedmy parliamentary life ; and a good finale I think itwas; Hie coasts artemque repono." 31 He was nowsadly sunk in strength, so that it was affecting tosee him ; yet full of kindness, cheerfulness, and piety." 32But still he was a " missionary favourer;" and as such29 Diary. Letter from the Hon. I. Villiers, April 19, 1816,31 See Correspondence.32 Letter of Mr. Wilberforce to Hannah More.366 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1808.came in for his full share of bitter crimination. Twodays after the debate he wrote to Mr. Wilberforce.Fulham House, June 10.Dear Sir,In the Times of yesterday morning, Mr.Reeves is reported to have said in his speech on theCurates' Bill on Wednesday night, that I had given aliving of 1200 a year to a missionary to Bussorah;and I do not see that any contradiction was given tothis groundless assertion. The truth is, I have givena living of 700 a year to Mr. Usko, a Prussian clergyman,who is the greatest oriental scholar in Europe ;and whom I thought it worth while to retain at anyprice in this country, for the double purpose of revivingOriental literature, (which is falling fast intodecay in this kingdom,) and of applying his great talentsand extensive knowledge of Eastern languages tothe elucidation and illustration of the sacred writings.I should not like to have these preposterous calumniesgo into the world uncontradicted ; yet I do notsee that any answer was given to them in the Houseof Commons. But in some future stage of the Bill Ihope some of my friends will defend me against suchunfounded charges. Mr. Usko never was a missionaryto any place whatever ; and how high his characterstands with those who know him best, you will seefrom the enclosed little pamphlet.I am, dear Sir,very faithfully yours,B. LONDON."1808. SPANISH PATRIOTS. 367The eyes of Europe were now fixed upon theSpanish patriots, who promised an effectual resistanceto the modern " scourge of God." " Sheridan would,against the advice of all the opposition friends, electrifythe country on the Spanish business. He camedown to the House, but the opportunity being delayed,he going up-stairs got so drunk, as to make himmanifestly and disgracefully besotted. Yet he seemedto remember a fair speech, for the topics were good ;only he was like a man catching through a thickmedium at the objects before him. Alas, a mosthumiliating spectacle ; yet the papers state him tohave made a brilliant speech, &c. So true is whatCobbett 33 said of his friendship to the editors andreporters." 34Accounts from Spain " now stated, " that thereare universal risings ; and our fleet admitted into Cadi,and Spaniards joining with us against the French,and French army defeated by patriots near SierraMorea. I cannot but hope that God, through thedestruction of the Spanish political despotism, willalso destroy the popish bondage and darkness, and(probably after much suffering) shine on them withthe light of truth." These hopes made him earnestin the cause, and upon the 4th of July he went " toa Spanish meeting, called by Colonel Greville, at theArgyle Rooms. Found no one gentleman there ;Powder and Macaulay coming out, and Zenobiaashamed, and walked off." 35 The same evening heVid. Cobbett's Political Reg. 1803. 3* Diary, June 14.3i Diary,368 . LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1808.declared in the House of Commons, after " hearingthe King's speech, how much he wished for an addressupon the subject. A great oversight omitting it, asthe Speaker suggested to me." The opportunity waslost ; and on the 7th he was " off from London " for thesummer. Barham Court was his first halting-place.After more than once putting off the day of our departure,"he writes upon the 8th, " we at length cutour cable, and leaving an anchor or two in the ground,if for figure's sake you will allow two cows, a pony,and much dead as well as quick stock, to be so denominated,and arrived last night at this hospitablemansion with all our little ones. But all morning long,even in this paradise, I have been employed in quill-driving;for I have brought with me an immensemass of unanswered letters, which I long to getthrough, that I may go to some more pleasing anduseful occupation. I long to play the parent a littlemore than I am able while parliament is sitting."With this intention he soon moved on to his fixedsummer quarters, and upon the 16th of July was settledwith his family at East-Bourne. Spanish interestsstill occupied his mind and tinged his correspondence.They really penetrate to the very bottom of theprsecordia." xEast Bourne, July 19, 1808.My dear Lancaster,How many a mile are we now separated ! yet,in confirmation of Cowper's beautiful line, ' How3(5 To Lord Sidmouth, Aug. 11.1808. TO LORD Nunc ASTER. 369fleet is a glance of the mind ! ' in a moment I can flyon the wings of imagination, from the shore of theChannel to Julius Caesar's old castle in Eskdale. Itseems shamefully long since I wrote to you, but youhave kindly let me know of your goings-on, for whichI thank you.What an extraordinary spectacle is now exhibitingin Spain ! Surely Buonaparte would not haveproceeded as he has done, if he had not been absolutelyintoxicated by his prosperity. To publish tothe world that Joseph Buonaparte was to be King,and his children in hereditary succession to succeed tothe crown after his death ; and failing his issue, Louisand his heirs ; and failing Louis, Jerome and his heirs ;and failing all these, to revert to us, Napoleon ! Surelythis is so heaping insult on injury, that he might haveforeseen that human nature would scarcely bear it. Ihave often thought that it might perhaps please Godto pull down this giant when raised to his highestelevation, and apparently glorying the most reasonably,as well as most proudly, in his strength. Doyou recollect the chapter in Isaiah, in which the prophetintroduces the King of Assyria as at first boastingof his victories, and after having been remindedthat he was but an instrument in the hand of theAlmighty, he is represented as brought down to thepit amid contempt and derision. Loath, I remember,justly states it to be, for its length, the finest poemalmost in existence.Surely it is much to be regretted, as I stated inthe House, though I was made by some of the newsR 3370 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1808.papers to say something very different, that there wasnot a joint address of both Houses of parliament(which might have been called forth by a messagefrom the Crown) on the Spanish affair s. So stronglydid I feel this, that I even went to the Argyle Rooms,though it was the first time I ever was in Col. Greville'spetit theatre. I was aware that I shouldexpose myself to some ridicule if the meeting werenot attended. The opposition I find would not go,because they were not concerned in the affair ; and,would you think it ? Col. Greville, who did not seemaware of the curious inconsistency of the account hewas giving, told me that Mr. Whitbread had statedto him that the King's Speech was the place to whichmen ought to look for the opinions and feelings of thecountry on Spanish affairs. I could not help remarkingthat it was the first time in this session that I hadheard such a sentiment from Mr. Whitbread. I mustbreak off for the present, but, please God, will writeagain soon, when I have got through my epistolaryarrear. Farewell, and believe meever affectionately yours,W. WILBERFORCE."TO MRS. HANNAH MORE.East-Bourne, July 25, 1808.My dear Friend,* * * * * * *After leaving Broomfield I carried my whole householdto Barham Court. Though our old friend didnot at first look quite the same as formerly, I really1808. SPANISH PATRIOTS. 371forgot all difference, if any there was, after having beenwith him for a week. He retains all his old energy ;takes his rides was reading Townshend's Travels torefresh his recollection as to Spain, &c.I have a thousand things to say to you. That Ishould have got so far, and not have mentioned Spain,is almost a reproach to both of us ; to me, as if I werevoid of all proper feeling ; and to you, as if you were tobe suspected of the same deficiency. I suppose it iswith difficulty you restrain sister Patty from going asavolunteer, while you are rubbing up your Spanish thatyou may assist in diffusing patriotic sentiments throughthe whole Peninsula. I rejoice in the merchants'dinner. Parliament's not doing any thing was a sadomission. But I must break off. Farewell.Believe me ever most sincerely yours,W. Wilberforce."He was the more deeply interested in the successof the Spanish arms from its apparent bearing on thecause of Abolition. These hopes he soon expressedto Mr. Stephen.My dear Stephen,Just at present the Spanish patriots mustnecessarily be wholly engrossed by the exigencies oftheir own situation, but doubtless they are preciselyin the circumstances in which, if it please God theysucceed, (and may the Almighty favour them,) thatgenerous temper of mind will be produced, which willabhor oppression and cruelty, consequently will abolish372 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1808.the Slave Trade. And surely we ought to be immediatelytaking all proper preparatory measures fordiffusing information on the subject. Such prospectsopen to my view when I look around on both sides ofthe Atlantic, as quite to enrapture me. To the fertilesoil of your mind let me commit the seed of this idea,and let me earnestly conjure you to give it immediateattention. Many of the priests appear to have joinedthe popular cause in Spain ; probably therefore alsoin Portugal. They may perhaps be worked on by thedouble motives of the spirit of liberty and of religion,to exert themselves for so glorious an object as ours.I will immediately write to Canning, desiring him tomention the subject to the Spanish deputies. Doyou desire Perceval to do the same. I have an ideaalso of writing to Lord Holland, as well as toBrougham, whom we ought here to carry along withus, for his knowledge of Portugal people, &c. renderhim capable of being a useful ally. Farewell.I am ever yours,W. WILBERFORCE."At East-Bourne he had escaped the crowd ofvisitors who dogged his Broomfield hours, and herejoiced in being able to associate freely with hisfamily, and find some time for meditation and forstudy. But one great hinderance still remained. Hisletters still followed, pouring in upon him in multitudes." They are become an unspeakable plague tome.They form my chief occupation, and I mustcontrive some means of lessening the time spent on1808. MISS REWARD'S LETTERS. 373them; for there is no acquisition of knowledge, noexercise or improvement of talents." 37 Yet he wasas far as possible from cultivating an idle and unmeaningcorrespondence. " I am too like her' he saysafter reading Miss Seward's Letters, " in one particular,that, I mean, of the proportion of my timespent on writing letters. But not I trust from thesame motives. Mine are really necessary. Sheseems to have cultivated the acquaintance of all personsof any note, literary, social, or of any other kind ;when separated from them a correspondence sprungup ; hence her 144 quarto volumes of letters between1784 and 1810 ; the first, the very year I becameM. P. for Yorkshire. She really had talents andreading ; but how much more usefully and honourablywould she have been employed, had she, like HannahMore, been teaching the poor, or still more in writingsuch books as Hannah More ! " 38 In truth, his correspondence,like his open house, and broken Londonmornings, sprung of necessity from his peculiar situation.Without them he could not have been foryears the advocate of every moral and religious cause ;the friend and counsellor of all who were in need ofcounsel; the very Attorney General of the unprotectedand the friendless. " Almost entirely consumed,"is one of his complaints, "by letters, yet itappears the part of Christian courtesy to answer correspondents; and so much suffering would in each casebe produced by my not answering, compared with thetrouble it costs, that I know not how to abstain. I3 7 Diary. Ib. Nov. 7,1811.374 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1808.have written lately an immense number several onimportant objects to-day one on missions. Havingheard of the Duke of York's being designed for commanderof the army, I resolved, however invidious, tostate objections strongly ; and wrote to Perceval.I am now writing to Jefferson in America, to obtainsome agreement between the two nations, for givingeffect to Abolition, by allowing each country to takethe other's slave ships."A compact formed between our two countries,"he tells Jefferson in the conclusion of his letter, " forthe benevolent purpose of stopping, perhaps, the mostdestructive scourge that ever afflicted the human race,may lead to similar agreements with other countries,until at length all the civilized nations of the earthshall have come into this concert of benevolence.It was by a compact of a similar nature, establishedbetween a number of different independent states,that, in the darkness and anarchy of the middle ages,the ravages of private war were arrested in a great partof Europe for near three centuries ; during whichperiod political order, respect for the laws, togetherwith the equal administration of justice, made a considerableprogress. Surely a better precedent cannotbe followed. Surely there can never exist an occasionmore proper for resorting to such a measure ; andmay we not hope that the adoption of it would now befollowed in Africa by the same happy consequenceswhich it formerly produced in Europe."I long," he says a little later, " to write my projectedreligious work, but have first several jobs to do,1808. CHEDDAR Feast-day. 375not one of which however is yet begun. My lettersstill almost engross me. True, they are importantletters keeping up connexion with constituents inabsence from the county ; also some religious letters,and some letters of friendship." Some of these lastare delightful exhibitions of the play and freedom ofhis mind, when not overborne by harassing engagements.Such is a letter of this date to Mrs. HannahMore.East-Bourne, Aug. 2, 1808.My dear Friend,I cannot resist the impulse I feel to take upmy pen on the spot, after reading your most interestingletter. O thank you, thank you a thousandtimes ; (' friend, dost thou count them ? ') I really havenot had my spirits so elevated since 1 came to Eastbourne.I have attended you all through your shiftingof the scene, and your sister Sally also; havebeen with you to church, travelled with you to Weymouth,and rejoiced almost as much as you (not nearso much as Patty, who really, besides other gladdeningconsiderations, has I think somewhat of a militaryturn) over the glories of Sergeant Hill, (how differentfrom Sergeant Kite !) Could I but be affected at theCheddar feast-day ? the twentieth anniversary ! Canit really be ? Then I have been of your party withMai thus, &c. But above all, I have sympathizedwith you, with him, and with the honest villagers, onYoung's return to Blade Cicero's from banishmentwas nothing to it,376 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE, 1808.But after giving vent to these first ebullitions, (totake my figure from the barrel of brown stout just arrived,and for the same reason,) I must leave you forless acceptable society. Be assured however that if,as you say, you have not for many a day written sucha letter, so for many a day neither has any letter givenso much pleasure as yours. But now these frothy joyshaving fumed away, as South would have said, I reallycome to some more solid and substantial pleasure.Your mention of the schools being now attended by somany of the children of those who once were scholars,opens a prospect so extensive, and at the same time sodelightful, that I cannot yet take my eyes from it. SoI trust it will continue to be for generations yet unborn; and that when you and your fellow-labourersare in the world of spirits, you will welcome into theblessed society troop after troop, in long succession,of those who can trace up the work of God in theirhearts to the ladies at Cheddar, as its spring-head andultimate fountain.(( Poor Addington ! and yet you would mischievouslycheck the current of my feelings when in full flow,by your kind memorandum, that the fall you werespeaking of was not Lord S.'s fall from power, buthis own fall down Lord S.'s stairs. But to be moreserious, what a resource does Christianity offer todisappointed men, and yet offer it in vain! Howmerciful and condescending is our God! willing totake the world's leavings, and to accept those whocome to Him (if they will but come) only when theyhave no where else to go. But I must leave you.1808. FRENCH PRIVATEERS. 377As I have gone so far, instead of putting down mysheet, as I had intended, to be finished some leisurequarter of an hour, I'll send it off as it is, to carrythe warm impressions of the heart fresh from beingtaken. I have a whole budget full of matter readyfor you, had I but time but that grows more andmore deficient. Farewell, I've told Mrs. W. whata treat I have for her after dinner in your letter. Iread it inter ambulance by the sea-side. I am everYour affectionate and faithful Friend,W. Wilberforce."Another of these friendly letters is worth preserving.East-Bourne, Sept. 7, 1808.My dear Lancaster,I see you know this coast ; that is, all about itprobably in the state in which it was before it wasmade an iron frontier to resist the attacks of ouropposite neighbour. Yet, ironed as we are, two orthree shabby little privateers, who, as far as we know,had not one cannon among them, same off the coastabout a week ago, took four or five vessels close tothe land, so near that when one was captured evenmusketry would have reached them, and hoveredfor ten or twelve hours so near as would have forfeitedthem to the Crown under the smuggling acts; yetthough we have above 1500 troops, a corps of engineers,a fort which must have cost 2 or 300,000,flying artillery, &c. not the hair of the head of a378 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1808.Frenchman was injured, or a feather in his wing discomposed.Where there was a cannon there was noammunition, where a favourable situation no cannon :the officers were all out of the way, though the affairlasted so long ; and as for a ship of war, it was a nondescript.I must say I seldom have been more provoked,than to have thirty or forty poor fellowscarried into a French gaol, when the slightest preparationfor resistance by those who are paid andmaintained for the sole purpose of resistance, wouldhave prevented all the mischief.But what a gratifying transition across the Bay ofBiscay ! Most cordially do I congratulate you, my dearLancaster, on the happy change of affairs in the Spanishpeninsula, and on the glorious achievements of our bravesoldiery to be vainqueur des vainqueurs du monde is ahigh commendation. What cause have we for thankfulness! I cannot but hope that this humiliation ofimperial arrogance is meant for some good issue. Iam pressed for time, but I was strongly prompted byyour letter, which I have just received, to send youback a few lines. Believe me ever, my dear friend,Yours most sincerely,W. Wilberforce."With " inconceivable sorrow" he heard just at thistime " of all the schoolmasters being dismissed in Ceylon.We are to save only about 1500 by what is themoral and religious ruin of the island. O Lord, howdeeply do we provoke Thy resentment ! Yet havemercy on us, and spare us, much as we deserve1808. SCHOOLS IN CEYLON. 379punishment. I have had some intercourse with LordCastlereagh about it." 39 Happily he did not remonstratefruitlessly ; some of the old schools were restored,and the place of others supplied by new institutions." I enclose for your private information 5 wasLord C.'s reply, " the letter I have written to Ceylon,relative "to schoolmasters, of which I hope you willapprove." This happy interposition he reports toMr. Babington.East-Bourne, Sept. 28, 1808.My dear Babington,******I am vexed beyond measure, to tell you that I reallyhave done little since I came here but write letters.Numbers of them have been of very great importance.Still as the 'summer is my only time for pouring in, Iam likely to become as hollow as an empty cask,especially as I am but a leaky vessel. I have beenwriting to Lord Castlereagh about the conduct ofgovernment, in breaking up, for the purpose of savingI am told about 1800, nearly all the schools in Ceylonnear two hundred masters, who acted as catechists,and instructed near 200,000 willing learners inthe principles of Christianity. I have since beenshocked by a proclamation of the Governor, whereinhe vindicates publicly his rights, privileges, revenues,and presidencies for the priest of the temple of Candy,whom we appoint, having the greatest confidence inhis eminent qualities, fidelity, and ability. The Diary, Sept. 11,380 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1808.sect is to secure the attachment of the priests ofBudhoo, and to pull down the Modaliars, who arechiefly Christians ; doing away a rule which has alwaysbeen adhered to from the first European possessionof the island, that natives are only capable ofholding offices if Christians. You cannot conceive(yes, you can on recollection) how cool Lord Castlereaghwas about the schools, &c. Yet somethingpassed which showed the benefit of our parliamentarydiscussions, and gave me ground to stand on, betterthan I could otherwise have had.I will say nothing of public affairs, except that Ithink you would wish, if at all, to receive such anaccount as that of the Portugal convention when atthe house of your friend the Lord Advocate ; becausethere would then be a chance of seeing his face withouta smile ; and really one would like to see how hewould look in such a situation for the mere novelty :where there is perpetual sunshine, I suppose even agloomy day is a pleasing variety. Seriously, I havebeen deeply hurt. The stroke fell just when ourfeelings made the discord of such a note the most inharmonious.I shall like hereafter to talk with you about yourScotch tour. Farewell. I do not like to break offwithout one serious word. May our gracious Godwatch over you, and bless you.Ever affectionately yours,W. WILBERFORCE."1808. OBSERVANCE OF THE LORD'S DAY. 381Another letter written during the same month illustratesthe nature of his various employments.TO W. Alert ESQ. 40East-Bourne, Sept, 12, 1808.Dear Sir,Though I have not the pleasure of being personallyknown to you, an apology or an introductionwas wholly unnecessary for any one writing to me onsuch a subject 41 as that of your letter; and for you,let the subject of your letter have been what it would.I can open my mind to you with the frankness withwhich I should address an old acquaintance ; andtherefore I state without reserve, that the subjecton which you have written to me is one on which Ihave been thinking, and consulting, and discussing,and sometimes even acting, for many years. Aboutthirteen or fourteen years ago we actually had a billin the House of Commons which went through manystages, but was at length thrown out.ee I could not without going into great length sayall that would be necessary to state to you, to giveyou complete information on this subject. Whenparliament meets again, I shall be very happy D. V.to talk it over with you ; and to consider, in conjunctionwith yourself arid others who are aware of theextreme importance of the end in view, whether thereis such a reasonable probability of carrying any newbill for better enforcing the due observance of the40 Now W. Alters Hanker Esq.41 Obtaining some additional legislative protection for the Lord's day.382 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1808.Lord's day, as to render it prudent to bring it forward.I feel that you really do me honour in what you sayconcerning my bringing such a proposition forward ;but on that head I should have much to observe ofan opposite tendency.Meanwhile I remain, with cordial esteem andregard, my dear sir,Your faithful Servant,W. WILBERFORCE."His correspondent had referred to the Abolition asaffording a ground for his application . . . . " Thatimportant object, which has formed the great labourof your life, being through the Divine blessing happilyaccomplished, your active mind disdaining repose in aworld where so much is needful to be done, has doubtlesscontemplated new scenes of exertion." But thestate of the Slave Trade still continued to be a constantcall upon his attention. On this subject he now wroteto Mr. Macaulay.East-Bourne, Sept. 5, 1808.My dear Sir,I will myself write to Consul Gambier, withwhom I am a little acquainted, begging him to be onthe watch, and to set proper persons on the look-out,to detect any British ships or men bringing slavesinto Brazil. I will also desire Perceval to see thatspecial instructions are given to the chief revenueofficers in Trinidad, and the continent, (I meanDemerara, &c.) to stimulate their exertions. I also1808. ENFORCING ABOLITION. 383will write to Canning, but I will beg him to consultwith Stephen for particular regulations.I will mention to Perceval the idea of a bond.Were it not for the sake of the poor slaves themselves,I should quite enjoy suffering the Liverpool villany toripen to its full maturity, and then to pluck it fromthe blood-stained hand which would be just about tograsp it ; but by preventing the crime in its earlierstages, we shall prevent much individual suffering.I am quite thankful that you have succeeded so wellin finding proper instruments for Sierra Leone. Asfor , I could almost be pleased with his beingsuch as he seems to be. It certainly was requisite tothe consistency of the character. An appointment somade, an office so filled, ought to have its duties soexecuted. But I beg that means may be taken forbringing Perceval, at least, acquainted with hisgoings-on.I will send D. V. the American letter. Yourfew little words, though so modestly put, cut me tothe very quick I mean your short question, ' Howgoes on the critique on Fox ? ' I am ashamed to say,it can scarcely be said to be begun, except that I havebeen reading a good deal, in order to refresh mymemory on the events of that period. But I amgrieved to think how the six weeks, for so long I havenow been here, have been employed four-fifths ofmy time consumed in letter-writing. I can make toyou the same sort of excuse which was made to aworthy friend of mine, rector of a parish in Norfolk,by a parishioner whom my friend had been reprovingfor never having come to church for a long period.384 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1808.1 Why to be sure replied the man, ' I have not come tochurch much, but I assure your honour I have goneno where else' So I can plead to you. But really, mydear friend, I find that it would take me a year'sstudy, (not of such little broken periods as alone Inow enjoy, but of real good days' work,) to make upmy mind satisfactorily on even a part only of the manyimportant facts and questions which come before anyonewho reviews the period between 1625, (Charles theFirst's beginning to reign,) and the Revolution. But Iam resolved I will send you something, and therefore1 must be content, and so must you, with a far lesssatisfactory and complete work than I should be gladto send.Another idea has struck me whether it mightnot be useful for me to get pretty well acquainted withthe Spanish and Portuguese deputies. Certainly,advantage should be taken of their being here, tomake them acquainted with the real nature of theSlave Trade, &c. Is there any person who will translateinto Spanish any English piece on the SlaveTrade ? I desired both Canning, and Perceval, andBrougham, and Lord Holland to attend to thedeputies.I am not quite well to-day, and must stop for thepresent. You and yours I hope are all well. I don'tknow what we should do without you. I am sure Ican "truly declare, that when I think how much youget through, I shrink back into my shell with shame.Farewell, my dear sir, and believe meever most sincerely yours,W. WILBERFORCE."1808. FOX'S HISTORY. 385The same subject appears in a letter from Eastbourneto Mr. William Smith.I had a very obliging letter from Lord Holland,to whom I took the liberty of writing with a view tohaving the Spanish deputies well impregnated withAbolitionism. I was glad to find that the subjecthad fully occupied his mind. * I havebeen hearing by snatches, while dressing, (the onlytime, observe, when I could read or hear readinghitherto,) Fox's History, and I long to undertakea more deliberate perusal. I do not happen tohave heard many people speak of it. The few whoseopinions have reached me, were people strongly opposedto Fox in politics, and who did not at allknow the man. They certainly gave me reason toexpect something very different from what I havefound. He seems to write under a strong party bias,but with perfect integrity ; I mean, with an earnestdesire to make out and relate the truth. He hasevidently digested his matter thoroughly ; and thereare several remarks, as I already see, which beartraces of Fox's superior vigour of intellect. Howmuch one wishes such a man could have written ahistory of England from the times of Alfred ! If anythingfrets me, (choquer is the French word,) it is twoor three not very good-natured allusions to the politicsof his own times. But in another view, even theseplease me, by showing how much he felt in earnest inthem ; and where that is the case, and there is noshabby view of a mercenary kind, I can forgive all therest."VOL. in. s386 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1808.But "a more deliberate perusal" led him greatlyto qualify this favourable judgment. "I own as Ihave proceeded reading the work with more care thanI had done when the observations in the preface werewritten, I see far more reason for censure than Iformerly did ; above all, I see far more party bias."I believe Fox meant to be perfectly impartial,though he certainly was, in fact, grievously otherwise.Meaning however to correct his partial representations,I should really like to do justice to what Ibelieve to have been his feelings. But I have a notionwith respect to him and other such men, whoseunderstandings are vigorous, and their feelings warm,that they are ardent in their emotions in behalf oftruth, justice, the oppressed, &c. ; yet take them intheir cool moments, and they are not so deliberatelyand practically observant of the duties with whichthese several sets of emotions are connected, as manya simple honest man whose passions are far less susceptible.This observation, if true, greatly illustratesFox's character, and explains what might at firstsight appear an inconsistency, that he was honest anhis sympathies with the oppressed and injured, warmin his love of justice and truth, and yet by nomeans an accurate man (far less so than Pitt) in hisassertions." 42The promised review was soon afterwards supplied.It is full of valuable thought, though " the most productivetime " he could give up for composition wasin the morning whilst dressing," and many of the48 To Zachary Macaulay Esq.1808. REVIEW. 387questions which he wished to solve were left untouched." I find there is no end of entering into adiscussion of the questions started by Mr. Fox in theintroductory chapter. Alps on Alps arise as one proceedsto investigate it. But I am disposed to givea little account of the party system, as Fox mostbroadly lays down the doctrine of his party, by condemningand grossly misapplying the dictum, ' notmen but measures.' Does it not however strike youthat there is a certain philosophical spirit throughout,very hostile to the spirit of Christianity, as well as amanifest hatred, in him poor fellow but too natural,to the Church of England." 43East-Bourne was his head-quarters until the 19thof November, when he took possession of a new houseat Kensington Gore, of which he had bought a twenty-fiveyears' lease in the preceding spring. It was notwithout "great regret that" he "gave up Broomfield,a place endeared to" him " by much happiness enjoyedin it, as well as by its own beauty. I give up alsothe living near my friends in this circle ; yet I trustmy connexion with them is so firm that the removalwill not weaken it." The Dean of Carlisle suggestedanother incidental benefit, pointing out to him " a dangerin living altogether at Clapham danger of conceitand spiritual pride, and a cold, critical spirit. Heimputes this less to me than to some others but thedanger great." 44 Upon the whole, he thought " thechange of residence best may God bless it I trustthat it is made on grounds of which He approves."43 To Zachary Macaulay Esq. 4t Diary.s 2388 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1808.The distance of Broomfield made a London houseessential to his parliamentary attendance, and separatedhim almost entirely from his family. By settlingwithin a mile of Hyde Park Corner, he hoped to bemuch oftener with them ; and by the exchange of "theold house in Palace Yard' for "lodgings on the Terrace,(for I must have a nest close to the House ofCommons)" he hoped to promote that economy bywhich he still kept up his ample charities.These ends were in a measure answered. As long,indeed, as he sat for Yorkshire, and actively " representeda tenth part of England," he was often keptthroughout the week at his lodgings in Westminster.Yet upon the whole he was more with hisfamily ; and from the size of his new house was ableto exercise, with greater comfort, the hospitality inwhich he delighted. There are still many who rememberwith no little interest, the cheerful and enlightenedintercourse of the house and grounds ofKensington Gore. The house was seldom free fromguests when he was in it. The first hours in themorning were all that he could strictly call his own,and these were spent~in devotional exercises. "I alwaysfind that I have most time for business, and it isbest done, when I have most properly observed myprivate devotions." " In the calmness of the morning,"was his common observation, " before the mindis heated and wearied by the turmoil of the day, youhave a season of unusual importance for communingwith God and with yourself." After this secret intercoursewith his heavenly Father, which cheered1808. SOCIAL POWERS. 389and sustained his laborious pilgrimage, he joined hisassembled household for morning prayer a servicewhich he conducted himself, and with peculiar interest.With breakfast, which was thus made somewhatlate, began his first throng of visitors. Hisante-room, which still justified abundantly the wittysimile 45 of Hannah More, furnished many breakfastguests ; and his extraordinary social powers werenever seen to more advantage, than in drawing outand harmonizing all the shades of character and feelingwhich were here brought suddenly together.Thus whilst he was endeavouring to relax the stiffnessof a " starched little fellow whom " he " wasanxious not to disgust, Andrew Fuller was announceda man of considerable powers of mind, but who boreabout him very plainly the vestigia juris. Not amoment was to be lost. So before he came in Isaid to my little friend, ' You know Andrew Fuller ? '6 No, I never heard his name.' f Oh then you mustknow him ; he is an extraordinary man, whose talentshave raised him from a very low situation.' Thisprepared the way, and Andrew Fuller did no harm,although he walked in looking the very picture of ablacksmith."He was often amused by these harmless incongruities." Southey," he said, whilst the accountof Dr. Coke's visit to America in Wesley'sLife was being read to him, " never could have seenthe Doctor. I wish I could forget his little roundface and short figure. Any one who wished to takeVid. vol. i. p. 257.390 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1808.off a Methodist could not have done better than exactlycopy his manner and appearance. He looked amere boy when he was turned fifty, with such a smoothapple face, and little round mouth, that if it had beenforgotten you might have made as good a one bythrusting in your thumb. He was waiting once tosee me in a room, into which some accident broughtBankes. The Doctor made I suppose some strangedemonstration, for he sent Bankes to Milner's room,saying in amazement, ( What extraordinary peopleWilberforce does get around him !' " " A large partyto dinner," he says about this time, " of very miscellaneousmaterials; some whom I had asked andwho had sent no answer; others coming withoutnotice. Dr. Constance, Portuguese physician, intelligent,speaks English ; Mr. Townshend, Dissentingminister, from Borough ; Mr. Proctor fromYarmouth, James Stephen, Dicey, and some more.Rational day enough."There were some amongst his nearest connexionswho grudged the expenditure of time and thesacrifice of domestic privacy which this mode oflife required. To a suggestion that he shouldwithdraw to a greater distance from London inorder to escape from it, Mr. Stephen well repliedThere is a peculiar and very important species ofusefulness to friends and acquaintances, for whichWilberforce's character and manners fit him inan extraordinary degree ; and this talent can nowhereperhaps be traded with to greater profit thanat Kensington. I think too that his public usefulness1808. KENSINGTON GORE. 391is promoted by having so respectable a mansion, somuch in the eye of the public, and within reach of allwho have business with him, or to whom his attentionas leader in great public causes ought to be paid.Constituted as the world is, example and influencewill be the more efficacious, the more personal consequenceis attached to them ; and personal consequencewill be measured by strangers, nay, insensibly bythose who are not strangers, in a certain degree byexternal appearances. A good house is the mosteffectual way of attaining this advantage. It meetsevery eye. It costs far less than the support ofsplendid equipages and bands of livery servants, orthan grand fetes and entertainments. I have oftenthought when I saw strangers, to whom Wilberforcefor important reasons wished to be courteous, at KensingtonGore, that his house made them take inbetter part that seeming inequality in the ceremonialforms of life, which his health, hurry, &c. generallyoblige him to exact. Besides, there he is inthe eye of the great and fashionable world, while theydrive in Hyde Park, with appearances that proclaimhe might live like them if he would, that it is not forwant of fortune Wilberforce has not like others sunkhis name in a title ; and that while he abstains fromfashionable luxuries, he indulges himself in thosecongruities to his station and fortune, which best becomethe English gentleman and the Christian, inthe means of family comfort, and extensive thoughsimple hospitality.In any material degree to exclude guests, would392 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1808.not only be to impair Wilberforce's usefulness, but tochange his nature. And the witnessing his domesticlife is one of the best cures I know for prepossessionsagainst religion, best human incentives to the practiceof it, and best guards against those errors and excessesinto which misdirected zeal is apt to run.Too much stress, I am aware, may be laid on thiskind of usefulness, and it ought not to supersede relativeduties of a nearer kind. Still, however, thereis something peculiar in Wilberforce's character andsituation, that seem to point it out as the design ofProvidence, that he should serve his Master in thishigh and special walk ; and should have, so to speak,a kind of domestic publicity that he should be athome a candle set on a candlestick, as well as abroada city built upon a hill.But here perhaps, as usual, we may find an unforeseencoincidence between the dictates of particularand general duties; and that blessings are in facthusbanded, when they appear to be from an excessof benevolence too liberally diffused. If Wilberforcewere less hospitable, sure I am, his children wouldsee less of what may be most useful to them in hisexample. They would have less of that importantand difficult lesson, how to live with the world, andyet not be of the world. They would be less likelyto learn how to have their conversation in heaven,without renouncing the society of man ; how to becheerful in company, and to please both friends andstrangers, without any sacrifice of Christian character.Besides, it is of unspeakable importance that1808. HOUSEHOLD ECONOMY. 393they will thus gain a taste for the pleasures of Christiansociety, and for that very superior tone of conversation,which distinguishes their father's tableand their father's fireside. I do not think you aresufficiently aware of this superiority. The trash, thetrifles, the insipidity, that make up conversation ingeneral, form a disgusting contrast with even theworst table-talk that one generally meets at his house.Wilberforce himself does not see a tenth part somuch of this as I have done, because he knows howto lead conversation wherever he goes ; but rest assured,his home parties are in this respect usefulschools for his children."This is a good picture of his household economy.It abounded in cheerful hospitality, and in the highestcharms of conversation and social intercourse :but there was nothing costly or luxurious in his styleof living ; these were banished on principle, andnone of his guests missed them. " You can do whatyou please," said a friend, who was celebrated for theexcellence of his table ; " people go to you to hear youtalk, not for a good dinner." " I am almost ashamed,"was the thankful simplicity of his own remark whenfirst entering Kensington Gore, " of the handsomenessof my house, my verandah, &c." " I am almost uneasyabout my house and furniture, lest I am spendingtoo much money upon it, so as to curtail my charities."The very next entry is a good commentaryon this characteristic fear. " E. forced his way intosee. me the poor midshipman who about eightmonths ago wrote to me from Worketh gaol, at thes3394 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1808.suit of a tailor for uniform, whom I got released, andsent him a few pounds. He called to thank me, andsaid he should never forget my kindness not ashamedof it ; and would subscribe five pounds per annum toSmall Debt Society. Eat yesterday a turkey, sent meby the person whom I helped to recover a landedestate of three or four hundred pounds per annum."The brief record, a few lines further on, of a visitto an early friend, who had been a keen and a successfulsuitor for riches and advancement, furnishes astriking contrast to his own happier simplicity ofchoice. " To N.'s to dinner, Lord and Lady E.there, and others. The place most complete, andbuilt and fitted up at a vast expense. His son a sweet-lookingboy, quite manly ; but all, I fear, honourableand dishonourable ! N. has a most anxious face, andshe too." " Oh how does that little sentence, ' Thetime is short,' laugh to scorn all the left-handed wisdomof these politic contrivers ! "CHAPTER XXIII.DECEMBER 1808 TO JULY 1810.New house Spanish independence Meeting of parliamentSunday travelling Death of Dr. Burgh Duke of YorkBible Society Use and abuse of government influenceEast-Bourne Walcheren expedition Comprising summerDuel between Castlereagh and Canning Parliament meetsCensure on Lord Chatham Sir Francis Burdett Seriousaccident Windham's death Parliamentary Reform.THE year 1808 closed upon Mr. Wilberforce with theworrying business of removing from two other housesthe accumulated papers, books, &c. of a whole life, toa residence which is not yet prepared for them ;whence the workmen have not yet withdrawn, andwill not for some months to come. My main residenceis just one mile from Hyde Park Corner, and whenfinished it will be a very roomy, comfortable house.I am a little unfortunate in coming after a man whosename you must remember, Morgan, who applied tothe House of Commons many years ago, on being disappointedof the loan. He himself told me, whenshowing me the premises, that he saved 8 or 10,000per annum, and certainly he appears not to have spentas many pence, I beg his pardon, as many farthings,on this residence, in which he lived sixteen or eighteen396 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1-808years. Not a single gravel walk, and literally asmuch to do as in a house which had been ten yearsempty. My kind friend Bernard superintended myimprovements, and has executed his commission withgreat taste.Were I not aware to whom I am writing,and that in addressing a friend you naturally openyour mind on the petitesses of private life, I shouldbe afraid of being deemed abominably selfish forhaving expended my sheet on my own little matters,when every head and heart are full of schemes andsympathies for the poor Spaniards schemes andsympathies more or less sanguine in their nature,according to the temperament of the individual bywhom they are formed and felt. I have been one ofthose, who have not looked for at least any greatpresent triumphs. Yet even the stand which has beenalready made is wonderful. To what a temper ofhardness must that man have brought his mind, whocan coolly issue orders, that no quarter shall be givento the peasants taken in arms fighting for their naturalmonarch against a sovereign set over them by aforeign usurper. Well, we are taught by suchinstances to look forward to the day of retribution,and it will come." xHe was at this time meditating a trip to Bath, andwrote to Mr. Perceval to ascertain the day of meeting.Parliament," was the reply, 2 " will not meet unlesssomething unforeseen at present should occur,until Monday the 16th of January. I hope therefore1 To Lord Lancaster. R. H. S. Perceval to W. Wilberforce Esq.1808. SUNDAY TRAVELLING. 397you will lose no time in .getting your health well setupat Bath." His watchfulness for public morals at oncesuggested to him the amount of Sunday travellingwhich such a day of meeting would create ; and he beggedin answer, that it might, if possible, be altered.I thank you for your note of yesterday," rejoinedthe conscientious minister, " and am really sorry thatI have given occasion for it. I feel myself the moreto blame because, upon the receipt of your note, itbrought back to my recollection (what I had till thenforgot) some observations which the Speaker made tomesome time ago upon the same subject ; if theyhad been present to my mind when we settled themeeting of parliament, I would not have fixed it upona Monday. We were however almost driven into thatday ; Notwithstanding all these considerations,however, if I had thought, as I ought tohave done, of the Sunday travelling, which the meetingon Monday will too probably occasion, I wouldhave preferred meeting on the Friday in the sessionsweek, with all its inconveniences.You have the whole state of the case before you.I am open to your judgment babes confidence forinadvertence is certainly never felt by me as anyexcuse."Two days later he wrote again.Downing Street, Dec. 10, 1808.Dear Wilberforce,You will be glad to hear that it is determinedto postpone the meeting of parliament till Thursday398 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1808.the 19th, instead of Monday the 16th, to obviate theobjections which you have suggested to the meetingon that day.Yours very truly,SPENCER PERCEVAL."The House," says his Diary, " put off nobly byPerceval, because of the Sunday travelling it wouldhave occasioned."The year closed with the death of his old friend,Dr. Burgh. " Dec. 28th. This morning heard ofdear Burgh's death how striking ! he taken and Ileft and not by a stroke, an accident, but by a constitutionbroken down in a few months." 3To Lord Lancaster he writes upon their commonlossMy dear Lancaster,The nome-nt almost after I heard of poorBurgh's death, my mind turned to three or four friendswho I knew would sympathize with me on that event,and you were one of the number. What a strikinginstance of the uncertainty of our mortal state ! Heseemed at one time to have a frame of iron yet ironwill sometimes snap in two. He however, it is remarkable,was carried off, not by a sudden blow, butby a leisurely decay. It is matter of no small pleasureto me to reflect that he was ill so long before thelast fatal issue ; and that he was in such a state as tobe able to use all his mental faculties. Ah ! my dear3 Diary.1809. Celebes. 399Lancaster, we all need preparation, and are too aptto grow careless and worldly-minded from the caresand the bustle of life. How striking that our friendat Copgrove should survive him } I must break off.My dear friend,Believe me ever yours,W. Wilberforce."The leisure of the Christmas holidays left him timeto look at Celebes, which had just appeared. Noneof Hannah More's usual confidants had been let thistime into the secret, and no rumour had betrayed itsauthor. " Celebes," says his Diary, te variously talkedof. The Henry Thorntonss affirm that it cannot beHannah More's, and are strong against it, surely withoutreason." His critical discernment was morefaithful. " Reading Celebes in the afternoon, andmuch pleased with it ; it is Hannah More's all over."Kensington Gore, Jan. 7, 1809.My dear Friend,What ! did I not know thy old ward, Hal ? 'I had not read ten pages before I was reminded ofaut Erasmus, &c. And without paying you any compliments,I may say, that it is a piece in my judgment,of which you, even you, with all your well-earnedand well-merited credit, need not be ashamed ;on the contrary, I really am delighted with it, andhave been kept up night after night reading it aftersupper. I hope too, which will please you better,that it will do as much good, as such a composition,400 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1809.from its very nature, and from the state of mind itnecessarily generates, can do. It will, I trust, draw ontoother and more serious studies. It will accredit truereligion and its ministers, and its consistent professors.It will but I must break off. I am come too latefrom London, and have to prepare for a large party todinner, preceded by a consultation on a matter ofgreat importance to a friend. The truth is, (to thinkaloud to yourself and Patty only,) the judgment of ourfriend Henry, (with whom I argued about your beingthe author, till I saw there was no use in arguingany longer,) that you were not the author, abundantlyjustifies your judgment in not consulting him, and ifnot him, none of us, in the outset or progress."Before the holidays were over he wrote to Mr. Hey.My dear Sir,I am almost glad if I can surprise you in alittle irregularity, or a little want of punctuality. Itseems as if I got you thereby into my books, and hada right to plead it as my excuse, if I should ever(which I fear is much more likely than that it shouldbe the case with you) incur to you a debt of friendlyattention. Though I have not heard from you, Ihave heard of you, and that more especially from ourfriend the Dean ; and it gave me sincere pleasure toreceive so favourable a report of the state of yourhealth and strength. I am inclined to hope it willplease God still to grant you a fine autumn of life ; aseason which, with better reason than the historian of1809. NEW SOUTH WALES. 401nature, as Mr. Gibbon terms him, you might findpeculiarly grateful. However, our times and seasonsare in the disposal of One who knows far better thanwe do what is most eligible for us, and who, if it benot our own fault, will cause all things to work togetherfor our good.Mr. Marsden's coming over to this country wasso opportune, and the services he has been able torender while here are such, that I cannot considerhim any otherwise, than as a special instrument ofProvidence, sent over on a particular errand, justwhen he could do most good here, and be deliveredfrom most evil in New South Wales. I hope we shallget the moral state of the colony greatly reformed.Alas, in how many instances does our national conductin foreign countries call aloud for the vengeanceof Heaven ! I hope I have been able to prevent someshocking violations of our moral duties, and of thefirst principles of our national religion, in one of ourdistant settlements, some short time ago.I am myself full as well as usual, looking forwardto a very unpleasant session. I am quite sick of suchincessant brawls as I there witness, while every forwardman wishes to bring himself into notice by findingsome topic on which he may display his talents.Farewell.Believe me ever affectionately yours,W. Wilberforce."This " unpleasant session " soon surpassed hisgloomiest forebodings. " Wardle's motion on Duke of402 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1809.York sad work. No apparent sense in the House ofthe guilt of adultery, only of the political offence spokefor any other proceedings than bar of the House. MajorCartwright writes about Parliamentary Reform as theonly panacea. Alas! 'tis more a moral disease." 4tf I have wanted greatly to move the examination ofthe Duke of York's business from the bar, opengallery, &c. to a committee up-stairs, and some parliamentaryinquest on oath. This melancholy businesswill do irreparable mischief to public morals, byaccustoming the public to hear without emotion ofshameless violations of decency. House examiningMrs. Clarke for two hours cross-examining her inthe Old Bailey way she elegantly dressed, consummatelyimpudent, and very clever : clearly got thebetter in the tussle a number of particulars let outabout life, mother, children, &c. Col. Gordon's evidencewould have been sufficient, and I would nothave asked one question of Mrs. Clarke." 5TO WILLIAM HEY ESQ.London, February 16, 1809.My dear Sir,What a scene are we exhibiting to the world !It is no more than was to be foreseen by any one whowas ever so little acquainted with the House of Commons.We are alive to the political offence, but to themoral crime we seem utterly insensible ; and the receptionwhich every double entendre meets in theHouse, must injure our character greatly with allDiary, Jan. 26. * Feb. 1.1809. DUKE OF YORK'S BUSINESS. 403religious minds. It was because I foresaw all this,that I pressed so strongly for a secret committee orsome special commission of inquiry.I remain, my dear Sir,ever most sincerely yours,W. Wilberforce."Mrs. Clarke by fascinating the House has preventedits degradation by appearing to stifle theinquiry, and take too strong a part with the Duke ofYork curious to see how strongly she has won uponpeople." 6 " Duke of York's business deciding. Perceval'scapital speech, which greatly changed my opinionas to his guilt, softening though not quite turningme." 7 This judicial tone, so rarely maintained inthe heated atmosphere of party, was preserved by acontinual reference to unseen realities. " Lord," washis secret prayer whilst this question was before him,guide me right in this great business that is nowgoing on. May I be enabled to judge, and speak,and act with a simple desire to please God, free entirelyfrom vanity or love of popular favour on the oneside, and from the fear of man on the other. O Lord,above all, teach me to look to Thee, and set my affectionson things above."The debate, which had already occupied two days,was resumed upon the 10th, when Mr. Bankes broughtforward a second amendment to Colonel Wardle'smotion. It had been " agreed on," says the Diary,between Bankes, Henry Thornton, myself, and6 Feb. 26. 7 March 8.404 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1809*others' and took a middle line between Mr. Percevaland Colonel Wardle. Upon the 14th he " rose tospeak, but others were before" him. On the 15th hespoke latish. I had prepared myself fully, and neverfelt myself less easy or warm ; and though in someparts what I said was well, in others not so ; and theHouse at last grew impatient and hurried me, andforced me to conclude, after compressing. Thefact was, I was very poorly in body." 8 It seems howeverthat the pen could more easily follow him whenhis usual brilliancy and fire were somewhat obscuredby bodily infirmity; for those who compared thereport of this speech with that of his most powerfulefforts, supposed him rarely to have spoken with suchfulness and effect. " I waited anxiously," says a veryintelligent constituent, " till the newspaper announcedyour sentiments, and nunquam, si mihi cretan, was Imore satisfied. If you had delivered them sooner theeffect would have been more powerful." " Strangethat my speech on the Duke of York's business, inwhich I was so foiled, gave great satisfaction to myfriends in the county ; more almost than any I everdelivered. Very humiliating."Mr. Bankes's motion failed, being " negatived byabout 95; near 500 members present." The nextday was a welcome holiday : " The House havingadjourned the Duke of York's business, I staid atKensington Gore its peacefulness delightful ; " butthe contest was renewed the following night.Saturday Mr. Wilberforce tells Lord Lancasters Diarv.1809. PUBLIC MORALS. 405London, March 18, 1809.My dear Lancaster,Perceval carried last night his vote of purgation,but unless the Duke of York should resignbefore Monday, I am sanguine in my expectation,that we shall either carry the question for his removal,or for some measure which must lead to it, or comeso near carrying it, as to render it prudent for him totake the hint. Alas, my dear Lancaster, what sceneshave we been unveiling to the peaceful villagers ofCumberland and Westmoreland. If we believe theBible, we must believe that the vices of the great,both directly and consequentially, call down the judgmentsof the Almighty ; and I may say to you that Iam strongly influenced by the persuasion, that bymarking such shameful debauchery, thus publicly disclosed,with the stigma of the House of Commons, weshould be acting in a manner that would be pleasingto God, and directly beneficial to the morals of thecommunity. On one day the House of Lords wereemployed on five Divorce Bills, and we in examiningMrs. Clarke. I was reading this morning the 15thof Jeremiah. ' Shall not my soul be avenged,' &c.still saddens my heart. Yet there are many righteous,I trust, among us.Ever, my dear Lancaster,Yours most sincerely,W. Wilberforce."His expectations were not disappointed. Beforethe House met he received a message from the Duke406 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1809.of Cumberland, by Mr. Robert Thornton, that theDuke of York has resigned ; e( wishing to knowwhether I mean to push any further steps, &c.Thornton says, ' the Duke of Cumberland told himthe King and all of them extremely angry at me.'Yet what could I do as an honest man short of whatI have done. Bankes's motion acquitted the Dukeof all personal corruption, but prayed for his removal,declaring he could scarcely have helped suspectingwhat had passed ; and though Canning made himselfmerry with this, I am well pleased with it on reflection.It expresses a very common state of mind,especially in the case of a man, who does not thinkmuch, and is loose in his principles."As soon as the House met on Monday, he " heardfrom Perceval the formal statement, that the Dukehas resigned. Lord Thorpe's motion acceded to,noticing the resignation, and no further proceedingsnow necessary." 9 But the effect of these disclosureslong agitated the public mind, and a breath from anyquarter was enough to raise the troubled waves into astorm. Lord Castlereagh was first attacked for bargainingcorruptly for a seat in parliament. On thismotion Mr. Wilberforce was " long doubtful ; but atlast decided to vote against it, as too severe to turnhim out for such an offence. Henry Thornton andBabington against me, Grant with me." 10 He votedin the majority of 49, n which negatived Lord ArchibaldHamilton's resolutions; and three days later,reports that the " Burdettites are trying to stir9 May 6. 10 Diary. n Ayes 167, noes 216.1809. BIBLE SOCIETY. 407up a flame about Castlereagh's not being condemnedby the House of Commons ; but (N. B.) he ownedhis fault frankly and humbly, so did all his colleagues ;and it rested in intention, and never was an act."In the midst of these political contentions, the morningof the 3rd of May presented to him a more gratefulsight. His views in joining the Bible Societyhave been explained already ; and giving others creditfor that pure spirit with which he was animated,he saw in its anniversary a " grand " and pleasingspectacle " five or six hundred people of all sects andparties, with one heart, and face, and tongue." Butthis was only a moment's calm amidst the troubledscenes in which he was compelled to take an activepart. " I want more time for reflection, and considerationof political subjects. The times are highlyalarming. The Duke of York's affair, and parliament'sconduct in it, has infused a general jealousy ofpublic men. The House of Commons has lost thepublic confidence ; there is no man of such talents asto take the ascendency like Pitt or Fox. It wouldbe worse to try to stifle inquiry than to prosecute it.Yet I see the people may be inflamed to madness, orat least to the most mischievous excesses and measures.Oh may He who rides in the whirlwind direct the stormfor our good ! " 12 On the day before this entry, Mr.Mattocks had given notice of his " motion, chargingPerceval and Castlereagh with interference in theelection of Mattocks for Castel, and afterwards influxDiary, May 6.408 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1809.ending him to go out of parliament." The motionwas debated on the 11th, when he, " Babington,Grant, Henry Thornton, all voted in the minority.The inquiry negatived by a vast majority, on theground of its being the first step towards ParliamentaryReform. I said a few words, having been often up,but not being called upon till so late, that I could notspeak more than two or three minutes. I feared thevote would be more injurious to the character of parliamentthan any other. But all the violent or ratherdecided partisans, both of government and opposition,very strong against us, on the ground of the unfairnessof censuring what we have connived at, and whatis generally known to exist. Still this ought not toinfluence our exercise of a trust."He enforced these principles at greater length insupporting, on the 26th of May, Mr. Curwen's motionfor Parliamentary Reform. After showing that, howeverexplained, the prevailing system could not butoffend men of strict principles, he referred to Mr.Pitt's position, that on grounds of policy it was importantto separate the real enemies of corruptionfrom those who made Reform a party watch-word.For himself however he took higher ground. " SureI am that no country was ever the worse for adheringto moral principles. 5? " I was always a friend tomoderate and temperate Reform : in my younger daysI espoused it ; though older now, and consequentlymore cautious, I can see no reason to doubt the proprietyof that former opinion, or why Reform should1809. GOVERNMENT PATRONAGE. 409not now take place." Mr. Perceval's amendment tothe Bill of Mr. Cur wen led, upon the 9th of June,to a debate, in which he condemned the corrupt usetoo often made of the patronage of government. Hehad ever been jealously careful x>f his own independence,asking no personal favours of the minister,nor ever recommending to .appointments, except onpublic grounds. But there were some cases in which,on public grounds, he felt bound to name the properperson for the office. " Ministers," was his avowedprinciple, " cannot possibly know the circumstancesof remote parts of the country, and they ought tobe highly obliged to those who will give them honestinformation."One of these cases occurred exactly at this time,and his casual opposition to the government did notmake him hesitate to recommend the fittest claimantfor the vacant office. " Mr. Huskisson," he writesword to Col. Creyke, "entirely acquiesced in theplace of Receiver-general being one which belongsto the manor of the member for Yorkshire, and receivedmy recommendation just as he has always donethose for other similar offices." Yet this applicationbetrayed Mr. Canning, through his dangerous fertilityin sarcasm, into an insinuation which deeply woundedMr. Wilberforce. " The intimation was, that whilstI was opposing government I was asking a favour ofthem." This was just the sort of misrepresentationwhich was sure to wound him ; and he felt at themoment " sadly discomposed." It was a time to tryhis principles. " These men of the world," he says aVOL. III. T410 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1809.few months back, " how resentful ! Canning said tomesignificantly yesterday evening, he vowed vengeanceagainst Bankes for his attack on him about theconsulship." He professed a higher standard; andhe acted up to it. When he had given undesignedoffence, " I apologized' he says, " to Homer, I hopeto the comfort of both, I am sure to my own " andhere when he was hurt, " My discomposure," he adds,passed ois, I thank God, and " (having replied tothe attack while the gallery was cleared) " I spoketo him freely and kindly in private afterwards." Yethis honest jealousy of any stain upon his independencemade one effect of this insinuation lasting. ThoughMr. Perceval assured him, " If you feel the least scruplein consequence, in making all such applications tothe Treasury as you have ever heretofore made, theeffect will be, that government will be deprived ofyour testimony in favour of persons of whom yourconnexion with the county you represent enables youto form a much better judgment than it is possiblefor government to expect from any other quarter ;"yet he resolved, as years afterwards he told a leadingconstituent who wished to secure his nomination, " totake no part except that of certifying, if consulted,and why the imputation cast by Canning."The session closed upon the 21st of June, and onthe 5th of July, " cutting the cables, rather thanregularly unmooring," he turned his back on London,and the bustle of politics, and with his whole familytook possession of his last summer's quarters at Eastbourne.He brought with him as usual " an .EAST-BOURNE. 411mense mass of unanswered letters. They took me,and some besides, about three hours and a half lookingover, sorting, selecting, and preparing for answering.My chief business at first must be to pay offthese arrears ; but I mean here to live with my ownfamily, attending closely to their tempers and dispositions."The clearing off this accumulation was noslight task. " How much I wish always," he tellsMr. Macaulay, " when at such places as this, where,however, at present I have not a minute's leisure,though I am looking forward to it with hope and joy,that you and a few other friends were at hand, thatwe might have a little less hurried social intercourse !But so it is may we at last enjoy this peace as wellas love. It is a delightful idea of the future state,(may we realize it more,) that it is the rest which remainethfor the people of God." A few days laterhe writes to Hannah More, whom he had visited inApril, and found, "after all her sufferings, (seven teethdrawn at once,) perfectly alive in spirits, though stillin pain at intervals.""East-Bourne, July 15, 1809.",My dear Friend,Your truly interesting letter is just arrived. Iam with you at your festivity a more truly gloriousgala than all the Olympic or Isthmian games in theworld. I quite rejoice you were able to make yourappearance ; and I trust, as you gain strength insteadof losing it, that your complaints, obstinately as theyhave kept possession of your tormented frame, are yetT 2412 LIFE OF Wilberforce. 1809.losing their hold on the main organs. What yousay of the good Bishop 13 delights me : surely he wasone of the most lovely of human beings ; yet even hehad his venomous traducers, and even death, as youwill have heard, did not silence them all.As for the drawing, you have done the thingmuch more splendidly than I ever intended, but as itis done I shall carve for myself a little ; and allowingthe Earl of Harrowby, (do you know that far morethan half of the nobility both of England and Irelandhave been raised to their present elevation since Icame into public life,) granting to my Lord H. I saythe usufruct of the drawing, I shall retain the fee-simpleof it, and hang it up as a memento of a scene Ilove so well. By the way, I am glad to see Harrowbyin office, he is a very able man.We are all well, I thank God, though I have foundmyself more shattered than I was aware of. Butas for relaxation ! I have by tiny side four or five andtwenty letters ready franked, and I owe sixty orseventy more ; many of them old epistolary debts.When these are cleared away, I have several other oldcreditors to satisfy. Who should be here but LadyCrewe, whom I doubt if I have seen since 1783. Ilong to open to her. I find among other obligationsI owe you for C celebes, is that of giving me a text onwhich to comment, an introduction for opening theway to discussions on the most important topics,which otherwise would be hedged out from access.By the way, I ought to have thought of asking you,13 Bishop Porteus.1809. TO MRS. HANNAH MORE. 413does N. contribute towards the Somersetshire operations? If not, I really ought and gladly will increasemy, I often think, too small contribution. I beg youwill deal honestly with me here. The idea of spendingall the summer at a watering-place, where onecannot have a solitary, contemplative walk withoutbeing thought sulky, is so little to my taste, indeed Imay say to ours, that we have been looking round tofind some furnished dwelling for two or three months.One or two I found which would have done, but I wasasked 2 or 300 or more for them ; and I believe weshall at last accept a very obliging offer Mrs.made to my wife, of lending us for a few weeks theparsonage, they occupying the while the curate'shouse, and we finding quarters for the latter's family.All this arrangement may as well however not betalked of: I only say all to you. I own my chieftemptation was its being very near dear Cowper'sfavourite promenades. Indeed I hoped we should geta house in the very heart of them, but we must havefurnished it, which for two months would have beentoo much.I must break off. Farewell, and believe me withkindest remembrances,Ever affectionately yours,W. Wilberforce'*From his present resting-place upon the Sussexcoast, he saw the " gallant trim " of the unhappyWalcheren expedition. In some anxiety on publicmatters, he wrote to Mr. Bankes.414 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1809.East-Bourne, July 26, 1809.My dear Bankes,Are you still in London, making up the weeksspent in the country in soldiering, or are you gonedown again to Kingston Hall ? Whether in Dorsetshireor Palace Yard, I am disposed to take up the pen tosay a few words to you, the rather because I was disappointedin my hopes of seeing you before I cameout of town. Neither you nor I are much disappointedby the melancholy issue of the fighting onthe Danube, though we must deeply lament it ; and Iown I had begun to hope a little, though sorely againstmy judgment. Whither, and for what purpose, is ourlarge army going? It never can be intended for amere coup de main ; though that employment of it inthe first instance, in its way to some ulterior and moreimportant purpose, may be very proper. But I amafraid it has been prepared and sent out, under anotion of Buonaparte's being confined with the bulkof his forces in the south of Germany, and in Spain,that we may therefore form such a nucleus of forcein the north, as may draw after it as a tail thehardy population of all the German provinces ; havingtime to organize, train, and discipline it into an efficientarmy. I am always very slow to decide onpoints of great importance, when I know I have butvery inadequate grounds on which to rest my opinion.But I have learned to suspect that those who havemore and betted grounds, have not always sufficient.I have seen a sad propensity in men, when they havegot a great army, to set it at work, even where the1809. CONTINENTAL EXPEDITIONS. 415prospect is not very encouraging, as being better thanletting it lie idle, and rust for want of exercise. Wereally do not enough remember, that our proper arms arenot military, but naval, and that these military enterprisesare dreadfully expensive, at a time when our truepolicy undoubtedly should be, to husband our resources,and, if possible, adopt a system of warfare, I fear at leastit cannot be peace, which we may be able to carry onfor an indefinitely long period. I hope the desire ofrecovering Hanover has had no undue share in biassingthe judgment of government ; but who that remembershow courtly Fox became on that subject, cancast away all suspicions ? I very well remember oldLord Camden's telling me, that when the King tookhim into his closet, and fairly gave himself to talkinghim over, he was almost irresistible.We are going on in a very quiet way here,which indeed was the object of the journey. I seeso little of my family during the session, that it isonly fair to give them a more liberal portion of mytime in the recess. Our old friend Lady Crewe ishere, and two daughters of Grant's, clever and well-lookingyoung women. I shall be sorry, if the f antic 'himself does not arrive before we depart.Yours ever,W. Wilberforce."On his birth-day he writes to Mr. StephenAugust 24, 1809.My dear Stephen,To you, my kind friend, I may confess that thisis my birth-day ; and I was hoping and meaning to LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1809.ploy this morning (for my morning hours are alwaysbeyond comparison my best hours) in looking backall the way that the Lord hath led me these (notforty, but) fifty years in the wilderness.' I am sureit must argue great hardness, if I cannot go on withthe sentence, and add, ' to humble me,' &c. Ithappens, however, that an unusual number of lettersrequiring immediate attention, and several of themimmediate answers, have this day reached me. Mr.B. however may wait till tomorrow ; his papers, andthe course of conduct which the existing circumstancesof his case render best, require a good deal of consideration.How often does it happen that the sufferingwhich befalls us is the punishment of someformer misconduct, though from its not being immediatelyconnected with it, the sufferer himself overlooksits moral and judicial, or rather penal, quality ! PoorB. will probably suffer from the presumption of hisbeing in the wrong, which will be afforded by hisirritable temper, and former impracticableness.O my dear Stephen, what a prospect does a viewof the last fifty years open to me ! But I must nottrust myself now on that subject. Farewell.Yours ever affectionately,W. WILBERFORCE."The offer of a quiet parsonage near Cowper's hauntsfell in exactly with all his inclinations. " I always observe,"he would often say, " that the owners of yourgrand houses have some snug corner in which theyare glad to shelter themselves from their own magnificence.I remember dining, when I was a young1809. SIMPLE TASTES. 417man, with the Duke of Queensberry, at his Richmondvilla. The party was very small and select Pitt, Lordand Lady Chatham, the Duchess of Gordon, andGeorge Selwyn (who lived for society, and continued init, till he looked really like the wax work figure of acorpse) were amongst the guests. We dined early thatsome of our party might be ready to attend the opera.The dinner was sumptuous, the views from the villaquite enchanting, and the Thames in all its glorybut the Duke looked on with indifference. f Whatis there,' he said, ' to make so much of in theThames I am quite tired of it there it goes, flow,flow, flow, always the same.' ' : " What a blessingit is," remarks Mr. Wilberforce, this summer, onmeeting an acquaintance who could not be happy outof London, " to have a taste for simple and virtuouspleasures ! Religion gives this, but some have it naturally."He possessed it strongly, and enjoyed, therefore,exceedingly this " Comprising summer." 14Nous voici," is his first address to Mr. Stephen fromthe neighbourhood of Newport Pagnell. "We arrivedhere last night, having left Battersea Rise aftera prolonged breakfast. There we took up our abodefrom Tuesday evening, and enjoyed the society ofmany kind friends, whom Henry Thornton had askedto meet us ; inter alios, Mr. Knox, of Ireland, of whomyou must I think have heard me speak, and his friendthe Rev. Mr. Webb. The former is a man of greatpiety, uncommon reading, (uncommon both in qualityand quantity,) and extraordinary liveliness of imamSee Life of Hannah More.T 3418 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1809.nation and powers of conversation. He is reallywell worth your going over on purpose to talk withhim. He was once, strange to say, Lord Castlereagh'sprivate secretary. He is the very last manI should have conceived to have gravitated to LordCastlereagh."To Lord Lancaster he thus communicates theplace of his retirement.Near Newport Pagnell, Sept. 1809.My dear Lancaster,And where is Wilder ? I hear you saying.Near Newport Pagnell ! Out comes Cary, and theinventive genius and geographical knowledge of theyoung ones are set to work ; but I defy you all. Thetruth is, I had been long looking round for a ready-furnishedhouse for a few weeks. Not being able tofind one, I carried my household to our old quarters atEast-Bourne, and there I should have been glad to continuetill November, but for its being so fully peopledthat I could not walk out without being joined bypeople, my only connexion with whom arose from ourinhabiting different numbers in the same row. Iwished to pass a little time as much as possible withmy family, of whom I literally see scarcely any thingduring the whole session of parliament. Really too,though summer by the calendar, it has been so like winterby the weather, as to prompt me rather to look forsome snug hiding-place, than to bask, without sunshine,on an open shore. I therefore am come inland,calling first to spend a day with the Speaker, whom I1809. THE PARSONAGE. 419left contrary alike to our own feelings, and his kindpressings to stay ; and then halting for five or six dayswith Henry Thornton, where I carried Mrs. Wilberforceand my six children to the same house in whichwere now contained his own wife and eight ; but whichhe and I once inhabited as chums for several years,when we were solitary bachelors. How naturally Iwas led to adopt the old patriarch's declaration, Withmy staff I passed over, &c. and now I am become twobands ! Thence we came to this place, where I inhabitthe house of a friend, who having failed in his attemptto hire one ready furnished in the neighbourhood, haskindly lent me his own. It is the parsonage, and heoccupies the house of the curate, who is now servinganother church, and whom I provide with a temporaryresidence.I must own that from my earliest days, at leastmy earliest travelling days, I never passed a parsonagein at all a pretty village, without my mouth wateringto reside in it. And this longing has been still morepowerful since the only objection, that of solitude, hasbeen removed, by my bringing my own society alongwith me. The best of this place is, that though theimmediate neighbourhood has no other beauties thanthose of peaceful rural scenery, yet we are near thescene of Cowper's rambles ; and, devoted as I am toCowper, the idea of treading in his track is not alittle delightful. It is quite classic ground to me, andI shall read both his prose and his verse here with adouble relish. I have once already, (but the day wasbad, and I mean to do it again,) carried some cold420 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1809.meat to a venerable old oak, to which he was stronglyattached. I have been to see Stowe with my charmingyoung friend Powder, whom I think I introducedto you in London ; if not, I have yet to introduce youto a man who will one day I think make a figure.How much was I impressed with the idea of grandeur'snot being necessary to happiness !My dear Lancaster, I wish we were within talkingdistance, I should have much both to say and to hear jbut unless I had more time at command I feel no comfortin beginning upon political subjects. Oh ! it is agloomy sky, but there is a Sun behind the clouds. Inone particular I quite agree with you, in ascribing allthe great events which are taking place to a higher hand.Indeed He is always the supreme Agent, but thereare times, and this seems to be one of them, when Hisarm is lifted up, and His hand displayed with morethan common plainness. This consideration administersthe greatest comfort to my mind. For beingpersuaded that there are many among us who stilllove, and fear, and serve the great Governor of theuniverse, I cannot but hope that, though justly deservingthe vengeance, we shall still experience themercy of Heaven.I found Mr. Worgaii still lingering about ClaphamCommon, and was delighted with his performances.His music gratifies not only the ear but thesoul. You and yours are all well I hope.Believe me ever, my dear Lancaster,Yours most sincerely,W. WILBERFORCE."1809. COUNTRY LIFE. 421Mr. Morgan was soon added to their country party,taking his meals, but not sleeping under our roof."Legs Richmond's neighbouring parsonage supplieda piano forte ; and " music generally in the evening"was added to the other sources of his pleasure.Here he thoroughly enjoyed himself. His arrear ofletters was discharged; and he was commonly safefrom interruption. " A civil invitation from Whit-breadcivilly declined' secured his quiet. Oneevening only he laments as wasted, by some visitorswho staid late, and I, expecting they would go afteran early tea, did not propose reading aloud, so theevening passed away in sadly unprofitable and mostwearing chat. Finding my spirits worn, I took upBurke's pieces Letter to the Duke of Bedford torefresh. Christians should understand each otherbetter than to waste time so." Mr. Richmond wasalmost his only neighbour, and him he occasionallymet with freedom and pleasure. " Dined at Richmond's.His old mother there. It is just twelveyears since he became serious from reading my bookon Christianity, lent him by a brother divine, whosaid, f I am no reader,' and begged him to run itover, as he did in three days. He showed it me inthe original cover." This naturally added to thepleasure which he always felt in seeing the interiorof a well-ordered parish. He attended with delightat a cottage reading, amongst many of " the peoplein their common working clothes ;" and he adds thatRichmond, who is a most affectionate, warm-heartedcreature, has made great way in Survey. Every422 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1809.body favours him, and God has greatly blessed hispreaching." 15 " Of Olney I hear but a very melancholyaccount. It is indeed an awful instance ofmercies slighted and privileges abused. I suspectalso from what I have heard, that some of the formerministers of the place, like my excellent friend Mr.Newton, not being quite enough on their guard respectingdissenting, and Dissenters, has been notunproductive of evil." 16Here he could walk undisturbed in the solitaryfields communing with God, or as he did " two mornings,reading Pope and Horace, and getting his Odesby heart ; had quite forgotten them, but found themeasily regained." A little more exertion carried himto Cowper's Weston Woods. " I wish you were ahorseman," writes a distant friend, " that I might goand see them by proxy, and hear from you what theplace resembles ; but your feats of equestrianism areconfined to your septennial ride into the Castle Yard ;so there are no hopes of your getting into Cowper'sclassic ground." He had far more activity andspring of body than his appearance seemed to indicate,and twice already had he made this excursion.In this unusual quiet, "reading much, correcting thePractical View for a new edition, and much with "his " family," the weeks passed happily away. " Ohwhat a blessing it is to be living thus in peace !Surely no one has so much reason to say, that goodnessand mercy have followed me all the days of mylife. Never was any one so exempted from suffering,15 Diary. * To William Hey Esq.1809. VISIT FROM JOHN BOWDLER. 423so favoured with comforts. Oh that I were moregrateful!" 17Mr. John Powder's sketch of this time of peacefulharmony is so happily expressed, that though it hasappeared in print already, it will be read again withpleasure.I arrived here last Saturday morning at breakfast-time,having been kept by Mr. Wilberforce muchlonger than I intended; but he is like the old man inSinbad's Voyage woe be to the traveller that fallsinto his grasp ! It required a considerable effort todisengage myself, and I have promised another shortvisit on my return, which will be greatly to my inconvenienceand delight. Mr. Wilberforce, I think, enjoyshis parsonage as much as possible : to say thathe is happier than usual is being very bold ; but certainlyhe is as happy as I ever beheld a human being.He carried me one day to Weston, and we wanderedover many a spot which Cowper's feet had trod, andgazed on the scenes which his pen has immortalized.On another day we visited Stowe ( a work to wonderat,' for we were still in the land of poetry, and ofmusic too, for Mr. Wilberforce made the shades resoundto his voice, singing like a blackbird whereverhe went. He always has the spirits of a boy, but "here " not little Sam himself can beat him, though hedoes his best." 18Yet this was no season of indolent recreation ormere idle enjoyment. Whilst he thanked God forthis wholesome retirement," he was most anxious to7 Diary. Powder's Remains, i. 106.424 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1809.turn it to the best account. " O Lord," he prays,direct and guide me, so as to make my residencehere a blessing to me." And he watched as well asprayed. "Laying out" his "plans so as to securetime for evening devotions, emptying" his "mind ofbusiness and literature ;" examining himself whetherhis "mind had wandered whilst reading the responsesor the psalms in church, or during the singing ofpraises to God ;" and reminding himself, " that ifhere I find not my mind ungovernable, yet that thisis a most favourable situation : all about me favourableto holiness, except that I commonly find literaturemore seductive than any thing. I should thenbe striving for the habit of heavenly-mindedness, thatI may maintain it in more worldly scenes and societies."Here therefore, as well as in the crowded lifeof London, he could exclaim upon his Sundays, te Oblessed days these, which call us from the bustle oflife, and warrant us in giving up our studies and ourbusiness, and cultivating communion with God." 19Some days too he set apart in this season of retirementfor more entire devotion to religious offices;and then, with such a measure of abstinence as hisstrength allowed, he gave 'the day to prayer andmeditation. Deep at these times was Diis unfeignedhumiliation, as he searched out before God all thesuspected corners of his heart, condemning himselffor " selfishness, though I do not pass for selfish,and am not allowed to be so ; Lord, increase my loveto others" for " ambition, or rather worldliness,>9 Journal.1809. CHARACTER OF HIS RELIGION. 425but ill cured, often bubbling up and breaking out,though my judgment I trust does not allow them,and though I am ashamed of them " for " want oflove, of real caring for my fellow-creatures*' forwant of delighting in God. Alas ! can I say that Ifind more pleasure in religious meditation than inliterature, which always presents itself to my mind asan object of gratification?" 30 Then too would henote down the remembered sins of long-past years,feeling he had gained his end when he could add,How does this review, in which my own mind fixeson specific objects, shame me ! How should I beashamed if others could see me just as I really am !I often think I am one grand imposture. My heartis heavy ; oh, there is nothing that can speak peaceto the wounded spirit but the gospel promises andthe promise is sure. God is love ; and is able to saveto the uttermost, and He will cast out none whocome to Him. He it is I trust who has excited in meadisposition to come, and I will therefore press forward,humbly indeed, but trusting to His mercy whohas promised so many blessings to them that seek Him.O Lord, yet strengthen me, arid, if it please Thee, fillme with all peace and joy in the Holy Ghost. Amen."At times too there are bursts of more than ordinaryjoy. " I humbly hope that I have felt this day, andstill feel, somewhat of the powers of the world tocome. I feel indeed the deepest sense of my ownsinfulness ; but blessed be God for His graciouspromises. To Thee, O Lord, I humbly devote Journal.426 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1809.self; O confirm me to the end. Make me perfect,stablish, strengthen, settle me. O prasclarum iliumdiem." " What cause have I for thankfulness !Which way soever I look I am heaped up with blessings,mercies of all sorts and sizes. I wish not tospend time in writing, but, oh let me record theloving-kindness of the Lord."In the midst of this life of quiet, his ordinarypolitical cares startle us with their unwonted sound.I opened the papers this morning to see if there isany confirmation of Buonaparte's madness ; for I cannotbut think it conformable to the providence ofGod, to manifest thus His ability in a moment to pulldown the lofty from his vain-glorious throne, to confoundthe wisdom of the politic and the plans of thecrafty. Lord Castlereagh and Canning fought aduel early on Thursday morning. What a humiliatingthing it is ! In what a spirit must our national counsellorshave been deliberating ! Lord Harrowby writesme word that Grenville and Lord Grey are sent to,with offers of treating for a joint administration.26th. I think Lord Grey and Grenville will not comein with the present men." 21A letter to Mr. Bankes, written on the second ofOctober, turns upon these subjects.Near Newport Pagnell, Oct. 2, 1809.My dear Bankes,I am prompted to scribble you a few lines,partly to inquire after you and yours, and partly to21 Diary, Sept. 23.1809* WALCHEREN EXPEDITION. 427elicit in return some of your sentiments che republica.Not, I fear, that they will be of a much more agreeablecolour or quality than my own ; but it is gratifyingto exchange groan for groan when one can clo nobetter. Of the late expedition I know not what tosay. You and I think much alike of Lord Chatham ;we can scarcely differ as to the particulars in which hewould be well, and in which ill, qualified for hiscommand. Prima facie, and previously to receivingany private information, I must say, that havingseen every minister without exception commonlyfail most egregiously in their expeditions and diversions,(I am grown really to hate the words almost asmuch as another which is forced on us, I needscarcely say, coalition,) it is more natural to imputethe failure to the framers of the plan than to itsexecutors; supposing I mean that there is blamesome where, for it is possible that there may not.One point is clear, that there ought to be some greatadvantage in view from keeping Walcheren, consideringthe expense at which it seems likely to be held,and an expense in the article in which we can leastof all bear to be extravagant. Then this strangehurricane of the elements of the administration.Could you have conceived any men's being so absurd,to say nothing of higher motives, as to makethe public exhibition afforded by Castlereagh andCanning. I can only account for it in the former, towhom as the challenger it is nine parts in ten mastprobably to be ascribed, by his Irish education andhabits. Manet adhuc vestigia runs. I wish the428 LIFE OP WILBERFORCE. 1809.King would declare that neither of them should everserve him again in a public station. That wouldeffectually prevent the spreading of the example.I cannot wonder at Lords Grenville's and Grey'srefusing to enter the present Cabinet, nor, to say thetruth, do I regret it. Any thing almost is better thanacoalition ; and nothing is so likely to multiply expeditions,or to produce impunity for the most absurd.What, but its happening that both ins and outs wereconcerned in the Buenos Ayres expedition, preventedsome public censure of that most monstrous of allabsurdities ? deliberately attempting to conquerSouth America, or when hoping to induce, the nativesto declare their independence, to set about conciliatingtheir favour, by sacking one of their mostpopulous towns.With best remembrances to Mrs. B. and all thehouse, believe meEver sincerely and affectionately yours,W. WILBERFORCE.Henry Bankes Esq."He wrote again upon the following day.Near Newport Pagnell, Oct. 3, 1809.My dear Bankes,I was quite vexed at myself yesterday, forhaving forgot, if you had seen the same account ofthe duel between Lord Castlereagh and Canningwhich I had, to call upon you to laugh with me onone circumstance j indeed it is actually true, that1809. TO HENRY BANKES ESQ. 429when I had read the paragraph I thought of cuttingit out and transmitting it to you, lest your papershould be less just to the party concerned. Theparticular to which I allude, and which made melaugh heartily, was that of Lord 's havingpicked up and carried off one of the pistols, which oneof the parties threw away after having fired it, andhis gardener the other (like master like man). I wasso forcibly reminded of your successful baiting for SirW. Pulteney, that you naturally were entitled to ashare of my amusement. But you perhaps havenot heard as much as I had done of the noble Earl'sprovident parsimony, which indeed went beyond parsimony,for it not only made him take care of whatwas his own, but keep a sharp look-out for that whichwas another's. If this be so, the trait would not delightyou as much as it did me.By the way, my newspaper to-day states sopositively that I know not how to doubt its beingright, that the duel arose from Canning's having,unknown to Lord Castlereagh, obtained the Dukeof Portland's promise, to ask the King to removehim, and having sat with him in Cabinet severalmonths en ami, without letting Lord C. know hisintentions. I must say, if this be true, as stated, itwas monstrous ill usage, and a course of conductwhich I can scarcely see how any thing would justify,though I would keep my mind open, till I shouldhave heard what Canning could say in his vindication.Tell me what you know, as far as you are atliberty. Of course I will observe any injunctions of430 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1809.secrecy you may impose. With kind remembrances,I am, my dear B.Yours ever,W. WILBERFORCE.Henry Bankes Esq."Upon the 20th of November, his quiet Buckinghamshirequarters were again exchanged for theneighbourhood of London, whence he soon afterwrote to Mr. Babington.My dear Tom,** * * * * *I have kept out of, or rather I have not been forward ingetting into, the way of my political friends ; and I amat this moment a little discomposed by a very friendlyinvitation from Perceval, to fix a day for dining withhim. Stephen sent me an account of the part Percevalhad taken in the late Cabinet broils, and Ireally thought that no blame was imputable to him.He never knew of the intrigues for turning outCastlereagh till after parliament had risen, when . .conceiving that the consequence of Castlereagh'sbeing made acquainted with what was dependingwould be his immediate resignation, which, as theexpedition was on the point of sailing, he conceivedwould be highly injurious to the public ; under thesepeculiar circumstances . . he became party to the concealment,until the expedition should have come tosome issue. He declared however formally in aletter to the Duke of Portland, against the .CANNING'S DEFENCE. 431cement which had been practised. I own that as faras Castlereagh is concerned, I think Canning hasmade almost a satisfactory defence ; but the reflectionwhich forces itself on my mind throughout the wholetransaction is, that the public interest seems to havebeen forgotten by almost all parties.I really felt a good deal for Castlereagh, till I foundthat the challenge was sent, not, as I had conceived,from the impulse of the first angry feelings, but afterhaving chewed the cud of his resentment for twelvedays. This, with the consideration that in that timehe must have learned that Canning was not so much infault as others as to the concealment, makes thechallenge appear a cold-blooded measure of deliberaterevenge, prompted by the resentment arising fromCanning's having shown, that he thought lightly of histalents and powers, and thereby degraded him in thepublic estimation. The duel was evidently in partthe expression of this revengeful anger ; in part, anexpedient for restoring him in some degree to hislevel, and putting him in good humour with himself,as a man who had obtained satisfaction for the insult.As for the present government : the King by ourconstitution has a right to appoint his ministers ; andif the Walcheren, and even far more the Spanish, expeditionare put out of the question, I see nothing inthe Cabinet, such as it now is, which forbids its beingentitled to a fair measure of parliamentary confidence.I can truly say that, Earl Grey only excepted, I thinkthese men superior in ministerial talents to the otherset. Grenville, though an excellent second, is not a432 LIFE OF Wilberforce. 1809.sound-headed man, and he is very obstinate. Wirid-ham is certainly a drawback from the value of anyministry, unless he can be kept in order. EarlGrey I value very highly indeed as a public man.Now take the present set. Perceval, Wellesley,Lord Liverpool, Ryder, are really all sensible men ;and of Perceval, with all his faults, I think betterthan of any of the rest. But they will greatly wantparliamentary speakers ; and yet it is sad work thatwe should take measure by the false standard oforatory, as to the fitness of men for ministerial situations: it was excusable in the commonalty of Athens,but is scarcely so in the British House of Commons.But I must say two things before I conclude. First,if Perceval deemed it material for the public wealthat there should be a mitigation of our parliamentarycontentions, and all the other benefits of a broad-bottomedadministration, the junction ought to havebeen proposed to Lords Grenville and Grey in themode most likely to insure the acceptance of theproposal, that is, it ought to have been made by theKing himself personally. J am persuaded that theKing might have prevailed on them to unite. I evenhold that they could not have accepted the offer as itwas made, without appearing too eager to get intooffice. Yet I have never doubted for a momentPerceval's sincerity in his offer to the two Lords. Hiseminence was not of his own seeking. Secondly, Ifthe regular opposition (excluding the democrats)would consent to abstain from systematic oppositionon the declared ground, that the public danger is such1809. COALITIONS. 433as to call on us to dismiss all party objections andhostilities for a time, I should prefer it greatly toa coalition. Coalitions are odious things, and leadto the dissolution of all principle, and the loss of allcredit, in public men ; and surely it is a shame that itshould be necessary to bribe men by the offer of goodplaces to wave their party altercations. But satisdisputant. Farewell. With kindest remembrances,Ever affectionately,W. Wilberforce."He could not long be quiet within a mile of HydePark Corner. Upon the 7th of December he " wentto Perceval's and talked with him for half an hour :he gave me a parcel of papers for previous consideration.Perceval owned, on my asking, that he hadoffered the Chancellorship of the Exchequer to R.Milnes. He and Ryder joined in defending it." 22Soon afterwards he " dined with Perceval ; who verykind and good-natured ; and pleased me more than everbefore by his speech about not exciting a spirit againstAmerica by having the story told, lest governmentshould be forced to exact too much." " My time," hetells Mr. Bankes, " was never more fully occupied whenparliament was not sitting ; foreseeing that when theHouse should meet, I must almost renounce all privatesociety, I have been both giving and receiving amost unusual number of visits." These brought beforehim a most miscellaneous set of charactersfrom " Lord Sidmouth, who dined tete-astute, andDiary.VOL. III. U434 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1809.much political talk with him' to " a missionary goingto the Namque country," and " poor W. who declaredmost seriously that he liked spiders betterthan my dinner. ( Spiders are very good food / andlooking round the corners of the room, e You have nospiders here as much as to say, I would soon convinceyou if you had a singular man appears astrong predestinarian." " General Miranda 23 dinedwith me, and his Mexican friend Dr. Constance, andPowder. Miranda talked all till half-past eleven,and still untired very entertaining and instructive,but used God's name lightly, else all his sentimentsand positions just, humane, and even delicate ; as hisrefusing to bear arms against Spain." " Mr. andMrs. D. dined with us, and Robert Grant gotBabington to spare us Powder for the sake of promotingreligious conversation. I did not profit enough.How has she been spoiled by the world ; by admirationand popularity! once very promising." " R. M.dined with me-evidently a disappointed man ofgreat talents ; yet not quite equal to scaling the wallsand trampling on opposition."But though mixing more freely in society, he didnot forget to watch carefully for the improvement ofhis time. " Back with Powder," he says, " by abouteleven o'clock. I must guard against suffering my time23 This acquaintance he had formed long before, when Miranda hadbeen employed by Pitt and Dundas, (as the latter expressed it,) "to insureSouth America." He now renewed the connexion with a view toAbolition objects. From the Caraccas, General Miranda wrote to himnext year ; " the Slave Trade had been abolished in the province of Venezuelaprevious to my arrival, and I find the feelings of the people of thiscountry very congenial with your philanthropic sentiments."1809. CONDUCT IN SOCIETY. 435to be frittered away before going to, and after comingback from, town ; to have occupations always ready,suited to my different states of animation and understanding."This high sense of the value of time ledhim to watch so carefully over his conduct in society ;and though probably unrivalled in the happy art ofleading conversation to the most improving topics, yethe was often little satisfied with his attempts. Thushe says, after giving a " dinner to Lord N. and I. H.who chatted till late ; Lord N. a strange twist ; I fearthe evening was sadly misspent. No efforts to improvethe opportunity and impress them aright. When inmy closet, as now, I feel a sincere desire to do goodto others, and to embrace occasions for it ; but, alas !when in society I am too apt to lose the sense ofGod's presence, or possess it feebly and faintly, and Ido not try to turn the conversation, and practise thecompany regulations which I have made. Lord,quicken me." 24 " I have a vast multiplicity of objectssoliciting my attention . . . and I seem to myselfto be failing in the discharge of the duties of myseveral relations, as member of parliament, as father,and as master. To Thee, O God, I fly, through theSaviour ; enable me to live more worthy of my holycalling ; to be more useful and efficient, that my timemay not be frittered away unprofitably to myself andothers, but that I really may be of use in my generation,and adorn the doctrine of God my Saviour. Ilong to carry the plan through for lessening the numberof oaths for reviving the Proclamation Society ;Diary.u 2436 LIFE OF Wilberforce. 1809.but I am a poor, helpless creature, Lord, strengthenme." 25"Alas ! how little time have I for private devotions,or Scripture reading and meditation. I must eithergive up having so much company and so manyfriends in the house, or I must leave them, so as torender hospitality and their society compatible withthe measure of spiritual exercises which my constitutionof soul requires. The last alternative surely isright ; but if on trial I find it needful, I must give upsociety as the right hand or eye, which it is my peculiarduty to cut off or pluck out. But, O Lord,quicken me. I have been hearing an excellent sermonfrom Simeon, on Aaron's death, pressing towards theclose on torpid believers ; alas ! alas ! to me thatname belongs ; but blessed be God it need not belongalways ; Thou hast declared that Thou wilt be foundof them that seek Thee. To Thee, O Lord, I fly ; Oforgive and receive Thy unworthy wanderer ! O comeand dwell within me ! Alas, how forgetful am I ofthe presence of God ; and thence of my company andconversation regulations! Yesterday evening I fellinto the vice of evil speaking. O Lord, fill me withlove, with brotherly kindness, and grateful humility.How thankful should I be for my signal privileges,and how candid and tender in speaking, or judging,or thinking of those who have been destitute ofthe advantages I have enjoyed ! If they had possessedmy advantages they would most likely be farsuperior to me. How shocking is it to think that35 Journal, Dec. 24.1810. JOURNAL. 437now for twenty-four years I have been seekingafter God, and that my progress has been so little !Yet, O Lord, I would humbly hope that thoughI am weakly and feeble, yet that Christ is knockingat the door of my Laodicean heart, and thatI shall open the door and admit my heavenly visitant.O Lord, rouse me effectually, and make me anactive, zealous, fruitful Christian ; let me beware ofgetting into the way so forcibly described by Owen,as a trade of sinning and repenting. Oh mostblessed promise, I will give to him that is athirst ofthe water of life freely ! The main spring havingthus been set flowing, may it water every distantbranch, and may I fulfil the duties of all my variousrelations as M. P., master, acquaintance, &c. nowso ill performed. Oh how little have I adorned Thydoctrine ; and yet how much better do people think ofme than they would if they knew me as I really am !Lord, do Thou completely sanctify me. Amen." 26Upon the nearer approach of the session, he expressesagain to Mr. Bankes his views of politics.TO HENRY BANKES ESQ.Near London, Jan. 12, 1810.My dear Bankes,In one view you are better off at KingstonHall than I at Kensington Gore. You are out ofinvitation distance ; whereas I am rather annoyed bycards to dine with this minister and with that. With2 Journal, Jan. 7, 1810.438 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1810,one of the Right Honourables this very day, afterfighting off several others, I am going to feed ; butI shall not hold that eating bread and salt with himforms a compact of political support as well as of personalgood will.I wish you may come up the day before the meeting,for if, as is said, opposition mean to make apowerful attack in the shape of an amendment to theAddress, I should like to confer with you about itbefore the last half hour. There are some men(would there were more of them in parliamentonly not thick and thin party men) from whosegeneral principles one may anticipate pretty confidentlyhow they will act in given circumstances. Itis no compliment to you to say that you are of theabove number. The administration, as those whomthe King has appointed, are entitled to a fair measureof support ; and I must say that comparing them inpoint of natural talent and political wisdom with theiropponents, I see in them no inferiority to the former.That our affairs have been most shockingly managedis I fear most true. However it would be very unjustto condemn without inquiry. For inquiry I thinkthere is sufficient ground ; yet looking back to thelast administration's expeditions I must say, that sofaras I am informed, the most absurd in conception,and the worst planned as to execution, was that toBuenos Ayres. Then if we go further back intoPitt's times, when more was really to be expectedfrom Lord Melville's good sense, method, diligence,and energy, (for I should expect from Windham's1810. PARLIAMENT MEETS. 439expedition just the result which took place,) yet howwretchedly did we fail, except where we were to operatechiefly by our navy, or where success was to beindirectly owing to our navy, as in the case of WestIndian Islands, &c. But I must stop.Believe me, my dear Bankes,Yours most sincerely,W. Wilberforce."An inquiry by the whole House into the expeditionto the Scheldt was voted, in spite of the opposition ofministers, within three days of the opening of thesession ; and of the secret committee appointed toexamine confidential information, he as usual was amember, though " Perceval objected " to him, " asnot enough of a party man to overbalance oppositionists."Notwithstanding his favourable inclination tothe ministry, he had " become very obnoxious totheir warm friends from having so often opposed Perceval."27 This he never did without reluctance; buthe could not swerve from that independent coursewhich he had maintained even when a younger man,and the friend of Mr. Pitt. Where he could do itconscientiously, no fear of misconstruction preventedhis supporting them. On the 16th he " spoke for'Lord Wellington's pension, though " he had come tothe House doubting, and much disposed to go away ;but my judgment convinced. It will however bevery unpopular." * But on this mismanaged expediteDiary. Ib.440 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1810.tion he felt strongly, and upon almost every motionopposed the government. For a short time duringthe progress of their debates, he was absent from theHouse.Kensington Gore, Friday, Feb. 9, 1810.My dear, kind Stephen,Your friendly importunity, with that of Mrs.W., has decided me to stay away to-day; which willenable me to absent myself from the Speaker's dinnertomorrow. A degree of fever seems to hang on me,though only at times, and I fear if I were to plungeinto the beehive to-day, I should experience the samesensations I did yesterday. I really feel your tendersolicitude for me most deeply ; I thought of it onenight when I lay awake, with, I hope, thankfulness toyourself, and to a gracious Providence which has givenme so affectionate a friend. I particularly wished toattend to-day to hear Sir Samuel Romilly on capitalpunishments, a subject on which I believe I agreewith him, and indeed I must say I commonly like thespirit of his law better than that of his opponents.Do be so good as to tell him why I am not at theHouse, and how much I regret it ; and to Mr. Yorkealso, of the secret committee. Farewell.Ever affectionately yours,W. WILBERFORCE."On the 12th of February he writes to HannahMore.1810. WALCHEREN INQUIRY. 441Near London, Feb. 12, 1810.My dear Friend,I have been indisposed with a fever and sorethroat for a few days past; not seriously, I thankGod, but sufficiently to keep me from the House ofCommons. I am now returning to service again inmoderation. The subject of our present discussionisa very painful one ; and indeed I fear the lives andhealth of our brave defenders have been far too littleattended to, in the various branches of military preparation.You must have read the surgeon-general'sexamination with no little indignation ; I think Imust send for Miss Sally's perusal Cobbett's lastnumber, in which he gives Mr. Windham a mosthearty flogging. All this might be vastly well ; butthe tide is rising, the wind, though from a distance, isroaring, and by and by it will blow, and the waveswill beat with unexampled violence from every quarterof the compass ; yet here are we gay and witty videCowper's Table Talk, and the lines, ' Fix the slave'scollar on, and snap the lock.' I must break off. Notidings yet of this poor young Eden. What a stroke !Farewell. Kind remembrances.Yours ever,W. Wilberforce."This tedious inquiry (suddenly interrupted on the27th, " by the interlude of that mad bull Fuller neversurely such a scene in the House of Commons" 39 )*> Diary.u 3442 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1810,lasted six weeks longer. On the 5th of March hewas at the " House till three in the morning, on LordChatham's ' private statement and voted againstministry, in the minority." At length, upon the30th, " the Scheldt business " was " finished. Housetill eight in the morning much time lost in divisionsI voted against opposition's strong resolutions ofcensure, but could not say the plan was justifiable, oracquit of all blame."A more stirring question followed. " I spokelate on Burdett's business, and was one instrumentin putting it off, on the ground that Adam, Romilly,and others declared themselves not to have hadtime to make themselves masters of the case." 31Upon the 5th of April the House resumed its considerationof Sir Francis Burdett's letter. " Sat tillnear eight, and voted Burdett to the Tower I forreprimand." 32 The grounds of this opinion he againrepeated on the following Tuesday, when " SirFrancis Burdett's letter was at last condemned, nem.con. I pressed unanimity, and had some influence onPerceval ; both he and Whitbread conceding a little." 33I cannot forget, sir," he then said, ll the effectswhich I have seen follow a reprimand from the chairwhen the levity of the offender had aroused theSpeaker's indignation. ( You are committed,' washis censure of the Sheriff of Middlesex, 34 ' to hisMajesty's gaol of Newgate, there to be confined withthe common felons, of whom the law made you the*> Diary. 31 Ib. March 28. Diary. M Ib.31 Reprimanded for admitting fictitious votes.1810. SIR FRANCIS Burnett. 443appointed guardian, but of whom your own misconducthas made you the associate.' The impressivecensure of the chair sent away the offenderlowered, penitent, and even in tears." On the interveningSunday, he " heard shocking account of riots.Sir Francis Burdett not yet taken to the Tower.Kept my mind free from politics all day, and I thankGod comfortable." 35 " What a fermentation has poorSir Francis Burdett excited, and he thinks no doubthe is doing his duty. Oh how different is the spiritof the gospel, how different the frame and tempers ofthe spirits of just men made perfect, from those of hisadherents ! Lord, whatever scenes are opening uponus, do Thou graciously guide and protect me, and maythe proofs afforded of the instability and perturbationsof all human things, produce on me the blessed effectof detaching me more from this world, both in myjudgment and affections, and of fixing them more onheavenly things." 36Upon the third of May he once more took part inthese discussions, urging upon the House the rejectionof the Middlesex petition, and speaking as he thoughtmore easily and pleasantly than for a long time,almost for years." He was now again in the fullcurrent of sessional business, public and private ;and though he tells Lord Lancaster, 37 that he " foundhimself less equal to the incessant wear and tear ofconstant parliamentary attendance," yet he gavehimself to it with all the energy of youth, spendingoften the whole week in his Westminster lodgings.Diary, April 8. Journal. 37 May 18.444 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1810.This was little to his taste, for no man more loveddomestic happiness. " Waited on' he says at thistime when returning unexpectedly, " with the mostkind officiousness ; my dear children also glad to receiveme ; how thankful should I be for such a home ! "But he complains, " I have a heavy arrear of unansweredletters and postponed business. So thatthough, I thank God, I have been uniformly well, I getno time for serious study, whether reading or thinkingover important topics, of which I have many to beconsidered Criminal law for Sir S. Romilly's andWindham's discussion, New South Wales, PenitentiaryHouses, Foreign Exchanges, Henry Thornton'sbook ; above all, besides the Charity DonationBill as changed, the Trinidad Registry Bill, for whichI must refresh my recollection of all West Indiantopics and facts and circumstances."All of these, with many others, pressed uponhim as the session advanced. " How oppositionthickens round Charity Donation Bill. Alas, howhard it is to do good ! There are, I believe, someobjections, but the good greatly overbalances. May1st. Romilly's Bill shameful House they dividedagainst Romilly, 33 to 31. Windham and Frank-landsuo more. I spoke, but very unsatisfactorilyas to method, though some good hits. 5th. Wyvillbreakfasted with me about Parliamentary ReformYorkshire meeting, &c. I strongly against it, and,strange to say, convinced him that a quiet writtentestimony better on all accounts. 14th. Callingon Canning about sinecures, and on Duke of1810. DIARY. 445Gloucester about Trinidad. House till one andpast chiefly Tierney's motion about Duke of BrunswickI in a minority of 86 against 103. Talked withCanning, and read his plan of sinecures rejected Iin majority. Major Cartwright's ( experiment solitary'in petitioning. 15th. African Institution meetingwell attended Duke of Gloucester, Brougham,Lord Hadley, Morris, Bootle, Granville Sharpe,and others. Settled finally to-day that I should bringin (or government by Order in Council establish) abill for effecting the registry of slaves in Trinidad.Mentioned it to Perceval in the House this eveninghe short perhaps from being hurried. Bad way tospeak to public men in such circumstances. 17th. CalledPerceval's about Trinidad told him that becausedry last night. 18th. House till late chiefly CatholicQuestion Grattan's brilliant speech. I madea wrong attack on opposition very hotly and sharplyresented by Ponsonby. 25th. Windham dangerouslyill, having had a dreadful operation performed. 31st.Off soon after breakfast about suppressing the sale ofspirits to the Indians. House till three o'clock in themorning beat government on altering sinecures topensions for stipulated terms of service.June 1st. With Lord Selkirk to Rose, aboutspirits affair. General Miranda dialogue he mostanimated. House, Catholic Question, till four o'clock,morning. 2nd. Dined Lambeth public day largeparty of grandees and bishops. I had not seen LordChatham before, since breaking up he very friendlyand easy in manner. Windham still lingering he LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1810.civet the sacrament before the operation was performed.7th. House till late on Captain Fossette's business.I thought it needful to stay, out of friendship to R.who had been conferring with me about it ; yet forcedto vote in the majority against Fossette."From these various employments he was suddenlyremoved by an accident, which he describes in a letterto Lord Lancaster.London, June 18, 1810.My dear Lancaster,The kindness which I have ever experiencedat your hands assures me, that if you were to hear aloose report of my having been confined up-stairs foraweek in a recumbent posture, you would becomevery uneasy till you should receive some authenticatedreport of my well-doing. You would, and you willnevertheless laugh heartily when you hear the wholestory : That playing at cricket with Mr. Babington,a ball struck my foot with great violence, and that bythe positive injunctions of my surgeon, I have beenever since sentenced to a sofa. It will lessen themarvel, and render the tale less laughable, to hearthat my son William was the main personage in thedramatis personae of the cricket players, and I havenot played with him at cricket before, for I know nothow long. But here, as in so many other instances, Ihave abundant cause for thankfulness to the goodprovidence of God ; for Mr. Pearson (and there is notamore able surgeon in London) declares that if theball had struck me an inch or two higher, and it is1810. Gingham. 447very uncommon for a ball to come along shaving theground as that did, it would almost certainly havebroken my leg. I own to you, that when the accidenthappened I was tempted the more readily to concurwith Mrs. W. in sending for a first-rate surgeon, onwhat appeared scarcely a dignus venice nodus, byrecollecting that it was said poor Windham's accidentwas a mere trifle at first, and perhaps if it hadbeen attended to in its earliest stages, the bad effectsmight have been checked.Poor fellow ! I really felt for him. He had somefine qualities, though I must own I did not rate himso highly as some persons did, except for conversation,in which I really think he was facile princeps,decidedly the most agreeable, scholar-like gentleman,or gentleman-like scholar, I ever remember to haveseen. It is certainly true that he wrote to Dr. Fisherthe day but one before the operation, to say that,the issue being doubtful, he wished to prepare forwhat might be the consequence in the most solemnmanner, and therefore desired him to administer thesacrament to him. Sir W. Scott, who told methis at Lord Camden's, added, that he did receive itwith the greatest fervour and emotion.It is very remarkable, that with an imagination farmore fertile and combining than any I ever knew, henever seemed to allude to any Scriptural facts orideas. Burke did continually.It has often struck me how soon in public lifepeople are forgotten. With all the feeling for poorWindham, and I really believe there was a great448 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1810.deal, he will soon have vanished from the view of allbut private friends, thrust out from the mind by thetopic of the day. Farewell for the present, andbelieve me,Ever affectionately yours,W. Wilberforce."Upon the 16th he was " still on the sofa, unableto set the foot to the ground, but carried down-stairs.Friends dined with me to-day Lord Sidmouth,Speaker, and Mrs. Abbot ; Pinkney, Americanminister; Mr. and Mrs. Grant, Lord Teignmouth,and General Calvert. A pleasant, rational day.Speaker and Lord Sidmouth very entertaining ; lattersat till near twelve, and chatted with me. Propositionmade to him for being the key-stone to form abroad administration, combining both Castlereaghand Canning ; but he declined, thinking there couldbe no cordiality, and that the exhibition discreditable.He is right if they two included." 38He much feared that he should not again reach theHouse of Commons before the prorogation. " It isa great disappointment to me ; but I hope it is theindication of Providence that I am to be quiet."But on the 20th, " having the Sheffield Address,loyal and constitutional, and well signed," he " resolvedto present it, and so was carried to the doorof the House, and limped to the Treasury Bench. Ihad prepared myself for a speech of an hour of closingadvice, and useful parting admonition, but there not39 Diary.1810. HIS SPEECHES NOT REPORTED. 449being above forty or fifty members, and as the appearancewould evidently have been that of going cold-bloodedto make a formal speech, I had not nervesfor it; yet wishing to say something, I could notabridge well." 39 One object of this parting speechwas to enforce the reasons by which he had been ledamonth before 40 to vote for Mr. Brand's motion onParliamentary Reform. He enters upon this subject,in replying to one of his constituents 41 who hadspoken of the " general disinclination of reflectingmen to any change in the representation," and hadlamented that so short an abstract of the speeches ofthe member for Yorkshire should be given to thepublic. " This," says another, " is the more to beregretted, because many who like myself have notime to read all the debates, look on any interestingsubject for your speech, on which to ground their ownopinions." " I have seen," Mr. Tennant continues,a gentleman who was in the gallery on the 28thinst. The account he gives me of your speech, theforce with which it was delivered, and the attentionwith which it was received by the House, causes meto lament exceedingly that your constituents cannot bemade much better acquainted with your view ofthings."Mr. Wilberforce repliesMy dear Sir,I feel in their fullest force all the remarks youmake on the effect on my character, credit, influence,39 Diary. to May 21. Thomas Tennant Esq.450 LIFE OP WILBERFORCE. 1810.&c. which are likely to be produced by the accountswhich almost all, or rather I believe all the newspaperreporters too commonly give of my speeches inparliament. This is a subject on which it may seemalmost indelicate for me myself to speak, but to theear of a friend I may declare, that often when I havetaken a material share in any discussion, and a longreport is made of the speeches of other members, especiallyof those who are favourites with the newspapereditors, reporters, &c. all that I have said is entirelyomitted, or at best very little indeed inserted. Butthis is not the worst ; sentiments are often ascribed tome,not only different from those which I haveexpressed, but directly opposed to them. All thisarises in part I doubt not from inadvertency, &c. ; butI own to you, that after seeing how systematical thistreatment of me is, I cannot but impute it to the circumstanceof my not belonging to any party, on whichaccount I am obnoxious to both, and to their writers,who are commonly among the most violent of theirpartisans. I hope some of my constituents who haveheard me at York, may do me the justice to believethat I do not really utter the nonsense which is oftenput into my mouth ; but I am persuaded that, ninetimes in ten, readers forget the allowances with whichnewspaper reports of the language of independentmen ought to be read. I can truly assure you thaton various occasions I have been restrained fromspeaking at all, by recollecting how much what Ishould say would probably be misrepresented. Thiswas the case in part, in the very instance to which1810. PARLIAMENTARY REFORM. 451you allude, that I mean of Mr. Brand's motionfor Reform in Parliament. Yet I confess to you,that I afterwards blamed myself greatly for havingremained silent, because it was impossible for me notto be greatly misconceived ; since, in truth, the votein which I concurred, and from which alone, as I didnot speak, my sentiments were to be collected, gavea very inadequate and even erroneous view of them.I should have gone away without voting at all, becauseI neither liked to support Mr. B.'s motion foracommittee nor to oppose it, but that I knew Ishould subject my character to very severe, thoughthey would have been false, reflections, if I had retiredwithout taking part with either side.I have not time now to enter into a full discussion ofthis most important question of Parliamentary Reform,and I should not do myself justice if I were to statemy opinions on it partially. I must however assureyou, that so entirely and fundamentally do I differfrom those who speak in disparaging terms of thestate of our constitution such as it now exists, thatit is from the admiration and love which I feel for it,my sense of its excellence and of the unequalled blessingsit dispenses, that I am chiefly decided (not, Iown to you, without some diffidence, yet on the wholewith a clear preponderance of judgment) in wishingfor a very moderate and temperate change in therepresentation. I repeat it, I cannot now go into theargument. Thus much only let me state to you, thatit must be remembered, the principle of representationis the vital principle of the House of Commons ;452 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1810.and I own to you, that judging both from speculationand experience, I am afraid lest the existence of suchboroughs as four or five are, and their manifest inconsistencywith the representative principle, if ever thepublic mind should happen to be heated on this subject,should produce so strong an impression, as todrive men to go lengths and adopt measures, whichmight have the most dangerous tendency. It is infact these four or five boroughs to which I allude,that give to the violent Reformers the only plausibleground they have to stand on; and this being takenaway by a moderate Reform, (such for instance as thatwhich Mr. Pitt last proposed, or one considerablyshort of it,) all the really well-affected would detectand separate from them. I well remember that greatman, not many years before his death, laying downthis principle as one of the best and most valuable ofall political maxims, that where it was at all practicable,nothing was so wise as to separate the well-intentionedfrom those who at the bottom haddangerous designs in view.From what I have said you would almost anticipatewhat I stated in the House of Commonsthe day before we rose, that I was one of the mostmoderate of all Reformers ; and in fact, that conceivinga Reform would some time or other * takeplace, I wished we were well through it, being persuadedit was a measure of which it might be trulysaid, that the danger of going too far was far greaterthan that of not going far enough, and that now,when I really believed the well-disposed part of our1810. BEST TIME FOR REFORM. 453country was rather against than for the measure,was just the period when it might be adopted withthe greatest safety, because with the least danger ofyielding to any wild and dangerous speculations.But I forget my resolution to abstain from the discussion,and I am detaining both you and myself toolong. Let me not however conclude without expressingmy joy at finding among my constituents so manywho admire and love as they ought our unrivalled constitution.Have you seen the testimony borne to itby an American gentleman of great ability, in apamphlet lately published on the genius and dispositionof the French government, which he contrastswith those of our own. I have been longing to seeit well abridged. Indeed I really have had thoughtsof abridging it myself, together with another by thesame author. I have scarcely left myself room (andI fear another half sheet would make my packet tooheavy) to assure you once more, that I feel most deeplythe friendly kindness which prompted your lastletter. Believe me, in return, with real esteem andregard,Yours sincerely,W. Wilberforce.To Thomas Tennant Esq."These were his fixed opinions on the question ofReform in Parliament. " All seems quiet now," hecomplains this spring, " but how little are men awareof the real dangers of the country ! How little dothey look forward to our probable state fifteen ortwenty years hence ! " His words seem almost LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1810.poetic of that storm of political excitement, in themidst of which the Reform Bill was at length carriedthrough. How full may be their accomplishment,our children will best know. The same opinions arethus expressed to Mr. Hey.My dear Friend,******I should injure myself if I said that I deserve assevere reprehension for our silence as you do. Forthough I know that you have as many demands onyour time as myself, you have more time to answerthem. Oh how do I wish that I could secure, as youdo, a few quiet hours before the world breaks in tointerrupt and harass you ! But I hold life by a differenttenure. My crazy tenement is not composedof such materials as yours, or so put together.You are disappointing us, by not fulfilling the expectationsyou excited in your southern friends byyour last visit that now you had begun your travels,they would be every year or two continued. I mustinsist on it, for one, that you either come or write;appear, as Lord Kenyon would have said, in his alliterativefashion, aut penna, aut persona.I know not whether Mr. Cooksonon may have informedyou that I had felt a strong desire of makingmy devoirs to my Yorkshire friends, in the form of aLetter to my Constituents; and I believe the executionof my design has been chiefly prevented, by week havingstolen away after week, till it has become too latefor me to set about such an undertaking.My object would have been in part to justify .TO WILLIAM HEY ESQ. 455self ; but in part also, and I hope still more, to rendersome service to the public. It is so many years sinceyou and I exchanged a word on the question of ParliamentaryReform, that I cannot call to mind withprecision your arguments. But I wish that you wouldcoolly estimate the danger to be apprehended fromkeeping our representation exactly in its present state,under all the circumstances, actual and probable, ofthis country, and at the same time consider the benefitsto be derived from having taken away those broadblots, which supply the most powerful and operativeplea for reforming the state of the representation, ata period when there was no danger of being hurried intoextravagant and precipitate excesses. But I am muchpressed for time, and cannot therefore even enter onthe discussion of such a subject. It often shocks me,and excites fearful presages of future evil, to see mycountrymen so easy, and cheerful, and confident inthe midst of circumstances which, as I think, mightwell produce alarm. But I must break off. Blessedbe that gracious God who has so long continued to usthe unequalled blessings we enjoy ! It may be thatHe will still bear with us. I beg my kindest remembrancesto all your family. My youngest child hasbeen ill, but is nearly well again. I overflow withmercies !Believe me, my dear Sir,ever affectionately yours,W. Wilberforce."CHAPTER XXIV.JULY 1810 TO JULY 1811,Garden at Kensington Gore Barham Court Herstmon-ceux Attention to his children King's illness West Indiantopics His practical rules during the bustle of thesession Death of friends County business Lord Sid-mouth'sBill concerning Dissenters Cambridge installationConclusion of the session.THE session closed on Thursday," is the last entryin the month of June, " and now a long reach of timeis before me, uninterrupted by parliamentary business.I have still, however, several matters to wind up,which have been delayed by my accident and confinement.O Lord, how thankful should I be thatno bone was broken, or greater mischief done ! Ihave not now time to write, but I go to prayer. Imean to spend a day in serious exercises as soon asI have cleared away my epistolary debts. May Goddirect me right, and enable me to grow in grace. Ifear that I shall not be able to live here in quiet ; ifso, I must move. The command of my time is thegrand desideratum with me during the recess. I ammeditating a letter to my constituents, to diffuse .THE GARDEN. 457cipher of thankfulness, moderation, and acquiescencein moderate Reform." lThe garden at Kensington Gore was one of hisgreat sources of pleasure, when his time was athis own command. During the sitting of parliament,he could " never get there sufficiently early,or stay there in the morning long enough, to witnessthe progress of the spring ; " 2 but now thathe had somewhat more leisure, whenever the weathermade it possible, he sat long, both writing andwith his books, under a spreading walnut-tree, whichwas known amongst his children as his study.Pretty quiet to-day went out and sat underwalnut-tree, where now writing. I should likemuch to stay in this sweet place, amidst my books, ifI could be quiet." : " We are just one mile," hetells an American correspondent, 4 "from the at Hyde Park Corner, which I thinkyou will not have forgotten yet, having about threeacres of pleasure-ground around my house, or ratherbehind it, and several old trees, walnut and mulberry,of thick foliage. I can sit and read under theirshade, which I delight in doing, with as much admirationof the beauties of nature (remembering at thesame time the words of my favourite poet, f Natureis but a name for an effect, whose cause is God ' ) asif I were 200 miles from the great city." But inother respects he was less favourably circumstanced.My situation near town produces numerous visitors,1 Journal. 2 Letter to Lord Lancaster.3 Diary. 4 To John Jay Esq. July 18.VOL. III. X458 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1810.and frequent invitations, difficult and painful toresist."These interruptions lasted as long as he remainednear London ; so that he could often only writehis letters by stealing to a den at the " Nuisance "(a small adjoining house which he had purchased) ;and even there I should be no more safe, if itwere known that I had such a lurking-hole, thanafox would be near Mr. Meynell's kennel." " SirAlexander Johnston, Dr. Buchanan, and Mr. ToddNaylor dined with me quietly. Much interestingtalk about East Indies, and Brazil, and Ceylon theysat till late." 5 "Mr. Vaughan at prayers, andstaid till half-past one, on the hard case of poorSore, who ruined by having saved a transport andfull three hundred British soldiers from perishing.Dined at Perceval's mixed party Pinkney Americanminister, Attorney-general, M. Montagu, andothers. Good-natured in Perceval to ask me, consideringmy differing so much from him. A sweet-temperedman ; he commonly bears all 's strongspeeches, but for Pinkney's sake, kindly correctedsome to-day." " Perceval is really a most generouscreature, with many most excellent qualities. PoorJohnson called to-day. Perceval merely seeing anaccount of his claims and merits for services in NewSouth Wales, which had been sent [by me] to theDuke of Portland, and left in the office, actually gavehim unsolicited a living of above 200 per annum." "ToAfrican Institution, last meeting; Duke of Gloucester5 Diarv.1810. SOCIETY. 459in the chair. To Secretary Ryder's office about a poorconvict. To Perceval, who was out. I saw CharlesYorke, First Lord of the Admiralty, who promised navalforce, in consequence of our hearing of Slave Tradeproceedings." " Whilst at family prayers this morning,there appeared in the verandah General Mirandaand his two Caraccas deputies, come to settle termsof friendly connexion with this country countenanceof one very peculiar; they staid till half-past twelve."Marquis Wellesley called, and sat with me, andwalked in the verandah three-quarters of an hour,talking about Abolition cause in Spain."All these were important objects ; and even the timespent in society was far from wasted. " Young LadyN. ascribes her serious sense of things to meeting metwo years ago. Oh what cause have we for ascribingall to God, who can use any instruments ! I fear Iwas sadly negligent about her and the others. Notbeing watchful for others' souls, is one of my greateststanding faults ; and, Q my soul, guard against beingdeceived by the mistaken judgments passed on theeby others ! How strange is it, that though we knowthem to be mistaken, we are often liable to be impressedby them ! I really do not remember havinghad any serious talk with her." Yet he longed forgreater quiet, and soon afterwards withdrew into thecountry. He moved first to Barham Court, and thusdescribes his visit.July 25, 1810.My dear Lancaster,So soon as I was well on my legs again I repairedto my worthy old friend, Lord Barham's, and460 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1810.found both him and his place in high preservation. Ofthe latter you have heard me speak. It has none ofthe grand features of your northern beauties, but forthe charms of softness and elegance I never beheld asuperior to Barham Court ; and there is the utile withthe dulce, for the most perfect specimen I believe inEngland of the ferme ornee has been also one of themost profitable of farms. But my good old friendhimself is the most extraordinary of all. We supposehe is about eighty-four, and the accounts I havereceived would make him more. He goes on just likeany other man of forty or fifty. He answers his lettersregularly after breakfast, then takes his ride, andlooks about his farm, and employs himself till dinner.At half-past four in the afternoon he takes as long oras short a walk as you desire ; and what surprises memost of all, when he comes in, he reads two, three, orfour hours till bed-time, without the slightest appearanceof drowsiness, in whatever publication the discussionsof the day render interesting. I must add,though I have detained you so long on this topic, onetrait most highly to his honour, that when he wasmanaging Lord of the Admiralty for Lord Chathamwho was at the head, for above a year he never wentto Barham Court although only thirty-two miles fromLondon, though he loved it then, as he still does,with all a lover's fondness ; and was directing byletters, tables, &c. every operation of the farm in allits daily details.During my confinement from my accident, mybeing such a fair shot for all who had not muchto do with their time, procured me incessant callers,1810. LADY OF THE LAKE. 461and my unanswered letters accumulated on myhands to a size that was quite terrific. I have onlyjust (indeed not quite) cleared away the arrears. Haveyou read the Lady of the Lake ? Like a good economistI waited till it should come out in octavo,but had I but tasted it before, though it had beenfolio instead of quarto, I could not without extremedifficulty have resisted the impulse to gratify myappetite for it without stint. Really I did not thinkthat I continued in such a degree subject to the fascinationof poetry. I have been absolutely bewitched.I could not keep the imaginary personages out ofmy mind when I most wished to remove them. Howwonderful is this dominion over the heart whichgenius exercises ! There are some parts of the poemthat are quite inimitable all that precedes and follows( And, Saxon, I am Frederick Dhu^' I regretthere not being so much of moral as in Marion. Imust break off farewell. With kind remembrances,Ever yours,W. Wilberforce."From Barham Court he replied to some interestingquestions sent him by Mr. Gisborne.Barham Court, July 11, 1810.My dear Gisborne,I turn from my wearisome track along a dulland laborious epistolary course, to answer the callfrom Yoxall Lodge, whence every voice is alwaysheard with pleasure. I must send you only my first462 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1810.thoughts, and shall probably write more largely aftersome reflection. I cannot at all wonder at, or regretsfeeling the dispositions you mention. On thecontrary, I should regret their non-existence. Theybecome every young Englishman of good fortune andrespectable connexions, and I heartily wish I may seehim an active, useful member of parliament.61 As to the plan of obtaining for him what I maycall the run of the Foreign Office, I own frankly toyou that I do not conceive it likely to be attendedwith any benefit, except on the supposition, that theyoung man to be so placed would study in this way,and not otherwise. There is something, it must beconfessed, in papers concerning real and dependingtransactions, in live papers if I may so term them,which makes them produce a more lively impression,and create a warmer interest in most men's mindsthan such stale papers as may be read in print in one'sown closet. Yet from these, if a man would reallyread them attentively, may be obtained all that canbe got from the former, except perhaps a more completeacquaintance with the existing fashion, the meretechnicality of the diplomatic correspondence of theday. I should say the printed documents were evento be preferred, because the best on every topic arecommonly selected, without a great deal of uselesstrash. I scarce know how any young man couldbetter prepare himself for either House of parliamentthan by studying, inter alia, the papers which havebeen laid before the House on the great events of theday ; those, for instance, on Walcheren, the American,1810. PREPARATION FOR PUBLIC LIFE. 463and the Spanish affairs. One of the chief particularswhich my mind includes in the inter alia, is ModemHistory, both of the continent, and still more of ourown country ; the latter of course to be read with theParliamentary History and Debates. If I were notwriting to you, who know, as well as I could tell you,all but what belongs to the shop, I should add, thatabove all I recommend composition on all the greattopics, Satis.With kind remembrances to all under your roof,I am always, my dear Gisborne,Yours most sincerely and affectionately,W. Wilberforce."Early in September he took possession of an emptycountry-house, which the kindness of a friend hadplaced at his disposal. His own was lent at the sametime, and he assured its inmates, " It is a pleasure tomethat my house should be of use to my friendswhen I am away from it." " I always feel the morerewarded for the money I spent upon KensingtonGore, when my friends come to it freely, whether wearepresent or absent. For those who are occupyinga friend's house in his absence, what so natural as tohave another friend occupying their own ? I onlybeg you will be in no hurry to quit."As soon as he was well established, he thus makesLord Lancaster acquainted with his " lurking-hole.' 1464 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1810.TO LORD MUNCASTER.Herstmonceux, near Battel, Sept. 25, 1810.My dear Lancaster,I cannot be sure whether or not I have writtento you within the last fortnight or three weeks. Ifnot, you will scarcely be able to make out my lurking-hole.How much will you be surprised when I go ontotell you, that I am within a very few miles of thetremendous John Fuller. It must surely be a strangewild region that contains such inhabitants ; some outlandishplace beyond the bounds of civilized society,where ' sea-monsters whelp and stable.' Indeed,were not Mr. Speaker at a distance but little greater,I should scarcely feel secure within the reach of sucha barbarian. But as it is said, that the fiercestanimals feel an inextinguishable dread of the keeperwho has once established his ascendency over them,so I trust to the effect of the recollection of the greatwig, and repose in security. To explain I am in a,corner of Sussex, in an excellent house lent me by akind friend, who from family circumstances is keptaway from it for some weeks longer ; and in a placealmost as pretty as the neighbourhood of the sea everis. Not that it is so near the salt water or so beautifulas Lancaster. There is a fine old castle here ; amere nous homo, however, compared with yours,having been built in Henry Gth's time, but it was incompletepreservation till about twenty years ago ; andthough this is a very good private gentleman's habitation,yet when one sets it against a complete castle,1810. HERTSMONCEUX.- 465one side of which was 200 feet long, and which was inthe complete costume of the age in which it wasreared, it dwindles into as much insignificance, asone of the armed knights of the middle ages, fullyaccoutred, who should suddenly be transformed intothe curtailed dimensions of one of the box lobbyloungers of the Opera, or even one of the cropped anddocked troopers of some of our modern-regiments.We have been here about three weeks ; and I amstriving to spend less time at my desk, both on accountof my health, and that I may, when alone it is in mypower, have a little time for reading to my wife andchildren. I wish you and yours could be of theparty. But I can only wish it.Accustomed as I am to all the conveniences of ahighly civilized state of society, I cannot withoutwonder as well as thankfulness call to mind, that hereI am at one extreme of the kingdom writing to you inthe other, and not doubting of conveying to you veryspeedily the tidings of me and mine, and of receivingfrom you the account of your goings-on, thoughsecured behind the natural ramparts of your ninefoldwall of mountains. O my dear Lancaster, we arenot, I am sure I feel it continually, we are not halfgrateful enough for the blessings with which we arefavoured ; above all, for the spiritual blessings. I cannothelp at times, giving way I will not say, but, atleast, lending an ear to suggestions which arise in mymind, that our comforts will be abridged, and ourpride be humbled. But I will abstain from strikingthis string, at least at present. Let me not excitex 3466 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1810.melancholy ideas in your mind. If I cannot be gay,let me at least be affectionate, and assure you, withkind remembrances to your young ladies, in whichMrs. W. would join if she knew of my writing, thatI am ever, my dear Lancaster,Yours most sincerely,W. WILBERFORCE."Lord Lancaster's reply produced the followingrejoinder.Herstmonceux, Oct. 23, 1810.You amused me, my dear Lancaster, by showingyourself at least as well acquainted with thisplace and its environs, as I was after residing here amonth. You are right, at least substantially so ; thecastle is in the park, but, horrendum dicta ! it waspulled down, and the bare walls and ivy-mantledtowers alone left standing ; the materials beingapplied to the construction of a new house, which onthe whole cost twice as much, I understand, as it wouldhave taken to make the castle habitable, for it hadfallen a little into arrears. I don't know however thatwe who inhabit the new mansion may not have madea good exchange by gaining in comfort what is lostin magnificence ; for the old building was of such aprodigious extent, that it w r ould have required thecontents of almost a whole colliery to keep it warm ;and I think few things are more wretched (of thekind I mean,) than living in a house which it is beyondthe powers of the fortune to keep in order ; like1810. JOHN BOWDLER. 467a great body with a languid circulation, all is cold andcomfortless.I see from the newspapers, that the Duke of Norfolkhas been in your part of the world. Has he notbeen in your old castle ? Not that you would muchcovet his visit. There is a strange anomaly, an utterunsuitableness, between Jockey of Norfolk and thepeaceful dales of Westmoreland, the seats of peace,and love, and melody, which he would people with thethrong of the assailed in Comus. I hope that youyourself are enjoying the witcheries of your fascinatingprospects. I quite long to revisit those much-lovedvalleys, and rocks, and lakes, and waterfalls. I thinkthe longing has been increased by the perusal of theLady of the Lake, which I have read with delight andwonder. I really think that from the place whereFits James first lights on the mountaineer, to the endof the battle, there has not often been a more spiritedand interesting poem.My dear Lancaster, your kind heart will be sorryto hear that my friend Powder is going abroad for amilder climate, but we greatly fear too late. But formy being married, I have thought that I would go ashis companion. He is really, take him all together,one of the most extraordinary young men I ever knew.If it should please God to restore him to health sufficientto enable him to carry on his profession, this willone day appear. But to those who love him as well as Ido, it is an unspeakable comfort to reflect that he is, Ibelieve, perfectly ready to make the great exchange.I often think what a change it is ! what astonishment468 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1810.will seize the minds of those whose thoughts have herebeen studiously turned away from all such serioussubjects ! My dear Lancaster, may we also be ready.My heart is very heavy. I know you will sympathizewith me. God bless you and yours.I am ever affectionately yours,W. WILBERFORCE."My dear sir," was Mr. Powder's parting addressto Mr. Wilberforce just before his embarkation forthe coast of Sicily, " we shall probably not meetagain for many months ; and it may be the will of God,that in this world we shall meet no more. Let meassure you, that you and Mrs. W., and your little circletoo, will be very, very often present to my thoughts,and never without feelings of the warmest gratitudeand affection. The hours which I have passed underyour roof have been among the happiest of my life ;and I shall ever esteem the advantages and opportunitiesof improvement which I have there enjoyed,as among the choicest blessings which the mercy ofa most merciful Father has showered on me. Maythe same bountiful Lord repay to you and yours tenfoldall your kindness to me. I beg you to presentmy very affectionate regards to Mrs. Wilberforce, andbelieve me, my dear sir,Most truly yours,J. BOWDLER, JUN."One main purpose of his summer retirement wasto " watch the tempers and dispositions of his chileINTERCOURSE WITH HIS CHILDREN. 469drew." " I mean' he tells Mr. Babington, " to makeeducation my grand object. Pray for me, that I maybeable to succeed. I can truly say I feel my owndeficiencies." This was one great reason why, insteadof visiting Yorkshire, he spent his summers in thesouth. " I can truly declare," he tells a countyfriend, " that even the inanimate objects which youdaily behold, would gratify my friendly feelings. Fewthings would give me more pleasure than to strollfrom Robert Bradley's garden (the fox, does hestill maintain his station ?) to the extremity of poorTom Williamson's woods, both inclusive ; but the difficulty,expense, and discomfort of moving children,and the evils and pains of leaving them, amongstother causes, keep me from any distant excursion. Ioften indulge the hope that, when my boys are goneto school, I shall be able to travel about a little ; andin that case the haunts of my youth would not beforgotten." " We are about to quit our pleasant retirement,"he tells Dr. Coulthurst, " pleasant, chieflybecause it has been so retired, where we have beenresiding for almost three months. This occasionalabstraction from the bustle and turmoil of the world,is highly beneficial to mind, body, and estate ; and Ihave had an opportunity of becoming acquainted withmy own children, who, it really is not exaggeration todeclare, seldom get a quiet minute with me duringthe sitting of parliament."As he had not married until middle life, whenhe was most busily engaged in his engrossing duties,this was literally true. So long as they were470 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1810.infants, he had not time to seek amusement fromthem. Even whilst they were of this age, it madea deep impression on his mind when one of thembeginning to cry as he took him up, the nursesaid naturally by way of explanation, " He always isafraid of strangers' This he could not suffer tocontinue when they grew out of mere infancy. Duringthe session indeed he was so busy, and so much fromhome, that he could see little of them through theweek ; but Sunday was his own, and he spent it in themidst of his family. His children, after meeting himat prayers, went with him to the house of God ; repeatingto him in the carriage hymns or verses, orpassages from his favourite Cowper. Then they walkedwith him in the garden, and each had the valuedprivilege of bringing him a Sunday nosegay, forwhich the flowers of their little gardens had beenhoarded all the week. Then all dined together, at anearly hour, in the midst of cheerful, yet suitable conversation." ' Better,' " was one of his Sunday commonplaces," says the wise man, ( is a dinner ofherbs where love is, than a stalled ox and hatredtherewith ; ' but, my children, how good is God to us !He gives us the stalled ox and love too." Never wasreligion seen in a more engaging form than in hisSunday intercourse with them. A festival air of holyand rational happiness dwelt continually around him.But with Sunday ended for the time the possibilityof domestic life. " While the House is sitting I becomealmost a bachelor." 6 When the session was6 Letter to S. Roberts Esq.1810. PLANS OF EDUCATION. 471over, and he had retired into the country, it was hisdelight to live amongst his children. His mealswere as far as possible taken with them ; he carriedthem out with him on little pleasurable excursions,and joined often in their amusements. Every daytoo he read aloud with them, setting apart some timein the afternoon for lighter and more entertainingbooks, (one of these this summer was the ArabianNights,) and selecting one of them to read moreserious works to him while he dressed. Happy wasthe young performer who was chosen for the office.The early and quiet intercourse which his afforded drew forth all a father's tenderness,whilst the reading was continually changed intothe most instructive conversation. " read to meRobertson's America whilst dressing, and we talkedover it." " I shall never forget," says his son, " thehappy expedient by which he impressed on me thecharacters of the several Spanish chieftains. Whenthe prayer bell cut short our reading, he would bidme mark how its heavy tones chimed in with theepithets by which he had distinguished them. Tothis hour the sound of a bell irresistibly reminds meof his exclamation, ' There it is again, cruel Cortes,perfidious Pizarro'" All his efforts were aimed atopening the mind, creating a spirit of inquiry, andstrengthening the powers ; while he was jealous ofsuch acquirements as yielded an immediate return,and so afforded opportunities for gratifying vanity.Thus when he first heard a rumour of Finale'splans " A foreigner," he says, " is in town who472 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1810.teaches the art of memory so as to render childrencapable of surprising feats. I have not heard a particularaccount, but I suspect it is one of the ancientmethods, of a house divided into rooms, &c. Butsuch mere technical plans are dangerous, especially foryoung people, as are all schemes which natter vanityand indolence, give the power of shining at a cheaprate, and of exhibiting a show of knowledge wherethere is really none."All this time he was watching carefully the indicationsof their various character ; and many a remainingentry of the long-past incidents of childhood, showhow observant was his eye of things of which heseemed to take no note. " a heavy-lookingchild, but showing at times much thought used (infact) in play yesterday Euclid's axiom, Things thatare equal to the same are equal to one another."has far more courage and character than allthe other children." " Heard W. read to me for anhour after dinner one of Miss Edgeworth's Tales.How entirely free from religion is her morality, whichhowever stolen from Scripture ! " " Reading to childrenRobertson's History of America." " Stoppedto buy a book, because he was good yesterdayhaving much wished to go with the rest ; and thoughat first he cried, he almost immediately got the betterof it, and desired (our driving off being a littledelayed) to come and wish me good bye, which hedid with a cheerful face. This deserves most seriousconsideration and suitable treatment." "behaved very pleasingly last night in relation to .1810. RELIGIOUS TRAINING. 473They were keeping 's birth-day, with their gala inthe gallery, in my old court dresses ; and in the midstof earnest entreaties to have my sword, and when ithad been promised, he gave it up in a moment whenI pressed that having done mischief with it,though undesigned, on the last birth-day, could nothave one ; and would be hurt by his having a sword,and himself being without it. How lightly thingssit on these young creatures ! " " The carriage hastaken the children into the country to-day; theycame home delighted. It is much to preserve ataste for natural and innocent pleasures."The practical character of his personal piety wasof the utmost moment in his treatment of his children.He was always on his guard against forcingtheir religious feelings, and shielded them carefullyfrom the poison of Antinomian teaching. " With myfamily," he says, " twice to Basil Wood's, becauseDr. Hawker preaching at the Lock." "preached, morning. Sad Antinomian sermon, onThere is forgiveness with Thee, therefore Thoushalt be feared.' He says he meant to speak of forgivenessas the act of God in His decree and purpose,not in the manner of His communicating it; whatsad work ! " " twice, still very doctrinal andunprofitable, reconciling his Calvinism with practicalreligion. How little the modern religionists thinkof the vices of the tongue, or even of bad tempers,much less of habits of mind ! Alas, how much easierto make a profession of religion than to govern thetemper ! " In the same spirit he says, after receiving474 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1810.a very promising account of one amongst his children,I am afraid of 's making him artificial by tellinghim it is God's work on the heart. I fear above allhis being led to affect more than he really feels."Yet with all this careful watchfulness, tenderness wasthe distinctive feature of his domestic character.Though he never weakly withheld any necessarypunishment, he did not attempt to dissemble thepain which its infliction cost him. " Alas ! " he saysat such a time, " grieved me much to-day, discoveringthe same utter want of self-government orself-denial when disappointed of any thing on whichhe had set his heart, as he had done before. He behavedvery ill. I talked with him plainly, and sethim a punishment. Poor fellow ! it made my heartheavy all the evening, and indeed ever since. But Ihope he will mend. God will grant much to prayer ;and I humbly trust it is our object to train him up inthe nurture and admonition of the Lord."This careful observation of his children's characters,joined with the most lively tenderness, isbeautifully illustrated by a paper of directions whichhe drew up about this time for the private use of twoof his sons, who were now at school together.BROTHERLY LOVE AND CONDUCT.Hints for my dear , to be often read over,with self-examination.1 . Endeavour to bear in mind, that you will be oftentempted to behave to your brother not so well1810. RULES FOR HIS CHILDREN. 475as you ought. That you may be on your guardagainst all such temptations2. Recollect, if you can, what the occasions are whichhave most commonly led you to behave ill to yourbrother, and try to keep them in your memory bynow and then thinking them over ; and when suchoccasions are about to occur, whether at play, inreading, or wherever else, then be doubly on yourguard, and try to lift up your heart in an ejaculationto God, that you may be enabled to resist thetemptation ; and if you do resist it, lift up your heartagain in thanksgiving.3. Remember one season of temptation will alwaysbe, when you are at play, especially where there aresides, whether you are on the same side asor not.4. Remember it is not sufficient not to be unkindto your brother ; you must be positively kind to all,and how much more then to a brother !5. Remember you will be under a temptation toresist unkindly 's disposition to command you.If Christ tells us not to resent little outrages fromany one, (see Matt. v. 39, 44,) how much lessshould you resent his commanding you ! Thoughperhaps it may be not quite right in itself, yet anelder brother has a right to some influence frombeing such. See 1 Pet. v. 5.6. Often reflect that you are both children of thesame father and mother ; how you have knelt togetherin prayer ; have played together as children,and have sat round the same table, on a Sunday, in476 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1810.peace and love. Place the scene before your mind'seye, and recollect how happy mamma and I havebeen to see you all around us good and happy.7. You are not so lively by nature as he is, but bewilling always to oblige him by playing at propertimes, &c. though not disposed of yourself.Nothing more occurs to me, except, and this bothmamma and I desire to press strongly on you, todesire you to be on your guard against being out ofhumour on a little raillery, and always to laugh atit ; nothing shows good humour more than takinga joke without being fretful or gloomy.May God bless my dearest boy, and enable himto profit from the above suggestions of his mostaffectionate father, . 'W. WILBERFORCE."BROTHERLY LOVE AND CONDUCT.Hints for my dear , to be often looked over,with self-examination.1. Endeavour to bear in mind, that you will be oftentempted to be not so kind to your brother asyou ought to be. That you may be on your guardagainst the temptations when they do occur2. Recollect, if you can, what the occasions are whichhave most commonly led you to be unkind to yourbrother, and keep them in your memory by nowand then thinking them over; and when such occasionsare about to occur again, whether at play,in reading, or wherever else, then be doubly on1810. RULES FOR HIS CHILDREN. 477your guard, and lift up your heart in prayer toGod, that you may be enabled to resist the temptation; and if you have been enabled to get thebetter of it, lift up your heart to God again inthanksgiving.3. Remember one season of temptation will alwaysbe, when you are at play, especially where there aresides, whether is on your side or on theopposite side.4. Remember it is not enough not to be unkind toWe ought to be positively kind to all, buthow much more so to a brother !5. Remember you will be tempted to command himtoo much. Guard therefore against this temptation.6. Sometimes reflect that he and you are children ofthe same parents. Recollect him a little fat child,and how we used to kiss his neck and call himBon. Recollect how you have knelt together inprayer with mamma and me, and how, especially ona Sunday, you have sat round the same table withus in peace and love. Try to place the scenebefore the eyes of your mind, and recollect howhappy your mamma and I have appeared to see youall good and happy around us.7. I will specify the times and circumstances inwhich you ought to be peculiarly on your guardagainst behaving improperly. When you have doneyour own business, or are not inclined to do it, bewareof interrupting him in doing his. When youare with older companions than yourself, beware of478 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1810.behaving to him less kindly, or with any thing likearrogance. When you are in the highest spirits,having been at play or from whatever other cause,you are apt to lose your self-government, and to beout of humour on having your inclination crossedin any way. Beware in such circumstances ofbeing unkind to him.May God bless my dearest , and enable himto profit from the above suggestions of his mostaffectionate father,W. WILBERFORCE."These hints afford a fair sample of his mode ofmanaging his children. He constantly referred themto the highest principles of action. Education indeed,when otherwise conducted, he always lookedat with suspicion. " William Allen," he says shortlyafterwards, " and Joseph Fox came about Lancaster'sschools, to tell me all about them, and press meto be a vice-president. Heard Fox's most interestingaccount." For a fortnight he was doubtful howto answer this appeal ; but having fully weighed thequestion, he " wrote to William Allen to declinebeing a committee man, though it gave me greatpain to refuse him ; but emulation and vanity are thevital breath of the system."He was still at Herstmonceux, when " he heard ofthe death of the Princess Amelia, and of parliamentmeeting on the 1st of November, owing to the King'sillness. He prepared immediately for his return to1810. TO THOMAS Barrington ESQ. 479town, which he reached upon the 9th of November.The day after his arrival he wrote to Mr. Babington.Kensington Gore, Saturday, Nov. 10, 1810.My dear Friend,I think you know me too well not to be surethat a friendly salutation from one I love so well, andafter so long a cessation of all intercourse, would nothave waited till now to be returned, but for some unavoidablehinderance. The fact is, your letter foundme in what has been called, you will say somewhattoo strongly, all the horrors of preparing for the migrationof the whole horde from a station which it hasbeen occupying for above two months ; and you arewell enough acquainted with the manners of the leaderof the tribe, to be aware of the quantity of baggageof all sorts, (well styled I have often thought bythe Romans, impedimenta,) which in the course ofthat time, in the summer too when he can hope for alittle leisure for study, he would heap around him.Under such circumstances, as I did not mean to beginthe system of short letters till I should have answeredyou, just as the parliamentarians in Charles List's timewere charged with getting up to the throat justbefore they commenced their fast, I deferred takingup my pen till I could allot at least a quiet half-hourto you. Then on our way having received a verykind invitation from the Speaker, I thought it wouldbe wrong for us not to accept it. Here we arrived safeand sound D. G. yesterday evening, and I have takenthe first vacant season, this morning, for writing to you ;480 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1810.though various hindrances, an hour's talk with dearStephen before his going back to town one of them, anda long discussion de rebus domestics another, havemade me so late that I shall not be able to enjoy aslong a tete-astute with you as I intended.We spent two months in quiet at Herstmonceux ;and I assure you, my dear Tom, I can truly say thatyou were remembered, not merely from the thoughtsand feelings which are always expended on those welove, and for whose well-doing we are interested, butfrom my bearing in mind your good advice concerningthe management of my children. Now for the expenditureof my time. It is but too true that my lettersoccupied far too large a proportion of it. It grievesme to be so unprofitable ; and in particular, having asI conceive in my mind the materials of a work of nogreat length either, but, as I humbly hope, likely tobe very useful, I quite long to begin upon it.When at Herstmonceux, we read with the childrenin the afternoon : we got through Clarke's Travels,and Robertson's History of America, and had begunthe historical part of Charles the Fifth. I was muchstruck with the remarks which the little ones made onthe passing scenes and characters, and I am disposedto think that it must be very useful to them to hearthe reflections which we make both on the dramatispersonae, and on the principles of the author of thepiece. I enter into all your domestic cares and joys.May God continue you His best blessings. Believe meever affectionately yours,W. WILBERFORCE."1810. WEST INDIAN SUBJECTS. 481All public business was deferred by the illness ofthe King, and the continual hopes which were heldforth of his speedy convalescence: " Our belovedold King the physicians declare is recovering, andthey have scarcely a doubt of his being even speedilywell, if his restoration be not retarded by some of thecircumstances, which if he were not a King he wouldnot experience." 7 " Dec. 9th. The King gettingbetter, but with occasional relapses. Perceval said onThursday, that as well then as when Throw declaredhim well, and sealed the commission in 1789. I believeit. I remember that it was then said in privatethat the King was not quite well." These hopes werecontinually deferred, and the examination of theroyal physicians before a committee of the House ofCommons, (of which he was a member,) was theonly public business which engaged him before Christmas; yet he was fully occupied. West Indian subjectsnow required a large portion of his time. Abovea year before he told his connexion Mr. Manning, 8It has grieved me not a little to hear that theplanters in the West Indies are not at all proceedingto make such improvements in their system as theirnew situation requires. I have often thought that itmight do much good, if Collins's excellent workon the management of the negroes were generallycirculated. It is astonishing how little it isknown by West Indians of education and knowledgeof colonial concerns. But the subject to which I wishto draw your attention, is that of an institution for the7 Letter to W. Hey Esq. s Oct. 18, 1809.VOL. III. Y482 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1810.religious instruction of the children of the slaves.Depend on it, their education would operate powerfullyto produce marriage, with all its happy consequences.The Bishop of London's society should beresuscitated. Could not the first stone of this secondtemple of Benevolence (if the late Bishop's be regardedas the first) be laid on the approaching 50th anniversaryof the King's accession. Do, my dear friend, stir yourselfin this good work. There are many reasons,which I need not point out to you, why I had betternot appear in this attempt at all ; or if at all, in theback-ground, at an almost invisible distance. But dopress forward. There are many West Indian gentlemenin this country, whose private character and dispositionencourage the hope of their co-operating inany well-devised plan for this purpose. All the Ellipsesare of this description ; Barham pre-eminently so. Imust lay down my pen. I wish I was within ear-shotof you, and tongue-shot too ; for I would speak aswell as hear."To Mr. Macaulay he wrote at the same time,and expressed his " grief that the West Indians arenot accommodating themselves to the new system.What think you of firing a pamphlet at them, toawake and alarm them ? And yet if one were to advisespecific measures, they would perhaps rather beruined than afterwards adopt them. Then Stephenascribes so much less than I do to the effects of encouragingmarriage, &c. He however will, I trust,push his own improvements, through the medium ofTrinidad." This last subject had engaged him all1810. PLANS OF THE ABOLITIONISTS. 483through the former session, and with many others stillcontinued to require attention. This department of hislabours, may be best understood from a list drawn upearly in December of the "subjects of action anddeliberation for Abolitionists."SUBJECTS OF ACTION AND DELIBERATION FORABOLITIONISTS. DEC. 3, 1810.1 . To meet at some early time for the sole purposeof discussing the important question, whether anyand what Bill ought to be brought into parliamentthis session, for amending and making more effectualthe Act for abolishing the Slave Trade.{f* For points involved in this discussion seea separate sheet.2. To take into consideration the PortugueseTreaty, and suggest to H. M.'s government, whatmay be proper to be done or attempted towardscorrecting or improving its stipulations, in regardto the Slave Trade.3. To consider whether any thing and what can bedone to engage the Spanish Cortes and othergoverning powers in Spain and Spanish Americain the cause of Abolition.4. To investigate the present state of things betweenGreat Britain and America in relation tothis subject, and consider whether any treaty forreciprocally enforcing the Abolition laws of bothcountries, can under present circumstances be advantageouslypromoted, and by what means.t( 5. To determine whether any and what part oughtY 2484 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1810.to be taken by Abolitionists, as such, in parliamentaryquestions likely to arise as to the continuingrestrictions on the distilleries, and othermeasures for aiding the, sale and consumption ofWest India produce.6. To promote by all possible means restrictionsand regulations, either by royal or parliamentaryauthority, for the prevention of the contrabandsupply of the conquered colonies with slaves.7. To concert measures and provide means formore speedily and effectually profiting by the dispositionof H. M.'s government to place the Crownestates and slaves fti the West Indies under ahumane and beneficent management."8. To inquire into and bring to justice alloffences against the Abolition Acts, in whichgovernors and public functionaries are implicated,and herein especially the conduct of Governor ,&c. At the same time to obtain, if possible, bylegal means, the enfranchisement of the negroesunlawfully deprived of their freedom in these cases.9. To consider whether any and what remedy canbe found for negroes brought in as prize, and restoredto the claimants in West India courts ofVice Admiralty, and afterwards sold in coloniesnow under H. M.'s government, but who uponappeals have since been condemned to the Crownfor the purpose of enfranchisement, pursuant tothe Abolition Act. The late case of the Africawill here demand particular attention.f 10. To inquire whether any and what measures1810. PLANS OF THE ABOLITIONISTS. 485ought to be taken for ascertaining the present conditionand treatment of negroes apprenticed in theWest Indies, or otherwise disposed of there, aftercondemnation to the Crown, pursuant to the AbolitionAct. Herein the case of a cargo of slaves,condemned at Tortola, and taken by AdmiralCochrane as apprentices on his plantation atTrinidadaa, will demand particular notice."II. To promote by all proper and necessary meansthe practical application at Trinidadaa, of the principleson which that new colony ought to be governed,and to give countenance and support to thefriends of those principles on the spot againsttheir opponents.12. To watch over the case of Huggins, at Nevis,and the proceedings against his official abettors.'13. To take care that the Commission of CustomHouse agents, now going to the West Indies, is soinstructed, &c. as to assist, and not unfairly prejudice,the cause of Abolition."All this required much labour, and he incurred itfreely. There were many services which, from hisstation, talents, and connexions, he could himselfperform, and which could be intrusted to no deputy.Such was the exertion of a constant private influencewith the heads of the administration, for preventingevils or redressing wrongs. Thus, upon the 6th, hewas long " with Perceval, talking with him aboutPortuguese treaty, pressing him to get the 10thArticle, about Slave Trade Abolition, altered." Andafter a visit to Lord Wellesley, he says, " I have been486 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1810.to call on him to bespeak his good offices for thecause of Abolition in Spain. The men whom he willsee, will probably go over to South America and thereleaven the mass." " I am very much obliged to youfor your suggestions respecting the possible interpretationof the 10th Article' Lord Wellesley replied tohim at this time. 9 " I shall instruct Lord Stratfordto invite the Portuguese government to a formalrenunciation of any eventual rights which this Articlemight be construed to establish to a Portuguese SlaveTrade on any part of the African coast, which is notnow in the actual possession of Portugal." Mr. Stephenappreciated rightly the value of these services,and as his own ardent temper was capable of very fewdiversions from the great object to which he had devotedall his energies, ." how manifestly is Stephena special instrument in the hands of God in behalf ofthe negro race ! " 10 . . . he not unnaturally pressed uponhis friend, that he should more confine his efforts tothis one object.My dear Wilberforce,# # % * # #I send for your consideration a paper that mayserve to show you how absolutely necessary it is youshould resolutely make time to think and act onAbolition matters. It is hastily drawn up, and Idoubt not an incomplete enumeration ; and the titleto be subdivided contains a whole host of toils anddifficulties within itself. If better and clearer heads,and more disengaged hands, than mine, do not lead in9 Marquis Wellesley to W. Wilberforce Esq. Dec. 8. Diary.1810. MR. FANTOM. 487this cause ; and if you, who must be the public leader,are to be only a battering-ram to be pushed forward,instead of a fore-horse in the team to pull as well asguide the rest, the cause is lost, the Abolition is undone.It will sink under the weight of your daily epistles ;your post privilege will be the bondage of Africa, andyour covers the funereal pyre of her new-born hopes.Millions will sigh in hopeless wretchedness, thatWilberforce's correspondents may not think him uncivilor unkind, and that no anonymous or unknownsupplicant may have his individual tale, whether trueor false, neglected. I really wish you were a littlemore like Mr. Fantom, (that I think is the name ofHannah More's reformer,) who disdained, in his grandprojects of universal good, all petty objects of, individualcharity or duty. Why, if you were my LordWellington and I Masses, I would undertake to drawoff your whole attention to my grand movements, andruin your army unperceived, by teasing your piquetsand burning a few cottages on your flanks. Awayyou would gallop to Coimbra, or any where else, killingyour horses and yourself; and a poor aid-decamplike me might fret his heart out with fruitless endeavoursto call you back to head-quarters. But it isvain to complain. So things will continue, I know,and it is only making bad worse to take up your timewith long expostulations. Read, however, and sendme back my paper.Yours, my dear Wilberforce,ever very affectionately,J. STEPHEN."488 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1816,That of which Mr. Stephen complained, at timesloudly, was in truth one of the most striking featuresof his character. Devoted as he was all through hislife with so much patient perseverance to the deliveranceof the negro race, his zeal for that greatcause never led him to neglect any opportunity ofdoing present good. He was just as active in redressingindividual wrongs, just as ready to assist thedistress, and poverty, and friendlessness which surroundedhis own doors, as to labour in the world'seye for the ill-used tribes of Africa. This, whileit increased his usefulness, saved him also from thatdiseased contraction of thought and feeling whichis so apt to grow on those who are identified withone pursuit. He was the very opposite of " Mr.Fantom." The healthy vigour of benevolent exertionwas ever fostered in his mind by his mingling individualacts of kindness with all his general plans .Thus whilst he was " calling upon Perceval, and discussingwith Macaulay, Stephen, Brougham, andothers, about African and West Indian matters," hewas also " off early to London to the War Officeabout the boy Powell, unlawfully recruited;" andfinding that " Lord Palmerston had not yet readthe minutes of the second examination, which decisive,"he went on " to the Colonial Office about thecase of Marsden and a poor woman," getting home atlast " top late for dinner;" and being "off" againnext morning " after breakfast to the Horse Guards,where talked to Lord Palmerston about the poorboy," and got the necessary " orders sent down for his1811. KING'S ILLNESS.discharge :" u and this is only a sample of a multitudeof works of mercy in which he was every day engaged.And yet he could say in his most private entries,Alas ! I feel my uselessness and unprofitableness,but I humbly hope I desire to employ my facultiesso as may be most for God's glory, and my fellow -creatures' benefit." It was this high motive whichgave such uniformity to his conduct. " I hear," sayshis Diary, with beautiful simplicity, a few weekslater, " that I am likely to be popular now amongstthe West Riding clothiers about poor Powell, theboy falsely enlisted. How this shows that God caneffect whatever He will, by means the most circuitous,and the least looked for. This might havea great effect in case of an election."With the new year set in the full tide of publicbusiness. The King's illness was painfully confirmed,and the appointment of a regency inevitable. In thesecircumstances, the mind of Mr. Pitt's friend revertednaturally to the debates of 1788 ; and to the greatactors in that drama who had left the stage beforehimself. His mind was constitutionally free fromthat fretfulness of spirit which too often embittersuch recollections, and his estimate of things was justand sober. " I believe," he tells Mr. Babington,from whom he had heard an instance of " Perceval'ssweetness melting down Whitbread's rough churlishness,and extorting a eulogy for suavity and kindness,"" that he is a man of undaunted spirit, but hismodesty prevents his taking that high tone, which atDiary.Y 3490 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1811.such a time as the present rendered Pitt so equal tothe emergency."On the 1st of January he was at the " Housetill about twelve. Romilly abusing Pitt. I got upand defended him. Did well for me, though desultory,not having prepared arranged speech." 12Without feeling the necessity of previous preparation,"to quote Sir Samuel Romilly's account of whathe said, " in the simple language of the heart he defendedhis friend's memory." " If my honourableand learned friend had enjoyed the opportunities ofknowing that great man which have fallen to my lot,he would have been better enabled to do justice tohis character. I am no worshipper of Mr. Pitt. Idiffered from him with what pain none but myselfcan tell ; but if I know any thing of that great man,I am sure of this, that every other consideration wasabsorbed in one grand ruling passion, The love of hiscountry. Of his talents there can be, and there is, butone opinion ; and with respect to his other qualities Ican only adopt the words which those qualities provokedfrom the admiration of a formidable butgenerous rival, e militia est sempiterna, inamicitiaest brevis'" The question was between keeping thewhole household irremovable, or agreeing to themoderate opposition principle of a portion. " Reportof Resolutions I voted for the amendment." In thenext debate there was " sad quarrelling work. Sheridan'slong speech, two-thirds tipsy, dealing aboutknocks on all sides (after Sir William Grant, who quite'* Diary.1811. DEBATES ON KING'S HOUSEHOLD. 491capital). He rather attacking me ; and I prepared avery good answer for him, which over-persuaded not tospeak. Canning declaring they must not (Foxites)abuse Pitt, or he must watch them closely. Then SirSamuel Romilly defending himself, &c. Ponsonbyreconciling ; though Whitbread could scarce bearit. Heartily wished to lose, but upon constitutionalprinciples voted for amendment, which carried by217 to 214. Had been carried last night, but movedagain by Perceval.Jan. 3rd. Last night, for the first time, at mylodgings. Morning, callers Vansittart about WestIndia commission, then others. House, when foundunexpectedly objection to money issuing from Exchequerby auditor (Lord Grenville) without authorityof the two Houses. So prepared by movingpapers for debate tomorrow, and home. I amvery doubtful if I should not explain in the Housewhat was grossly misrepresented by Whitbread,though I trust unintentionally, but renewed last nightby Sheridan, that I had said we ought to give Princeof Wales the least power possible for carrying on thegovernment. I have been much vexed, but not likingto come forward on purpose, did not explain to-day.Manifest symptoms of Canning's rather making overturesto opposition. His speeches excellent, but notlike Pitt's; rather exciting admiration than callingforth sympathy. 4th. House till half-past eleven.Opposition made no hand of it. Lords sharp contest; government beat by three. I am quite grievedat their not recovering household resolution, which492 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1811.lost by thirteen. 5th. I am pained by having votedagainst the Queen's having the household. I reallyfear it may hurt our good old King. Yet I actedfrom sense of duty. How toilsome and unsatisfactorya path is that of politics ! How much more satisfactoryis that of religion f Acquaint thyself with God andbe at peace."The notices of his Diary just sketch the conclusionof this business. " 1 th. The answers of the Prince ofWales and the Queen reported to the House. ThePrince's highly objectionable. Though the powerscommitted to him more than in 1788, and theright of making peers almost alone withheld, hesays, he is willing to use the powers left him for thepublic benefit ; also talks of his care for the Crown,and in an equal degree for the welfare of the peoplesurely it must be his own. 14th. Callers, and agood deal bustled, till House Phantom, as thecant phrase is, for the commission to put the greatseal." When the question was further debatedSheridan's speech wretched, and Perceval's excellent.Yet, as on the other evening, all the newspapersmake a capital speech for Sheridan, and extol hiseloquence. Dined at Henry Thornton's heard fromSharpe that the Prince intended to make a sweep assoon as possible, and after reading his oath, I do notsee how he can do otherwise. Lord Grey to be FirstLord of the Treasury. Grenville, who will not give upeditorship, and has lately, in his correspondence withPerceval, called it a check on the Treasury, has not Isuspect nerves to stand the proposing a bill to make1811. REGENCY. 493the two offices tenable together, and for so short aprobable time. Ponsonby, Third Secretary. Lans-down,Ireland. Surely Whitbread can never longagree with Lord Grenville. Brougham to be Secretaryof Admiralty vice Croaker. Surely infra dig.Homer to be Secretary of Treasury, a very goodappointment." 13This was but the rumour of a day, and on the 21sthe continues, " Very different reports about Regent'sintentions. Sharpe's statement contradicted throughout.All acknowledge the talent, the spirit, integrity,good humour, and various excellences of Percevalthrough all the conduct of this difficult business. Hiscolleagues don't help him at all. 14 23rd. Third readingof Regency Bill. Forced up by Giles, and glad ofan opportunity of speaking handsomely of Perceval."31st. Whitbread's notice, that if no one else, hewould take up the affair of Lord Eldon, acting forKing in 1804, and using his name when King insane,attended by Simmons's men. Sad work, but a mostdifficult and distressing situation for an honest manto ,be placed in. The King they say now gettingwell in private they say, well again now.Feb. 1 st. Morning, letters off by twelve, and byDr. Thornton's his lottery application to N. Vansittart.Meeting on Abolition enforcement law Whit-bread,Granville Sharpe, N* Vansittart, Brougham,Bootle, &c. Then House. No one knows what thePrince means to do, whether to change his ministers ornot. It is said that Lord Grey and Grenville very'3 Diarv, Jan. 14. " Ib. Jan. 22.494 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1811.indignant that the draft of an answer they had made toCommons (both Houses' address) was submitted toSheridan and Lord Moira, and that the Prince did allbut beg their pardon for it. 2nd. To Speaker's firstlevee. Lord Bathurst about four to-day believedthey were all to go out ; but Perry, the editor of theMorning Chronicle, told Stephen about half-pastthree, that he knew (he spoke as having been toldfrom authority) that the Prince of Wales had examinedthe physician at Carlton House, as to thestate of the King's health, and had determinedagainst changing his ministers. Otherwise it hadbeen decided, that Lord Grenville was to be the FirstLord of the Treasury, in spite of his late letter toPerceval ; that it would be three or four days' talk,and no more. I am assured that before the Princedetermined upon keeping the present ministers, hesent to Mrs. Fitzherbert and Lady H. and thatthey both advised it. Feb. 6th. Off for town sadbustle meeting at Vansittart's House adjournedSpeaker not being there, but at Privy Council, swearingin the Prince."In the midst of this " bustle" graver entries intervene,and reflections which strikingly illustrate thecalm and watchful temper in which he passed throughits turmoil. " Lying awake long in the night mythoughts were not naturally so serious as usual, and mymiiid more disturbed by the rushing in of a great varietyof topics. Alas ! how much of my life is fumed awayin trifles which leave no mark behind, and no fruit !O Lord, enable me to redeem the time better in future ;1811. JOURNAL. 495to live more on plan, though really this has been insome degree my object, and to be more devoted in heartand life to Thy glory, and to the good of my fellow -creatures." These were not the indolent desires ofoccasional feeling ; strict practical rules grew out ofthem. " Let me try to keep myself reminded of invisiblethings by something which will call attention,though not produce pain, and by varying the expedients; when I grow familiar with one, I may use another.I did try a little pebble in my shoe. Why shouldsuch secondary means be despised ? Oh that theywere unnecessary, and so they may become by degrees !Oh may I learn to live above this world, and set myaffections on things above ! " 13By being kept too late last night, I have losta full hour of morning time. God forgive me ! Iput this clown for my caution and guide. I musteither go to my private devotions before familyprayers, which is far the best when I have not anurgent pressure of business, or immediately after,which is next ; and in that case I must see thatI do not curtail the time in order to come in again.O Lord, help me to amend here, for I cannot expectThy blessing when the very means of supplyingall spiritual strength are thus broken in upon." 16How different do matters look at the time andafterwards ! Last night I thought I ought to stay withour friends after prayers, which were late, and I hadgot no time before, having been writing necessaryletters; but now I am clear I might have gone out for15 Journal, Feb. 10. <* Diary, Feb. 16.496 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1811.three quarters of an hour, and apologized on returning.My soul, remember this for use another time." 17Friends dined with me, and staid too late andthough I brought out books and read passages, it waswasteful work. How foolish that people cannotunderstand each other better ! What good done bythis visit ? How unprofitable was our intercourse,partly from want of topics ready for conversation !They would often remind me of useful subjects fordiscussion yet last night I really was thinking howto do the young man good, but no aspirations I amquite faulty here." 18 " Dined at the Speaker's hevery kind, and particularly obliging in his publicattentions to me. Sat between Bankes and Sir JohnBright latter a man of much energy in the pursuitshe engages in, and many right dispositions,feelings, and opinions very upright as a memberof parliament. I tried to introduce some religiousconversation, but I knew not well how. Alas ! Iwas too much admiring and enjoying the splendour,&c. in itself. It is much the handsomest thingof its size I ever saw, and so say others who live inand see the most splendid houses ; but how little didI keep my heart with due diligence ! how little was Ipoor in spirit, the mortified, humble, meek servant ofthe lowly Jesus ! Surely I was intoxicated with theglitter and parade, and too much like others. Itmust be good for me, who am called so much necessarilyinto social intercourse, to retire when I cantomy own home and family, and give up as much as17 Diary, Feb. 6. 18 Ib, Feb. 8.1811. SOCIETY. 497possible dining out my health is a fair plea for it italways suffers from late dining, though less I thinkthan formerly." 19 " Dined first time at the Alfredthe party kindly made for me by Sir Thomas BernardMat. Montagu, Lord Hardwicke, Sir Thomas Bernard,Lord Teignmouth, Master Simeon, Sir JohnColors, Hammered, &c. All went off very pleasantly.Sir Thomas Bernard's plan of an Alfred theatreby private subscription no promiscuous admissionselect plays and actors all pour la morale. To considerit. Perhaps I spoke too freely about it allcherished social affections, but, nonne, too luxurioustoo much tending to lower down the frame to theworld's standard, and spiritualized the affections ?I have no time now, but I will resume this. I shouldfear, in dining there often, both self-indulgence andcounter-spiritualizing tendencies. How truly interestingis Sir Thomas Bernard ! God bless him." 20I find my memory failing me partly I doubt not,from advancing years ; but this effect accelerated andexaggerated by the incessant bustle in which I havelived, and by my not taking pains to obtain sufficientlydeep impressions. Let me mind this with my children,especially with any who may seem volatile andbird-witted. I have not been watchful enough overmy thoughts, and for improving the time when goingfrom place to place, either on foot, or in a carriage.Let me think over some topics with or without apencil, and note down; or if I have no topic forthought ready on my memorandum paper, let me reteDiary, Feb. 9. 20 Jb. Feb. 16.498 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1811.peat passages in prose or verse, which I wish to retainin my memory, either seriatim or topically. Let mehave memoranda made to insure due attention toall my topics' stores. Oh how much better fitted Imight have been, than I am, for the duties of mystation, if I had duly improved my means, especiallythat most important of them all, my time ! O Lord,forgive me and let not vanity be my motive in allthese operations, but the desire of pleasing Thee.Again, as my memory thus fails me, let me ratherread over what I already know, since I can far moreeasily revive into completeness ideas now fading away,than put myself into complete possession of new ones.Again, in Scripture reading, especially at night, I findoften after it only a general devout frame of mind,but no specific recollections ; let me try to retainsomething distinctly, if only one verse and repeat itafterwards classification here of unspeakable use toa bad memory. Mem. To look over these papersfrequently." 21Surrounding events also gave a graver tone to someof his reflections. " Got my letters in the evening,and informed of the death of my old friend Cooksonon,of Leeds. Quite shocked and stunned by it. Therewas no man upon whose death I had less calculatedthan his." 22 " Feb. 11th. took me aside andtold me, that calling on Miss Smyth, she heard herfather was given over by the physicians. He hadhad a cold about three weeks. She had only beentold of his danger the day before, and shocked incendiary,Feb. 7. 22 Ib.1811. DEATH OF FRIENDS. 499possibly. I truly bewail the loss of so kind andsteady a friend so very partial to me ; but I recollectwith joy that I always dealt freely with him on religion,and I hope he was the better for it." " Feb.20th. Heard lately of honest Miles Atkinson's deatha truly pleasing letter from William Hey conveyedthe news. William sighs after a better world. PoorS.'s end awful beyond measure, all circumstancesconsidered. He had just put his son into a mostimportant post in the church, though he is said to beimbecile and incurably indolent. He was ill a fortnight,but his mind was so harassed with worldlyaffairs, that he would not pursue any medical advicetill too late. I hear, that dining lately with a smallparty of contemporaries, he boasted that, in his ownwords, ' he should see them all out ' one was toofat, and another something else. His life appears tohave been completely thrown away ; yet he was oneof the most sensible practical men I ever knew. Ohhow easily can God confound the wisdom of the wise,and bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent! What a contrast is Miles's death ! meek,humble, and confident."His hands were all this time full with his usualvariety of public and private business. ee Feb. 7th.Reading about Jeremy Bentham's Penitentiary plans,now I hope likely to be executed. 8th. Captain Manywith me about his manner of saving shipwreckedmariners very clever and effectual. To speak toRose about him. Called Thelwall's to speak to himabout E . Clever, but a coxcomb. L. break-cooLIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1811.fasted with me sent by Master Simeon. Introducedto me as having a plan for the public benefit. Onreceiving it, it is his own, though his plea the bestpossible. Feb. 22nd. Thank God, well again callingat Colonial Office, about a schoolmaster for NewSouth Wales. Found my name on a committeemoved by Sir F. Burdett, on the case of Melville.23rd. Off for Cold Bath Fields prison, where committeemet to-day on Colville's case. Sir F. Burdettcivil Lord Folkestone kindly giving me a shelteredplace, seeing me incommoded by the wind. 25th.Extremely hurried in the morning by different setsof callers on business. Off at three-quarters pasteleven, for committee on Colville's case. Then letters.House dined, and House again; but having beenvery poorly before, I now could not keep awake inHouse on Whi thread's charge against Lords Eldonand Sidmouth about King's illnesses in 1801 and 1804.Did not hear one-third of Castlereagh's defence, sothat I came away without voting. I know how unpopularthis is in the House ; but it was the path ofduty and conscience, for it was in truth as if I had notbeen present. But very middling in health just now.26th. Babington and Henry Thornton voted last nightwith Whitbread Stephen quite clear the oppositeway. How candid should this make us ! On readingthe Report of the debate I am quite satisfied to voteagainst Whitbread. Various callers this morninguntil time to go to the Prince's first levee. Thepalace most splendid an immense party the Princelooks very large little Michael Angelo in the room1811. SECRET COMMITTEE. 501as amicus curiae. Afterwards to House, though Iwished to attend Grant's summons, and meet theWayland at dinner. Wardle's charge about CorporalCurtis his charge in general futile, except that thepunishment excessively severe (though Judge Advo-cate-General Button's speech excellent too). TheHouse was manifestly any thing rather than a fairtribunal evidently so delighted when any thing wentagainst him.March 1 st. To secret committee 3 where longdiscussion, until, from talking over matters with a good-naturedspirit, Sir Francis Burdett acquiesced in Report; and Lord Folkestone, on Report's being made, veryhandsomely said it had been unanimously agreed to.I got inserted in it a clause suggesting the improprietyof keeping men, when only meant to be detained,where subjected to other evils besides detention. 2nd.To town about Wakefield railroad. Found that W.Allen, who had applied to me about getting a licencefor Paul Coffee's 24 ship, had not seen Lord Bathurst, towhom I had written went down to Council Office andprevailed on him to grant me a licence. He is to comeand negociate with African Institution and governmentabout settling himself and others in Africa." " 5th.Read letters a little writing till going out to offices.Three o'clock, Penitentiary Committee eat a meremorsel, and House Brougham's Bill for making Slave-dealinga chargeable felony. Not a voice lifted up23 About the detention of Mr. Colville.84 For an interesting notice of this remarkable man, a Massachusettsnegro who by unexampled perseverance raised himself to affluence,see the Appendix to the Christian Observer for 1811, vol. x. p. 325.502 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1811.against it; but the House rather cold on the subject, sothat I could not press, as I wished, for compensatingAfrica." " Dined at the Duke of Gloucester's, tomeet Mended Lopez, Caraccas' ambassador mixedparty Lord Glenbervie, Mr. Jackson, Americanminister, Bright, Wilbraham Bootle, and otherslittle good done I fear. The Duke talked to me aboutaccepting the chancellorship of the University." 25Upon this subject he wrote to Mr. Simeon.Kensington Gore, March 1G, 1811.My dear Sir,I have been desired to canvass you for theDuke of Gloucester; and as our friendship is such asto justify our applying to each other on such an occasion,I cannot refuse to express the interest I takein his Highness's success. The Duke of Gloucesterhas been commonly active in promoting institutionsof a benevolent kind, and more especially he has beenincessant in his attentions to the interests of the AfricanInstitution, and to all which has tended to thebenefit of the African race. I therefore must feelwarmly interested for him. I am so pressed for timethat I must suppress all that I should otherwise haveto say to you. But you will give me credit for allthat is affectionate, and believe me, now as ever, mydear sir,Your sincere friend,W. WILBERFORCE."Diary, Feb. 23.1811. NORTH AMERICAN INDIANS. 503In the midst of these employments he complains ofhaving suffered" his "mind to wander too muchfrom subject to subject, without discussing any satisfactorily.Let me amend here. To addict myself toAfrican matters, and North American Indianscaetera with a view to carrying through the othersby gaining influence." Yet in spite of this resolutionevery day was loaded with so many claims, that hecould not confine himself to these two subjects.Throughout the remainder of this busy session theywere the leading thread in his intricate engagements,but throughout his Diary they are intertwined with amultitude of other useful efforts or benevolent designs.A few brief and unconnected extracts willgive the truest picture of these multifarious engagements.(f March 16th. Pinkney, American minister, havingappointed me between twelve and one, I was forcedto town. Wished to see him before he is off, for Abolition'sake, and North American Indians. I grieveto say he intimated no hope of amicable adjustment.22nd. To Penitentiary Committee. ExaminingNewman, keeper of Newgate a sad place. 23rd.To Rose's to meet S., Sir R. E., Nepean, and LordSelkirk, about withholding spirits from the NorthAmerican Indians. The two first had professedthemselves friends to us, but now drawing back. Sadwork." Three days later he went on the same errand"to S.'s at Mark Lane, where met Sir R. E. andothers. They all warmly against Lord Selkirk andme, who contended with them. How much I LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1811.member all this exactly as in the beginning of Abolitioninquiries ! Those concerned at first seemedfavourable, but on reflection, like bodies moved fromtheir bases, and toppling a little, they righted again ;they thought better of it, and gave up to interestagain; as, ( Other nations will take up the SlaveTrade, &c. so now, the Americans will carry spiritsin.' Again, ' do it gradually ',' says Sir R. E. 29th. Offfrom breakfast for Penitentiary Committee, whereJeremy Bentham to be examined. He declined coming,and I went over, finding him at my lodgings, tofetch him. House till quarter-past eleven on Romilly'sBill ; we carried it against ministry, 79 to 56. Sat.30th. Off, after a few notes, to inquire about poorBlair, whose name I saw with two others ordered forexecution. Saw Ryder, and heard from him what satisfiedme that all idea of saving him hopeless, and evenwrong. Still I thought I ought to do as I would be doneby ; I reflected that our Saviour would have looked thusafter the culprit; and therefore, though it was muchfor me to give up the morning, I went on to Recorder's,and had perhaps an hour's talk with him, and a mostinteresting one it was. He showed me housebreakers'instruments, told me a thousand anecdotes, convincedme of what Marsden had said, that the London thiefand the country thief were different characters. Hetold me such things as showed me plainly I had notbeen fairly dealt with, and that the man ought tosuffer." 26 " Mr. Pinkney sent me a letter whichwas written to him by the President of the United26 Diary.1811. PRIVATE BILLS. 505States, intimating a disposition to enter into negociationwith England on Abolition Enforcement questionsdistinct from others ; and Pinkney said that hehad never had a convenient opportunity of reading itor showing it to Lord Wellesley, who was out of townall the summer, and he saw his Lordship rarely.This looks very ill. Lord ! give peace to an afflictedworld. 31st. Two sermons from F. ; that in themorning on ' the persecution of the religious world,' Idid not much relish,April 1st. A very hurried morning. Mr. Weather-ellcalled before prayers, and breakfasted, and others.Very much incessantly occupied till quarter-pasttwelve. Then called Lord Cardigan's and Aylesbury'sper force. Then lodgings, and found an immensity ofletters. Then House, calling committee for examiningBentham. Dined at lodgings afterwards Wakefieldrailway, which sharply contested. I believe Icarried many votes, though I declared truly that I wasquite uncertain what course I should pursue after thecommittee. I was truly hurt to go against John Smyth,especially so soon after his father's death. Alas ! itrequires sterner stuff than I am made of, to carry onthese matters well." ^These complaints he pours forth to his friend, LordLancaster.Near London, April 10, 1811.Alas ! my dear Lancaster, how little yoursanguine hopes of my being by this time at liberty,2 7 Diary, April 1.VOL. III. Z506 LIFE OF Wilberforce. 1811.are verified ! To-day, as again tomorrow, I amdoomed to that vile and hateful drudgery of presidingin a committee, where a private bill is very hotly contested;and what is worse, contested between those whoare all my friends ; and what is worst of all, the caseis one in which it is really very difficult to form a clearjudgment. Yet, notwithstanding this difficulty, youwould suppose, from the warmth with which the partisanson each side abuse the other, that there was noroom for any difference of opinion, but that dishonestyor sheer stupidity could alone cause any oneto hesitate on which side to give his vote, I am nowwriting on the evening of Saturday the 1 3th of April,having every day since that on which I wrote thefirst five lines of my letter been incessantly engrossed,except on the day which of course was claimed byconsiderations and feelings peculiar to that seasonwhen we commemorate the event on which we dependfor all our hopes of future happiness. Alas ! Iam beginning my recess with so great an arrear ofbusiness, that I am ready to burn my papers, andshut tip shop.You surprise me by your account of the bloomingstate of your walls, though I was prepared to hearaccounts which might seem strange to any one whodid not know that the seasons with you are not suchas your degree of latitude might lead any one to suppose.But, my dear Lancaster, though you havestaid till all around you is so beautiful that you canscarcely persuade yourself to quit the loves of thecastle ; yet come you must, or I shall send the .LICENSING DISSENTING TEACHERS. 507men-at-arms to disturb your privacy; and what ismore, you must bring your daughters with you, orthey also shall be summoned on some pretence orother to give evidence concerning the practicabilityof a tunnel through Scawfell to facilitate your communicationwith Windermere. We abound withprojects this session, and there are some little lessextraordinary. I guess how you will rejoice in thelate accounts from Portugal. They really gratifyme more than any public news which I have heardfor many years. Why, it is enough to drive Buonapartemad. What ! L'Enfaiit gate flying before LordWellington ?I must break off. Nil mihi describes, attainipse veni. With kind remembrances,Ever yours,W. Wilberforce.Bring the lasses."None of this abundant crop of projects caused Mr.Wilberforce more trouble than Lord Sidmouth's abortiveattempt to regulate the licences of protestantdissenting teachers. He disliked the whole measure,but feared especially lest, whilst aimed at others, itshould cripple the pastoral instructions of the clergy.This fear he early expressed to Mr. Perceval ; having,on the 26th March, " opened to him about the NorthAmerican Indians the Irish people and system,actual and proper the English church the clergy,and the operation of the Conventicle Act ; with thez 2508 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1811.benefit derived from religious societies conductedwith caution by the minister himself. I told Percevalthese effects in Richardson's 28 case and others, andstated to him Richmond's diligence and its effects." 29No private influence of the minister could divert LordSidmouth from his plan ; and upon the 29th of Aprilhe proposed that the Peers should be summoned forits full consideration upon the 9th of May. At thisstage of the business, Mr. Wilberforce felt bound toopen some communication directly with Lord Sid-mouth," to whom" he " had abstained from writing,having kept out of his way until the last, just as Idid in the case of Abolition, because I thought wewere likely to agree about as ill on one as on theother. I was not indeed aware of the particulars ofhis Bill, but was against it on general grounds." **This interview took place upon the 1st of May, andwas to be resumed upon the following Monday. Immediatelyafter the first conversation he writes to Mr.Hey, who from his early connexion with the Methodistbody, would enter into all the bearings of the question.Five o'clock, Wednesday, May 1.My dear Friend,It quite grieves me to be able to send you butavery few hasty lines ; but I am most unwilling to letthe post depart without a few words to you, because Imust hear from you on Monday next do not disappointme.23 Rev. William Richardson of York. 9 Diary.30 Letter to James' Stephen Esq.1811. PROTECTION FOR CHURCHMEN. 509Lord Sidmouth states it as the chief ground ofhis measure, that the Conventicle and TolerationActs are differently construed by the first lawyers,and the public, in different parts of England. Hemeans to allow itinerancy ; proposes that no mancan have a licence, unless he previously produce acertificate of his moral character, from six reputablehouseholders ; and he thinks he may require a certificateof three members of the sect to which the individualbelongs, stating that he is fit for the office ofa teacher.We were interrupted, and he did not fully statehis plan. But what I strenuously enforced on him.was, that he must provide that members of the Churchof England might meet together for devotional exercises,without being requested to declare themselvesDissenters. I own I fear, if he does not admit somesuch provision, numbers will be forced into the ranksof the Methodists. I am to see Lord Sidmouth againon Monday after the post comes in. I have beenscribbling now in a room full of people, all talkingabout and to me, and fresh from a public meeting.Farewell.Yours ever affectionately,W. .Wilberforce."Lord Sidmouth told me," he writes to Mr.Stephen, " that he had a conference of an hourwith Dr. A. Clarke the day before ; and he seemedto think, and certainly would have made me believeif I had not been prevented by what I know of the510 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1811.world, and of the parties, that he had satisfied theMethodists that his Bill was harmless as far as theywere concerned. I was chiefly afraid lest he shouldstop the private religious meetings of the clergy ; andI urged the danger of all who should come underserious impressions, going off in that case to theMethodists, and described the excellence of theirdiscipline."These fears were speedily dispelled by the totalfailure of the measure. The Methodists rose againstit as one man; and on the motion for its secondreading in the Lords, it was negatived without adivision, and with the expressed concurrence of theLord Primate and the government. Yet out ofthis business grew one of those irritating rumourswhich infest the course of the most simple-mindedpolitician. " Have I told you," he asks Mr. Stephen,that it is reported and credited, that Lord Sidmouthtold the deputation that I had been of his cabinet,and had instigated him to the measure, and had beenhis counsellor ; and that when Thompson 31 told mewhat Lord Sidmouth had said, I stamped upon theground and wept, exclaiming, Then Lord Sidmouthhas betrayed me or as some accounts give it, that Iwas in an agony; but these agree in saying that Iexclaimed, Lord Sidmouth has betrayed me ? (Yousee that this implies the most consummate villanypossible.) Yet this is believed of a man whom some ofthem, at least, must know to have defeated a similar31 Thomas Thompson Esq. M. P. for Andover, a member of theMethodist body.1811. CHARLES WESLEY. 511attack, only worse, in 179G or 7, 32 and who has hadnothing to do with the Methodists since, but theirbeing such zealous friends to him in the contest of1807. By the way, I have not mentioned to Thompsonwhat I doubt about mentioning even to you, (onaccount of Matt. vi. 3,) but I will as it bears onmy real feelings about the Methodists, (though moreabout one of their founders,) that from respect tothat great and good man, Charles Wesley, I manyyears ago prevailed on two friends to join in allowinghis widow an annuity, which she still receives. Ihave often, I own, thought it a great reflection on theMethodists, that they suffered such a person to be inreal want, as she was when I undertook her cause."It is strange that such a report should have gainedcredit, but so it was; and he heard of "the Sid-lothiandeclaration to the Methodist deputation ofmy hostility to them," as " bruited about with naturalcomments and additions, at Kidderminster, Leeds,and many other places. Though he was by this timepretty well case-hardened, and accustomed to walkwith truth " through evil as well as good repute,"yet he felt at first "perhaps too much the personalinjustice done ?J him, "just as a cut gives a sharperpain, than a heavy weight which overbears you." 33Yet even then he was chiefly " hurt by this story,because it goes to disparage religion ; and though itsfalsehood may be proved to sensible men, it will leavea cloud behind. Is it," he adds strikingly, 34 " thatGod, knowing me to be fond of popular favour, meansx In 1799. Vid. vol. ii. p. 365.w Letter to James Stephen Esq. 34 Diary.512 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 181 1,thus graciously to mortify the passion ? At least letme try to derive from it this benefit. I ought howeverto vindicate myself by all fair means." With this viewhe " called on Butterworth, but finding that both heand Adam Clarke are in Ireland' he determined " toget them to write and contradict the report." Mr.Butterworth, who " was all kindness in the matter,"immediately adopted this course ; so did Mr. Thompson,Adam Clarke, and Dr. Coke. The last referredin his letter to " the influence you used with Mr.Pitt, in preventing that great and irresistible manfrom bringing into parliament his intended Bill, whichwould have destroyed itinerant preachers root andbranch. Lord Sidmouth told me that to his knowledge,Mr. Pitt had prepared such a Bill, buse thathow it dropped he could not say." Lord Sidmouthcalled and made every acknowledgment which afriend could desire ;" 35 whilst in the following yearhe received a public vote of thanks from the Methodistbody for his principles of toleration.The progress meanwhile of the session brought nointermissions of bis labours. " I must put on the harnessagain I fear on Thursday," he tells Mr. Stephenafter two days' holidays in April, " but I shallrequire the whip to make me take the collar." " Howlittle good I do, compared with what I might," washis secret lamentation ! " Lord, I can only fly toThee my race is nearly run, but oh that I might dosome spiritual good, and even still more, that my desireto do it might be simple." 36 This spirit was anever-failing stimulus to action, and his mornings35 Diary. M Ib-.1811. BULLION REPORT. 513may be described by the entry in his Diary of April27th. " Spent nearly an hour in private devotions.At breakfast had a number of people Mr. Guineas, ofDublin, about Irish brewery. Colonel Morrison, fromTrinidad, Smith's friend, very acute and pleasing,wishing for instruction of Black corps shocking accountof Trinidad. William Hoare, about Scilly missionaries.Had each alone, besides general breakfast.Lord Teignmouth too called. Then to town letterslodgings. To Exhibition dinner looked at the picturesblamed myself for looking at a Scriptural subjectwithout emotion, as at a common fabulous picture.Dined sat near Sir T. Bernard, Rose, and Bankes.Set down Rose at his house he quite sure that heshall show the Bullion Report to be the most blunderingever laid before parliament. Surely the oppositeopinions of men, able, honest, and experiencedin the business, should teach diffidence in holdingyour own opinions, and candour in judging others.Lord Carrington, Perceval, and Vansittart, all disseveredby party ; and Rose, Samuel Thornton, andThomas Thompson against committee, whilst HenryThornton, John Smith, and Bankes, most decidedlyfor the Report. Wasted twenty or twenty-five mostprecious morning minutes to-day ; for time misappliedis wasted."The House of Commons, which he attended closelyall this session, ended most of these days, and oftencalled him into active service. Thus at this time heopposed, upon the Bullion Question, the depreciationof the currency " " carried an address to the Princez 3514 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 181 1.Regent for rewarding Captain Many sounded as tomaking adultery a criminal offence' and " took anactive part in private business arid committees." 37Above all, he watched diligently over the Abolitioncause' urging " Yorke, First Lord of the Admiralty,to send out ships of war to Africa, and clear the coastby a thorough sweep" " acting in the committee forhelping the Portuguese in order to strengthen influencewith them for the sake of Abolition " ee supportingMr. Barham's motion for the introducing free labourinto the West Indies " and "carrying triumphantly "an "amendment," upon the 13th of June, 38 by whichthe slaves in Trinidad were continued under themilder code of Spain.In all this press of business he " feared lest " heshould keep no watch over himself "on week days,and yet expect, as of course, to enjoy communion withGod on Sundays. This will never do. I must watchunto prayer, or I shall never enjoy the light of God'scountenance." 39 He " felt the comfort of earlyprivate devotions, so as to desire to have a full houror more quiet," daily ; and how far he maintainedthis watch, may be gathered from the grateful exclamationwhich soon afterwards bursts from him " MySundays are so precious to me in these weeks ofbustle." 40 Nor did this hurry impair the naturallylively action of his domestic affections. " Youhave been much in ^my thoughts," he writes onSunday evening, (June 23rd,) to Brighton, where37 Diary. 38 To Mr. Marriott's motion.39 Diary. 4 Ib. May 19.1811. TO MRS. WILBERFORCE. 515his wife and family were settled, " during this day ; Ido not feel at home, while you are absent, even in myown house. I shall not go on writing, as I hope so soonto see you, but take up my pen just to note down thepointing and tendencies of my mind. I trust ourminds are contemplating to-day the same objects,just as we look at the same heavenly luminaries, bothby day and night." "You will judge' he writesagain, on his return from a Sunday spent in Buckinghamshirewhither business had carried him, " byyour own feelings of the trial to which mine havebeen just exposed, by a blunder of my secretary. Iapproach my own house, I confess, with very differentemotions from those which possess my mind when Iexpect to find you all in it ; still I had been regalingmyself with the idea of hearing from you, when oneagerly asking for my letters, I was told they had allbeen sent after me to Bledlow, and could not cometo town again, at the soonest, before Wednesday. Iconfess that it was with very solitary feelings that Iwalked round the garden. It would however beshameful, if one so enveloped in blessings should beimpatient under such a petty trial as this will appeareven a month hence, though it excites too lively sensationsat the moment. Bledlow is really one of themost completely rural parsonages my eyes everbeheld a deep glen thickly furnished with trees andshrubs, and through which you hear a gurglingstream, is at the end of a little grass plot before thewindows. I need not say that you were not forgottenin my musings ; and I will acknowledge that I quitelonged for some quiet country residence, in which,516 LIFE OF Wilberforce. 181 I.after the bustle of our parliamentary life, we mighthave a little quiet Christian intercourse."Such visions would force themselves upon hisimagination ; but many years of labour were still tobe passed through before they were in any measurerealized. A wish to testify in every way his gratitudefor the Duke of Gloucester's steady Abolitionzeal, led him to steal time for attending the Cambridgeinstallation. " I came here' he writes toMrs. Wilberforce, from the Lodge at Queen's, 41 " abouta quarter before twelve last night, and have beenhighly gratified by a selection of sacred music thismorning. Beat Catalans, though you must admire hervoice and execution, does not touch the heart. I haveseveral letters to write in a short time, so I must notindulge in writing to you. I have written every day,though yesterday my letter was only like the soldier'swatch-word, ' All's well.' Farewell."Saturday, early to Trinity Lodge, to the Dukeof Gloucester ; then to Senate House, where Dukeinstalled Chancellor spoke well ; installation odegood. Back to Trinity dinner in the cloisters-^grand affair Dr. Parr smoking." 42 " We are insuch a state of bustle here," he says on Saturdaynight, 43 " that it is a great effort to step aside forhalf an hour and write two or three letters, and Icannot do it without being scolded by our friend theDean. How, with your love of quiet, you wouldabominate our goings-on, and indeed I am heartilytired of them ! After a whole day of public work ofone kind or another, I have been staying quietly inJune 28. Diary. Letter to Mrs. Wilberforce.1811. PARLIAMENTARY ATTENDANCE. 517my room instead of going to see the fire-works.How unlike' he continues upon Sunday evening, " isthis Sunday to those to which I look forward withhope in the course of the summer ! But I must breakoff unwillingly. Farewell. I trust nothing will preventour meeting next week." This hope was disappointed." I am so pulled in different directions,"he says on his return to London, July 5th, " and onpuzzling and vexatious questions, that I quite longfor a little peace and quietness. Yet, alas ! alas ! inthis state of feeling I am accosted with the unwelcometidings of more business still in the House ofCommons, which will come on upon Tuesday next,and not terminate till about the middle of the followingweek. I heard a distant hum of it yesterday, butI would not molest you with it till the sound becameirresistibly clear. I am not yet able to judgewhether or not I ought to attend, and if I can stayaway with any" just construction of my duty, I willgladly (oh how gladly !) join you. But I must havea good conscience ; and I know you would notwish me to do wrong, however you may regret thesacrifices which may be necessary."It was the 13th of July before he left London to joinhis family at Brighton, thinking that he need " not attendthis second session on Lord King's Conduct Bill,"and exceedingly disliking " the idea of making banknotesa legal tender." Yet a suspicion crossed hismind that he had left his proper post. " I could notbe easy, and so returned to London on the 15th, andwas in the House till nearly three o'clock." " I didnot think it right," he tells Lord Lancaster, " to518 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1811.continue so near the scene of action without beingpresent, so I returned for the Bill occasioned by LordKing's extraordinary measure, and staid till it hadpassed. How much must it have astonished you tohear that Lord Stanhope was the man to step forwardand prevent mischief. I must 'honestly own Iby no means like the Bill we have been passing ; 44 butwhen Lord King had not only been defended, buteven applauded, in both Houses of parliament, believingas I do that such conduct would throw the wholekingdom into confusion, it was absolutely necessaryto pass some law, if it was only to declare the senseof parliament."The King's health," he writes to Mrs. Wilberforce,from London, " is not alarming, but he has hada bad relapse of his mental malady, and there seemslittle hope of his recovery. But the pain producedby this relapse is lost in the extreme concern I feelfor the apparent probability of a war with America ;may God avert it." In the closing debate of thesession, on the 19th of July, he gave utterance tothese feelings. " Deeply, sir, do I deplore the gloomwhich I see spreading over the western horizon ; andI most earnestly trust that we are not to be involvedin the misfortune of a new war, aggravated by possessingalmost the character of civil strife a warbetween two nations, who are children of the samefamily, and brothers in the same inheritance of commonliberty." Upon the following day he joinedhis family at Herstmonceux.44 Making it unlawful to give more than twenty-one shillings for aguinea, or less than its legal value for a bank note.CHAPTER XXV.JULY 1811 TO JANUARY 1812.Correspondence with Mr. Roberts Doubts about resigningYorkshire, or retiring from public life West Indian persecutionsPays visits in the country JohnBowdler AlexanderKnox Lord Lancaster Change of ministry expectedCambridge Bible Society Duke of Gloucester Bishop ofBristol Christmas in his family William Allen LadyLindsay's marriage.THE vacation opened with its usual employments.Letters my chief business. Writing a long one to-dayto Mr. Roberts, vindicating myself against Mr. W.'scharge, and against his own declaration, most kindlyand frankly made, of my being too hurrying and immethodical,and thereby lessening my influence." 1Nothing could be more characteristic than the historyof this correspondence. Mr. Roberts, with whomhe had before no particular acquaintance, had calledon him in the bustle of the session, by an appointmentwhich had escaped Mr. Wilberforce's recollection.The rest may be told in his own words " Wrote toMr. Roberts, from whom I received a most frank andhonest letter ; too strongly charging me with deceiveDiary, July.520 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1811.ing people, though ascribing it to my attempting morebusiness than I can execute. I love his frankness,and thanked him for it ; yet how hardly am I used !If I do my utmost, yet if I do not succeed, or if delayshappen, they are charged on me ; yet I am notclear of the fault of taking more on me than I canget through, though not intentionally to blame. Oflate years I have refused multitudes of things. Letthis letter, and what it states of another person, whocharged me with deceiving him speaking fair, butperforming nothing, though all this is false . . . yetlet it be a lesson to me to avoid all appearance ofevil." 2Mr. Roberts, though with no such intention, hadtaken the shortest road to his confidence. " Afriend who will frankly tell me of my faults in private,"was a possession that he valued above allprice. " I must spend what time remains," he saystwo days afterwards in his private Journal, " in humiliationand prayer ; but let me just put down the recordof a most striking letter from Mr. Roberts of Sheffieldthe most truly Christian, candid, kind, friendlyremonstrance I ever remember ; especially consideringthe erroneous views of my conduct under whichhe wrote. I had unhappily forgot an appointmentmade with him four days before ; and just when rawand fresh from this instance of my negligence, he metat my door a neighbour, who charged me with themost, gross misconduct, in making people dance attendanceon me, and perhaps, at last, not only deceiveDiary of June 7.1811. LOVE OF FRANKNESS. 521ing, but even opposing them, &c. Yet he had thefirmness and Christian spirit of love to make him notcredit this, and to ascribe what ground there was for itto my undertaking more than I could execute." 3I should do violence to my own feelings," he tellsMr. Roberts, " if I did not without delay assure yousolemnly, that I greatly respect your frankness ongeneral grounds ; but that still more on personalgrounds I consider you as entitled to my warmestgratitude for what I must deem a signal act of friendship.Two of the best friends I have in the world,have endeared themselves to me in no small degreeby the same friendly frankness. Amongst otheradvantages which follow from dealing thus openly, isthis, that if a man be not in fault, or not in faultgreatly, he has an opportunity of vindicating himselfin whole or in part ; or if he be in fault, he has theopportunity of acknowledging, and as far as possibleof repairing it. * One word for theperson whom you met at my door ; you will add tothe obligations I owe you, if you will tell me who itis, or what the case is on which he applied to me. Ican solemnly declare, that for many years I have beenparticularly on my guard never to excite expectationswhich I was not sure I could realize ; but I mustsay public men are often used very hardly, and aperson in my situation is made answerable for measureshe cannot control. I will strictly observe anyinjunctions of secrecy under which you may lay me ;but conscious that I have not meant to deceive, Ia Journal, Sunday, June 9. Two o'clock.522 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1811.cannot but be very anxious to exculpate myself, if it beonly in your opinion,, which I must say I value highlyfrom the specimen you have given me of yourcharacter."Mr. Roberta's reply enabled him fully to refutethis charge. "Another most kind and Christianletter," is his memorandum of it. " N. was theman who gave him that account of me. How curious !Never had any man more reason to complain of anotherthan I of him; and because I kept back all mycomplaints, he goes about abusing me, and even sucha man as Roberts is the dupe of his account. Yet Iam not clear that it is not more stupidity than intentionalroguery." 4 His correspondent's frankness deserved,he thought, a fuller explanation of the truth.It is really extraordinary," he tells him in an earlyletter, " but I find myself opening to you with all theunreservedness of an old friend, and entering with thesame confidence of friendly sympathy into my privatecircumstances and feelings. Frankness begets frankness.My temper is naturally, I believe, open, andyou have been so kindly unreserved to me, that in returnI open the window of my bosom, you will rememberthe allusion, as soon as with my mind's eye I seeyou ready to look into it."As soon therefore as the leisure of his holidaysallowed, he replied at length to Mr. Roberts, enteringnaturally into a detailed sketch of his whole life inparliament.4 Diary.1811. TO SAMUEL ROBERTS ESQ. 523Hcrstmonceux, near Battel, July 29, 1811"My dear Sir,The strong claim on my esteem and gratitudewhich you established by your first letter is muchaugmented and confirmed by your last. I speak thereal sentiments of my heart, when I assure you that Ifeel deeply indebted to you. How much do I wishthat you had been long ere now in the habit of occasionallyaddressing me in the same style of friendly,and I will add, Christian, animadversion, and also,when needed, of reproof ! Such com muni cations areunspeakably valuable to any public man, who wishes,on the one hand, to do his duty, and who, on theother, is sufficiently aware of the difficulty of his task,and of his own various imperfections.I am sorry I have not as much time at my commandas I should be glad to employ in consideringyour letter, before I reply to it. But weeks might bespent, neither idly nor unprofitably, in discussingtopics of such importance and extent. Before Ienter on them, let me assure you that your last letter,by informing me that it was N, to whonv, ydu hadalluded, has afforded material relief to my mind. For,though I was conscious that I had never intentionallytrifled with or deceived any one with whom I hadbusiness to transact, yet I was but too well convincedthat from inadvertency or forgetfulness, arising fromthe multiplicity of my occupations and engagements,I had occasionally been justly culpable ; (how could Ibe otherwise than impressed with the consciousness524 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1811.of this, when engaged in writing to you, in whose casesuch a circumstance had arisen ?) and I could notforesee into what extent of apparent criminality Imight not have been drawn by the same causes. Byinforming me, that and were the personand case in question, you have therefore, I repeat it,considerably relieved me. * *I have spent so much time on the former part ofyour last letter, that the latter and more interestingpart must be despatched more briefly ; and I will behonest, enough to begin by confessing that I wish Icould vindicate myself as satisfactorily, even to myown judgment, against the general charge, which youurge so kindly, and therefore with increased force, ofa want of order and method in the general dischargeof my business, and I cannot deny the consequenceswhich you ascribe to these imperfections. I strive,and will strive still more earnestly, against them. But-letit not be supposed that after this frank confession,I am seeking covertly to do away the effect of it,when I go on to remark, that though conscience compelsme to plead guilty to the indictment, there ismuch to be alleged in extenuation, much in explanationof my offence. And before I proceed to statethese particulars, let me bar any conclusions in thiscase, to be drawn from the last session of parliamentonly; because the truth is, that about ten monthsago I lost my secretary, and hence my papers havebeen in confusion, my letters have been unanswered,and I have been forced to spend time in writing withmy own hand many which ought to have been .TO SAMUEL ROBERTS ESQ. 525ten by my secretary, with a gain to me of the timefor better purposes. But you will easily suggest toyourself, how such a cause must diffuse its effectsthroughout the whole of my day, and of my work. Inthe next place I ought perhaps to mention my nothaving any great share of bodily strength, were it notthat though this prevents my being able occasionallyto work double tides, and so get through a greatquantity of work in a few days on any emergency,yet my constitution has been such as to enable me, Ibelieve, to get through on the whole as much businessduring six or seven months as many far stronger persons: the inability to bear great fatigue does howeversometimes cause my affairs, papers, letters, &c. tofall into confusion, because I cannot, after havingbeen kept up till four or five in the morning, rise atmy usual hour, and pass my time according to itsordinary system of allotments. Conscious also ofthis, I dare not make engagements for an early oreven moderate hour in the ensuing morning, becauseI cannot foresee how long I may be kept up on thepreceding night. This leads me to remark in thenext place, that in the case of a member of parliament,it is not merely the quantity of work which he has onhis hands, but the uncertain hours he must keep,which prevents his having the full command of histime.And now in going on with this explanation, Ifind myself embarrassed by the fear of subjecting myselfto the imputation of vanity and self-sufficiency, ifI proceed to state particulars, which it would yet be526 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1811.unjust to myself to forbear mentioning. But if thegreat apostle of the Gentiles, when his character wascalled in question, felt that he was justified in speakingof his own actings and sufferings in the cause ofChrist, in a manner which but for the occasion wouldhave rendered him liable to the charge of boastingand vain glory, I may surely, at least to your friendlyear, state concerning myself particulars which, but forthe circumstance which calls them from me, ought notto proceed from my Own pen. With this excusethen let me state to you, that there is scarcely anymember of parliament who has much, or I might almostsay any private business, who attends the discussionson public questions with any thing like the same degreeof regularity as myself, or who takes part somuch in them. Again, there is scarcely any suchmember who is so generally put on the public committees,which from time to time are appointed forthe despatch of important business, for conductingdelicate and important inquiries, &c. Observe, I donot put myself on these committees, but bearing inmind that I am member for Yorkshire, I own I thinkit right that I should be present at the agitation ofall public questions of moment, and for the samereason, that I should not shrink from the attendanceon committees. The number of these to which Ibelonged during the last session was very great. Letme also state that you can scarcely conceive the prodigiousamount of inconvenience which I sustain fromnot thinking it right to allow my servants to say,when I am within, that I am not at home, but only1811. "NOT AT HOME." 527that I am engaged. . I will just state, that myscrupulousness here is not on my own account somuch as on my servants' ; it has been a matter of somuch importance to me, as to have made me observethe effect on their minds of saying, Not at home ; andI see that nine out of ten of them conceive that theyare telling a falsehood for their master's convenience.How then can I afterwards speak in Scriptural termsof the guilt of lying ? and will they not be likely toinfer, that if they are allowed to stretch a little whenit is for their master's benefit, they may do thesame for their own ? . . . But the inconvenience whichI suffer from it is extreme. For my servants assureme, that in spite of all they can say, of my being engaged,of my not seeing persons unless they come byappointment, (Yorkshire men however are exceptedfrom this rule,) people will force their way in, andthen you may conceive the consequence. Indeed Ibelieve you have in some degree witnessed it ; I say insome degree, because I doubt whether I had thepleasure of seeing you at Kensington Gore, and ifnot r you can little conceive how difficult it often is formeto force my way out of my own house. Butthough I own I might do better, and hope to do betterthan I have done, the above causes, with the additionalcircumstance of the grand evil of all, myvery great correspondence, render it extremely difficult,if not impossible, to allot certain hours to certainoccupations, in the degree which you perhaps suppose.There is however still another consideration to takeinto the account, and a consideration of as much prac-528 LIFE OF Wilberforce. 1811.tical importance and operation as any that has beenmentioned, and that is, my not being a party man,Nullius addicted jurare in verba magistri,which surely the member for Yorkshire ought not to be ;for as I have no such easy principle to decide my vote,in nine cases out of ten at least, as that of the side of theHouse from which the motion proceeds, but profess totake my part on every question according to my ownunblessed judgment, much reading is necessary, muchreflection, much talking matters over with able andimpartial friends, when facts are brought forward,concessions made, &c. which do not appear in publicdebates. The questions on which we have to decideare often,, believe me, of great nicety ; on which, if aman will give a fair hearing to all that is to be urged onboth sides, he will own it is very hard to judge whichof the two scales preponderates. I must add, by theway, that you are not to estimate the attention I pay,nay the share I take, in public debates and conversations,by what you see in the newspapers ; for belongingto no party, I am naturally, as well as on otheraccounts, very unpopular with the reporters, who arealways strong on one side or the other. Hence I amoften left entirely out, and more frequently dismissedwith a much shorter account of what I have said, thanis given of what comes from other speakers. . . . Theevil of which I am here speaking, if it affected myselfonly, would scarcely deserve to be noticed ; but consideredin its general operation, as it tends to aggravateparty violence, to produce a disposition to cultivate1811. HABITS DURING THE SESSION. 529the favour of the reporters, instances of which I haveseen in men who might have been supposed incapableof such servility, to destroy in short all independenceof principle and character, viewed in these and otherconsequences, the evils arising from the partial andunfair way in which our debates are now reported,and more especially in which any neutral, particularlyif he is supposed to be unreasonably religious, istreated, are of the very first importance, and tend asI really fear to the ruin of our country.But I have been led away, though not unnaturally,into this general discussion. I w r ill finish this train ofegotism, of which I really am heartily ashamed, bystating that my irregularity does not proceed frommy having less time to give to parliamentary businessfrom social engagements, domestic comforts, otheroccupations, &c. for I make all other business bendand give way to that of parliament. I refuse allinvitations for days on which the House sits. I commonlyattend all the debate, instead of going awayafter the private business is over for two or threehours, and coming down again after a comfortabledinner ; on the contrary, I snatch a hasty meal, as Imay, before the public business begins, in the shortinterval sometimes between the end of the privateand the beginning of the public. I see little ornothing of my family during the session of parliament,(though, blessed be God, of a more tender, excellentwife no man ever received ' the gift from the Lord,'you know the quotation,) and I have staid till thevery end of the session, I believe, every year of theVOL. III. 2 A530 LIFE OP WILBERFORCE. 1811.last twenty-three or twenty-four. This very year, Ihad gone down to my family, when the new businesswhich "so unexpectedly sprung up gave a call, towhich I did not turn a deaf ear. Now, my dear sir,once more I assure you, I am ashamed of myself forrunning on thus ; and yet having said so much I willclose the account by stating, in enumerating the commendableparts of my parliamentary character as wellas confessing my infirmities, first, that though I amconscious that I have so much to do that it is notwell done, (and let me inform you that for the lasttwo or three years I have declined all new business,wherever I could do it with a good conscience,) yetthat whenever there has been any special demand formy services, I have not I trust been wanting to theoccasion. In the long business of the Woollen ManufactureCommittee, I drew up the Report (this if youplease entre nous); and when during its continuancethe question of the Iron Tax came on, I can trulysay I bestowed on it all the time and thought whichit justly claimed, and I believe, though again I hateto speak thus, the part I took had a material effectin deciding the fate of the measure.But that which I account the part of my publicconduct in which I have acted the most faithfullyby my constituents, and in a manner the most becomingthe member for the first county in England,is my not having rendered the situation the means ofbenefit ting my relatives . . of whom I have had severalwith large families reduced from great affluence toentire destitution by commercial misfortunes . . or1811. TEMPTATIONS TO AMBITION. 531connexions, or friends ; nor still more, the means ofaggrandizing myself, or my family, or rather, whichwas the greater temptation to me, of securing a quietseat in the legislature of my country, exempt fromexpense, trouble, or risk, and which would haveallowed me to attend as much or as little as I likedwithout impropriety. This, I dare say, has neverstruck you ; but when you consider on the one hand,that more than half of the present House of Lordshas been created or gifted with their titles (excludingall hereditary descent) since I came into parliament,and on the other, that my intimacy with Mr. Pitt forso many years may be supposed to have rendered itnot difficult for me to obtain such an elevation, youmay assign more weight to this circumstance, than atfirst Bight might appear to you to be due to it. Iremember Mr. Cobbett commenting on this subjectwith his usual fairness observed, that my pride wasmore gratified by being M. P. for Yorkshire, than byreceiving a peerage from any minister ; and I will notdeny all force to the remark ; but I can assure him,that this pride would never have had the effect of preventingmy accepting a seat in the House of Lordsthey were principles of a very different and farhigher order which produced that operation.And thus for the first, and let me hope for the lasttime, finding myself in a rural retirement at a friend'shouse, where I could scribble on with little interruption,I have suffered myself by your friendly expostulationto be drawn into this exposure of the real sentimentsof my heart, respecting my parliamentary2 A 2532 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1811.conduct. But after all I have been led into saying inmy own favour, I ought in fairness to add, that I ammyself conscious of many, many imperfections, anddefects, and errors ; of more perhaps than are knownby any other person; though I can truly declarethat they have not been caused by my sacrificing asense of public duty to my own personal advantage, or,I will add, personal gratification. I will also confessmy fear lest from the infirmities of age beginning toappear, (for though I am not quite fifty two, a manageis not to be always measured by the number ofhis years,) there have been more imperfections withinthe last year or two than formerly the memory firstdeclines, and in my intercourse with you there was anotable instance of its being defective. Let me notforget to assure you that I consider myself, in all thatI have been saying, not so much defending myselfagainst the accusation you brought against me, asagainst that which I brought against myself that towhich I was conscious I must appear justly subjectin the judgment of fair and unprejudiced observers.I should not however, though I have been so insensiblydrawn on into pouring forth the unrestrainedeffusions of my heart as they have flowedforth without preparation or arrangement, I shouldnot, I think, send off such a mass of egotism, (as Imust again style what I have been writing,) if thefriendly frankness with which you addressed me,had not made me feel that I could open to you thewhole interior of my mind. Once more I thankyou from the bottom of my soul for the friendly and1811. TO SAMUEL ROBERTS ESQ. 533Christian freedom which you have exercised towardme.The postman is come. He departs hence, mostinconveniently for me, at a very early hour ; and tosave a day I will send off this letter without readingit over ; it will at least show, that I wish to standwell in your estimation, you have in fact convincedme, that you form your judgment of men with an observing,and at the same time a candid, eye. Butafter all, it is of little real importance what judgmentis formed of us by our fellow-creatures. To obtainthe approbation of the man within the breast, as consciencehas been well called, should be our object, andto seek for that true honour which cometh from God.Believe me with real esteem and regard, my dear sir,Your obliged and faithful,W. Wilberforce."The alarming illness of the King called him at thistime to an immediate decision upon a most importantquestion, suggested to him by that consciousness offailing memory which he expresses in this letter, aswell as by the earnest advice of some of his mostconfidential friends. " I am thinking just now whetheror not to give up the county of York : it is a mostserious question, may God direct me right in it. Ican truly say, that if I knew which was the right path,I would follow it." 5 A little later he says, (uponthe 24th,) " My birth-day again born in 1759, sofifty-two complete. I had wished to spend it in recDiary, Aug. 1.534 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1811.religious exercises, but I cannot. I have some veryurgent African and other business ; but I am going tospend an hour or two in religious exercises self-examination,humiliation, &c." 6 " And oh let menot omit the duty of praise and thanksgiving ! Whowas ever so loudly called on to perform it ! Who hasbeen so highly favoured ! Surely when I look overin detail for the last forty years (Deut. viii. 2) thecourse of my heart and life ; when I call to mindwhat I have been, and what God has done for me,and by me ; when I sum up all together, and recollectthat consideration which should never be forgotten,that all the past, present, and to come, are underthe view of God in lively colours, I am lost in astonishment,and can only exclaim ' Thy ways are not asour ways, nor Thy thoughts as our thoughts.' I willtry to look back through my past life, and to afreetmy heart, as by the review it ought to be, with humiliation,gratitude, love, and confidence, mixed withreverential fear ; and oh I must adopt the words ofEzek. xvi. 63, ' That thou mayest remember, and beconfounded, and never open thy mouth any more becauseof thy shame, when I am pacified toward thee '(poor old Newton's story) ' for all that thou hast done,saith the Lord God'" 7I wished to devote to-day specially to the importantpurpose of seeking God's direction on the question,whether or not I should resign Yorkshire ; and if so,whether to come in for a small borough. I have nottime now to record the arguments in full particularity.6 Diary. 7 Journal.1811. RETIRING FROM YORKSHIRE. 535Babington and Stephen are clearly for my giving upthe county, on the ground that neither my body normind are equal to the pressure which it must bringupon me. The reasons for retiring from Yorkshire arechiefly,1. The state of my family my eldest son justturned thirteen, and three other boys, and two girls.Now though I should commit the learning of my boysto others, yet the moral part of education should begreatly carried on by myself. They claim a father'sheart, eye, and voice, and friendly intercourse. Nowso long as I am M. P. for Yorkshire, it will, I fear,be impossible for me to give my heart and time to thework as I ought, unless I become a negligent M. P.such as does not become our great county. I evendoubt whether I ought not to quit public life altogether,on the ground that if I remain in the Houseeven for Chamber, which Lord Carthorse kindlyoffers, I shall still be so much of a political man, thatthe work of education will not be set to heartily.This consideration of education is, in great measure,the turning point with me ; but,2. The state of my body and mind, especially thelatter, intimate to me the solve senescentem, particularlymy memory, of the failure of which I finddecisive proofs continually. At present I can retireincolumi fama, and that is much. (See Johnson's lastRambler but one.)But there are some other considerations. I do notbelieve there would be any serious contest, and amnot prompted to retire by the fear of being turned536 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1811.out, so that I may leave out altogether this class ofconsiderations. But if there should be any contest,the Sidmouth and Methodist story would be circulatedwith all the scandalous exaggerations and calumnieswhich the evil spirit could stir up, and peoplehostile to religion, and suspecting all religious personsof hypocrisy, would believe it ; and the credit oftrue religion might with my own be tarnished. Itweighs with me too that the services to religion, bothin the House and out of it, which I might render ifI were to stay in parliament, might perhaps be renderedby persons not labouring under the stigma ofMethodism. My most faithful friend William Smith(oh how I wish he were even as we in the mostimportant particulars !) could do what was needful,and so could others.I must go to devotional exercises, but I will justadd that when I look into my own heart, and realizethe scene before me, I cannot deny that I feel verydeeply the loss of my high situation, and being out ofthe dramatis personae whilst all my friends are actingtheir parts ; but so far as this is vain-glory it is to beresisted to the very utmost. To serve God is thetrue honour of those who are not their own, but arebought with a price ; and the point is, to learn whatHis will is. It is unspeakably comfortable to me tohave Babington, Stephen, and other friends, confirmingmy own view as far as relinquishing Yorkshiregoes. Then I may humbly hope to be enabled byGod to discharge my parental duties better, if Istrive to prepare my heart for fulfilling them, seeking1811. JUDGMENT OF FRIENDS. 537His blessed aid, and ' cutting off the right hand'which would prevent my performing a father's duties.I trust God will strengthen my mind, and smooth mypath, and vouchsafe to prosper my labours and endeavourswith my children. If my line of duty be ahumble one, shall I not gladly pursue it, if I see reasonto believe it is the path to which the Almightydirects me ?" 8 A few days after this he visited " theSpeaker" and "talked over the projects with him.He against both most of all against quitting theHouse altogether of Stephen's opinion as to theeffect of occasional attendance." 9His great humility disposed him, as has been alreadysaid, to defer too much to the judgment of hisfriends; yet this was more perhaps in appearancethan in truth. It led him indeed to seek their counselwith unusual freedom, and to weigh it with proportionateanxiety, and thus sometimes gave to asuspended judgment the appearance of a want ofresolution ; but on all important points he at last actedon his own convictions. Yet whilst forming his ownjudgment he was often " much embarrassed by theconflicting advice of friends Babington strong forabsolute retiring Stephen and others for giving upYorkshire but Grant and Henry Thornton againstmy quitting the county." 10 This fulness of discussionmakes his letters an accurate picture of his mind ; forto his intimate friends he opened himself with a freedomwhich corresponded with his warm affections.8 Diary and Journal, Aug. 24.9 Diary, Aug. 26. > Ib. Aug. 24.2 A 3533 LIFE OF Wilberforce. 1811.You are and ever have been kind to me," he tellsMr. Stephen, " beyond a brother's kindness, and Ithink of it often with wonder as well as with humiliationand gratitude. Indeed I have long thought,that of all the manifold blessings which Providencehas heaped on me, the greatest of this world (and indeedit is not to be so restricted) consists of kind andintelligent friends, whom He has raised up for mycomfort and benefit. Surely no man ever had so many,and you and my sister are amongst the very first."His letters, whilst this question was before him,abound in these incidental illustrations of his character.He replies to Mr. Stephen, who rested his advicethat he should resign the county chiefly on the manifesteffect of over-work upon his weakly frameMy dear Stephen,Many thanks for your letter like all yourconduct towards me, exhibiting marks of the mosttender affection and sincere friendship. On the wholeI own I am at present disposed to see the same scalepreponderate, though not quite for the same reasons.The education of my children is a powerful motivewith me for declining the county. And yet I ambut too conscious of being very ill qualified for theoffice of a mentor at present ; but I hope by takingpains I might become better fitted for the work.I have no idea of teaching them their learning, but Ifeel deeply the importance of endeavouring to cultivatetheir friendship and intimacy, and of striving toregulate their minds and tempers. Yet I shrink1811. TO JAMES STEPHEN ESQ. 539with awe from the idea of at once giving up for lifeall the efficiency for religious and humane purposes,(the former weigh with me ninety-nine parts in ahundred,) which would arise from my continuing inthe House of Commons. The idea therefore of sucha seat in parliament as that you speak of is a greatease to me. For when I think of sealing up as itwere my parliamentary account and having done,as I now am, such a pang of conscience is produced ! ! !I seem to have been so unprofitable a servant comparedwith what I might have been. But I mustbreak off.Yours ever affectionately,W. Wilberforce.P. S. I have always thought that it would be aninstance of conduct truly Christian, suited to our times,for a man to retire voluntarily from such a situationas mine without a peerage, &c. You reckon littleof this, of which I think very much. Farewell. MayGod bless you and yours."I am not sure," he writes to Mr. Hey, " whetheror not I ever intimated to you, that for some timepast I have had it under consideration whether at thenext election it would not be advisable for me to takemy leave of our great county, with many, and I amsure unfeigned, acknowledgments of the kindnesswhich I have so long experienced at its hands. I wasnot however aware of its not being likely to live outits ordinary period of existence, but calculated on the540 LIFE OF Wilberforce. 1811.contrary supposition. Neither had I at all made upmy mind to retire in 1813, the year when it wouldhave attained its date of six years. I always intendedto consult two or three friends, and after furnishingthem with all the data I could supply, to be in aconsiderable degree guided by their advice. Butthe present state of our venerable Sovereign givesus but too much cause to fear that another electionwill come on very soon, perhaps almost immediately.I am therefore forced without delay to makeupmy mind one way or the other.I incline to retire at least from the representation ofour great county, if not from parliament altogether.I begin to feel the effects of time, both on my bodilyand mental powers ; and my family is growing up,and claims far more attention than I can give it,while I devote as much of my time to public duties asthe situation of M. P. for Yorkshire appears to meto require. I have always thought it right, while inthat honourable station, to be a constant attendant,not, as is too common, to make the House of Commonsmy amusement, and perhaps go out of town forweeks together while business is going on.I must however check my disposition to run on.There are many services which I should not be so wellable to render if I were out of parliament; but Itrust God will raise up others to defend the cause ofreligion at home and abroad, at least to oppose downrightpersecution ; and this is a line of service in whichmany persons who have themselves no respect forreligion will engage, and in which they may be even1811. CLOSING HIS ACCOUNT. 541the more able to plead the cause with success, fromnot being liable to the imputation of enthusiasm."With Mr. Babington he debated the matter at morelength. " I humbly trust' he says, " that if I knewwhich of the two courses it was right for me to pursue,I should not hesitate a moment about it ; but when Iconsider what it is to relinquish voluntarily such asituation as that of member for Yorkshire in timeslike these, and I must add, without there appearingany person coming forward to occupy my place so faras espousing the cause of religion goes, I own I shudderat the thought. When I number up the considerationsfor retiring, I own they are very powerful.But then it is like closing my account, and I seem tohave done so little, and there seem some things whichit would be so desirable to try to do before I quit parliament,that I shrink from retiring as from extinction.There is however an alternative to be considered, thatI mean of coming in for some other place. If I wereM. P. for any small place, I should profess to attendonly so far as my health and the education of my childrenwould allow. Grant suggests that I could onlyexercise a general superintendence over them if outof parliament, and this I may do as eques calceatus."I see some objections to accepting Lord Carthorse'soffer, yet the opposing opinions of Grant, HenryThornton, and Powder, who are all decided and strongagainst my resigning the county, make me more disposedthan I was to embrace it as a half measurethe resource it is said of weak, but sometimes also ofconscientious minds. It has weight with me, that at542 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1811.the beginning of the Prince's reign I might have aconsiderable share of influence, and that it would beright to see how things go on a little, before I retire.I must also own that I fear, if I were now to retire,that all the grace of the surrender might be done awayby the idea that I attempted to make a virtue of necessity,and made a pretence of retiring when in truth Ithought 1 should be turned out. If it were only themomentary eclat, this would not be worth mentioning,but it appears to me to be a consideration of no smallmoment when you take into account that to let theprinciple of a Christian's really balancing how he maybemost usefully and properly employed, how, allthings considered, it was the will of God that heshould determine the remainder of his life, withoutbeing biassed by a great worldly situation this, andthe quietly retiring to a private life instead of apeerage, does seem an action, which if right to do atall, it is right to do in such a manner and at such atime that it may not be misconstrued." Mr. Barrington'sreply turned chiefly upon Mr. Wilberforce'sapplication of the word " extinction " to his retirementfrom the House of Commons, and it drew forth thisbeautiful rejoinder.Herstmonceux, Aug. 22, 1811.My dear Babington,You know I sometimes speak strongly, andshould not have drawn so large an inference from myword ' extinction.' I need not, I trust, assure youthat I endeavour to bear in mind the conclusion of1811. REMAINING IN PARLIAMENT. 543Milton's beautiful sonnet, ( They also serve who onlystand and wait.' But I am well aware it is not to standstillor even wait, to be employed in writing a religiouswork or to be educating six children. They are bothemployments which may well claim the utmost powersof a man of far greater abilities than myself. Stilltake into account, but do not be biassed by my supposedfeelings do not practise on me Solon's oldexcuse, ' As good laws, not as I could have made, butas they were capable of receiving ; ' but tell me fairlywhat you judge best for me. After this premisingI say again, take into account that if I retirealtogether from parliament and then return to it, Ishould be discredited ; whereas if I should come infor any snug place on the alleged ground of intendedrelaxed attendance, such as might be compatiblewith the claims of my health and family, I might atany time give up the seat in the middle of a session,even just as easily as at the end of a parliament. Andmay it not be deemed natural, that a man who hasbeen so long in public life, especially when a dissolutionhas come upon him two years sooner than heexpected, should have matters to wind up so as tomake his not at once going off altogether the morenatural course. Yet whilst I write thus, I fear lestbeing in the House, and meaning to attend only upongreat occasions, I should still be more of a politicalman (Bov\^o/)os avijp) than would be compatible witha diligent and cordial discharge of the duties of educationand of writing.Besides religious writing, when once I should have544 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1811.quitted the stage, I might, if I should deem it expedient,give even political counsel with a freedom whichwould not be tolerated in an M. P. I should speak asfrom the shades. I have in my mind certain truths asto the effects of the influence of the Crown askingfavours both in the House and out of it concerningparty too, and other things. Still, e contra, it is muchto give up the hope of using the influence derivedfrom having been long in public life for religiouspurposes. At this moment I have three applicationsdepending concerning the poor slaves, and the missionariesTrinidad, Demerara, and the Cape (thelast is a horrid business ; the boors have actuallymurdered numbers of the poor Hottentots) ; but thenI am bound in fairness to reply to myself, that theservice here in question might be rendered by WilliamSmith, Whitbread, and others, even better thanby me ; and I think it would not be difficult to getpersons to undertake such commissions. The accountto-day of the King's health is such as to force me todecide as soon as possible. Write to me immediately.Kindest remembrances.Ever yours,W. WILBERFORCE.P. S. Consider, my dear Babington, I have beenin parliament thirty-one years, and how all myhabits, &c."This important question was far from occupying allhis time. He complains indeed of being robbed of his1811. PREVENTING OPPRESSION. 545usual holiday leisure for literary enjoyment, and beingable therefore to do little more than " run over part ofGil Bias, in the afternoon and evening, when nothingmore serious could be well done. It is useful for meto know these works, and I do not find them fascinateme as many talk; but how completely unchristianare they ! Besides this, I have run through four-fifthsof Captain Parley's book, the Quarterly and BritishReviews, a little Cecil, and am reading Isaiah withLoath a little poetry to the ladies at night, andsometimes Walter Scott and Lord Chesterfield's Lettersto his Son." nBut of more serious work, as he tells Mr. Barrington,his hands were full ; and in no vacation did hefind, " as Dr. Johnson phrases it, a more plentifullack of time." 12 Nothing stirred his spirit more thaninstances of that petty but grinding persecution,which breaks forth here and there, and lays hold commonlyupon some simple, zealous man as its victim.More than one such instance was now before him,and he was always the redresser of their wrongs.You really amaze me," he replies to the statementof one of these cases, " by your coolness. Used as Iam in public life to hear of acts of injustice and oppression,and therefore though I may be supposed tohave been disciplined into habitual sobriety of feelings,if not into absolute torpor, the account of thispoor young man's treatment has called forth the mostindignant emotions. G.'s dry, repulsive tone to theson of a deceased fellow soldier is insufferable. HowDiary, Sept. 1, ' Letter to J. Stephen Esq.546 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1811.forcibly does such an instance as this impress onewith the real moral worth of that unparalleled sentence,( Father, forgive them, for they know not whatthey do.' I mention it because I have really foundit useful in restoring me to some measure of Christianpity for these unchristian persecutors. I am notfor giving up the cause without a struggle. Butmuch more am I clear that a strenuous effort oughtto be made, to prevent such scandalous, such horribleconduct in future. I could not hope for a blessing,(how can ministry or our country ?) if I were not touse any share however small of power, which such anindividual as I may have in counteracting such proceedings; and I think some considerations may beurged which will be likely to affect even irreligiousmen, much more any man who has any fear of God,and any sense of His overruling Providence."The Cape, and above all, the West Indies, suppliedthe other subjects of his care. " You are notaware," he tells Mr. Hey, 13 " of all the claims on mytime and thoughts which the West Indies have latelyfurnished." " We are working," says Mr. Stephen, 14like negroes for the negroes of Berbice, SierraLeone, Trinidad, and Africa at large. Oh for a littlefarming and reading near Bledlow Ridge ! " Thereluctant conviction that their work was incomplete,was being forced upon the Abolition leaders. TheWest Indians clung too fondly to the vices of the oldsystem ; and though perhaps Mr. Wilberforce himselfdid not as yet look forward to those great attempts3 Aug. 22. u Aug. 21.1811. PERSECUTIONS IN TRINIDAD. 547to which he was led on step by step by the gradualprogress of events, yet the present vigilance and zealof the protector of the negro were undoubtedly preparingfor them.His present object was to stop the " persecution ofthe missionaries, or rather the forbidding religion tothe slaves in Trinidad and Demerara." 15 For thispurpose he appealed earnestly to Lord Liverpool,pointing out to him that it was " a cause interestingnot merely to the members of the particular sect towhich the missionaries belong, though the Methodistsare a very numerous and increasing body ; but all religionistswill make it their own. All will feel itdeeply who believe in the truths of Christianity, andare capable of sympathizing with the injuries andsufferings of their fellow creatures. In truth thereis a peculiar call on our sensibility in the presentinstance, for in proportion as the lot of the slavesis hard in this world, we ought to rejoice in everyopportunity of bringing them under the influence ofprinciples which may cheer them under their presentsufferings, and secure for them a rich compensationof reversionary happiness. Their case needs onlyto be known to produce the most lively sympathyamongst all good men from one end of the kingdomto the other, together with the most determinedefforts to assert what may without impropriety betermed the rights even of the slaves. For it may beproper to remark, that there is in this case no questionbetween the Methodists and the Established15 Diary, Sept. 6.548 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1811.Church. The persecutors of Trinidad cannot holdout even that excuse justly suspicious as it is whenno other mark of zeal has been exhibited. Thereare in Trinidad no clergy of the Church of England.It must be admitted in Jamaica indeed that a verysmall proportion of the slaves can possibly have accessto the few churches of that large island, or derive anyother benefit from its scanty establishment. ButinTrinidad I shall be glad to hear that there is anyparochial church establishment at all. There is noChurch of England clergyman in the island, unless Iam misinformed, except one military chaplain attachedto the garrison ; nor have I heard of any provision forintroducing the Established Church. I know notwhether any of the popish clergy are there, but if not,and the remark is of the first importance, it is onlythrough the missionaries that the slaves can receiveany religious instruction whatever. To silence themtherefore is to bar out and close up the only passagethrough which the light of Divine truth might beconveyed to that deeply-injured class of our fellow-creatures.It is not therefore the injustice and crueltytowards the missionaries of which I would complain,(though they are great and flagrant,) so much as theinjustice and cruelty towards the slaves, in whosecase this puts the finishing hand to the long catalogueof their wrongs."There were many difficulties besetting this application; some of them may be gathered from aletter written to him at this time by Mr. Stephen.I was consoling myself that we had a strong1811. APPLICATIONS TO GOVERNMENT. 549game to play. I reckoned on the ardent support ofall the religious world. But f I have espied dissensionand strife in the city.' I thought that I had putevery thing in train with the Missionary Society andMethodists. I had repressed C.'s egotism and vanityfrom spoiling the representation to Lord Liverpool.I had parried an attack to know if we would supportthe repeal of the Conventicle Act. I hoped I hadsucceeded; that an application from the Committeeof the Methodists, coupled with that fromthe Missionary Society, would back your representation,and extort a speedy and favourable decision.But last night I thought all was lost. C. had sentthe case to Lord Liverpool, as from himself, withoutconsulting the Committee. I fear this weak old manwill spoil much of our hopes from the influence ofthat powerful body. It should teach us candour tofind that with his low secular principles is notsingular in wishing to exalt himself by means of asacred cause, and even at its expense. If governmentdoes not yield to these private instances, weshall have a difficult and painful duty to discharge.But I think there is no alternative in conscience or inprudential regard to the welfare of our general cause.Think of this. Consider what is to be done practicallyand in detail. It is high time to have a planfor the campaign, and to be forming our magazines,mustering our forces, and recruiting our battalions.Without a cry from the public we cannot hope forsuccess in parliament if ministers are not with us, or,what will be as bad, if they suffer themselves to be550 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1811.placed in circumstances which will make the sins ofthe assembly and governors their own. Yet how isa cry to be raised without the help of the disaffected,or of men who will take widely different ground fromwhat you and I could decorously or even conscientiouslydefend ? I am full of perplexities and alarm.May God be with us, and direct and help us.Yours, my dear Wilberforce,ever very affectionately,J. STEPHEN."I have received," replies Mr. Wilberforce, " avery friendly letter from C. about his application toLord Liverpool ; it is all however in the first personsingular, and he did not seem to know that I hadbeen at all applying. Certainly they have been tooeasily satisfied, and we must try to obtain better principledterms. It is curious how a little civility oflanguage or manner from a great man softens them,and even makes them give up material points. Ifthey submit cheerfully to a regulation that theplanter's consent must be signified in order to justifypreaching to any blacks . . this must never be acquiescedin." " You must have heard from R ," he tellsMr. Macaulay at the same time, " of the misconductof the Governor of Surinam. Now R has it from aconfidential source, and cannot in honour use it, exceptin the manner which they who related it to himwould approve. Surely we might get the thing bythe tail through some other channel, and if so wemight easily drag it to light. Can you also furnish1811. DECISION TO RETIRE. 551me with any special facts or statements for Mr.Yorke ? I can only say in general that there is muchSlave-trading, much masquerading as Stephen termsit ; but I am puzzled how to describe to Yorke whatships I wish ours to seize."He was now again at Kensington Gore, havingspent a day at Kidbrook, ( " where most kindly receivedby the Speaker and Mrs. Abbot. Speakerasked me what Commentary on the New TestamentI recommended. I answered, Doddridge's Expositor,mentioning Warburton's eulogium. Yet Doddridgeis not satisfactory Scott will not do we want sucha work." 16 ) He reached home upon the 6th of September,and felt his "mind affected by having allaround me on my first return home, but somewhatturmoil from the consciousness of the number ofpeople I had to see and things to do." 17 Here hespent a busy fortnight, pressing forward by continuedpersonal exertion his West Indian efforts, and consultingwith his natural advisers on his own doubtfulquestion. He was gradually adopting his ultimatedecision. " It seems best to quit the larger sphere,and yet remain at least for a while in parliament, atthe beginning of a new reign, when one knows notwhat may be intended in favour of popery, or againstmorals." " I think I am pretty well resolved againstYorkshire, which I humbly hope is pleasing to God.I am sure it is not from the love of ease or quiet. Ifeel exquisitely the giving up all my old ways andhabits, and still more, I humbly hope, the becomingis Diary, Aug. 29. l7 Ib.552 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1811.unable to render any public services such as thosein which I now am engaged. Still God can find instruments.He seems to have prepared a new employmentand new pleasures for me, and I humblyhope that I shall also know Him better and love Himmore. O Lord, bless, and keep, and guide me !I am much impressed with finding my memorymore decayed than I had conceived. When at Herst-monceux, I wrote several letters on important subjectsto Lord Liverpool, Wellesley, and others, and I findthe traces fading away. I cannot even be quite surewhether or not I wrote to Lord Mulgrave on the petershamgunpowder-mills working on Sunday, or onlyintended to do so. This is surely a strong argumentfor retiring. Ne peccet ad extremum. I mayforget engagements, declarations, and things whichI have said, &c. and even bring a taint on mymoral character. This weighs more with me thanall the rest, and it ought so to do, lest I bring disgraceon my Christian profession. Lord, guide mearight." l8 "It is the very nature of all declining tobe at first faint, and even doubtful in their appearances.My old illustration of the tide slowly advancing,and then retiring to advance a little further anda little further, till at length it has gained its fullascent, is the best instance and illustration that I canfurnish in this case, as well as in that in which Ihave more commonly employed it, the moral and religiouschange of the popular mind of a great nation."19 <( Oh how the heart is wheel within wheel !9 Diary, Sept. 6. '9 Letter to Thomas Babington Esq.1811. JOHN BOWDLER. 553I cannot help continual risings of the feeling, what animpression would the knowledge of these thoughtsmake on others, and then when I check this, what ofthese checking, and so ad infinitum." 20 Meanwhilehe was full of business, " several important mattershaving been stored up to meet me. Several missionaryconcerns. With Lord Liverpool, Lord N. andothers. Heard with pleasure from Lord N. thatjustice would be secured for the Hottentots. Hebore strong testimony to the effects of the Moravianmissions less to those of the Methodists said and Kichener worthy men, but enthusiasts.Alas ! poor Lord N., how little dost thou judgeaccording to the Scripture's estimate ! Was not thenSt. Paul an enthusiast?"There was no mark of failing vigour in the effortshe was now conducting ; and he was followed intoWarwickshire, whither, on the 20th, he removed hisfamily, by the grateful tidings of their entire success.These busy days moreover had been days of friendship.I shall think during my absence from England,"wrote Mr. John Powder just before he again sailed forSicily v " with peculiar pleasure of the few days passedat Kensington Gore. It was a sort of connecting linkbetween the scenes of past happiness to which my mindoften reverts, and those which are yet but images inthe land of hope and futurity. Aeneas amused himself(when he was much busier than I am) with watchingthe shades of his expected progeny, and hearingwhat wonderful things they were to perform on earth.20 Journal, Sept. 6.VOL. III. 2 B554 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1811.Why may not I amuse and solace the moments oflanguor by visions as innocent at least, and, if notassociated with the hopes of worldly grandeur, connectedwith those dispositions and affections whichare best fitted to brighten and tranquillize this lifeand prepare us for a better j?"The next two months were spent by Mr. Wilberforcein paying, with his family, some long-promisedvisits. Signs of thankfulness to God, and love to man,mark every halt along his route. " Eldon, Sunday,Sept. 29. Walked a little with Cowper the beautifulend of the 6th book ' the promised Sabbath.' Whata prospect ! Oh the unspeakable mercies of God ;what can I desire which He has not granted me ? Andthen when I compare my state with that of all therest of the world, in other countries, and even in thislittle oasis of security, and prosperity, and peace !Oh that I were more grateful ! Oh let me strivemore to love God and Christ, to delight in Them, andbe grateful to Them in some proportion to what Iought." Oct. 28th. Off for Lord G.'s, where verykindly received. It is a fine place, and improvedwith great taste. Their kind compulsion kept usover another day. Lord G. very pleasing and friendly,but these fine houses do not suit me. Surely theysee too little of their children. Alas ! I fear I didlittle good. Resolved to take opportunity from aconversation we had at N. to write to Lord G. topress on him the reading of St. Paul's writings. Ohmay the effect be blessed ! He is of a sweet disposition,and most superior understanding. Alas ! how1811. VISITS. 555unspeakable are his disadvantages, and how muchdoes he suffer from high life ! How thankful should Ibe for having a wife who is not of the fashionablesort ! How thankful for my not having been made apeer in earlier life ! It would, humanly speaking, havebeen the ruin of my children, if not of myself.""Mr. S. and E. added to our party. S. harmlessbut dull. E. a shrewd, clever man of the world,moralized down by marriage into a good magistrateand very decent man, especially when with decentpeople. I was not careful enough to introduce edifyingor useful topics." " Finishing in the evening aletter of Alexander Knox's, of fine imagination, richin thought and beautiful in language ; ingenious too,and devotional, but yet fanciful, and full of guessesand subtleties leading to dangerous practical errors,or rather perhaps arising out of them, and then lendingtheir filial support." 21During this excursion, he took his family to visithis old haunts under the hospitable roof of his " hostand hostess of the forest ;" and from Yoxall Lodge hewrites to Mr. Macaulay.Yoxall Lodge, Nov. 12, 1811.My dear Sir,Many thanks for your kind letter. Firstlet me say a word of R. and then dismiss him . .I must begin by expressing my concern at giving youso much trouble : I really do not say this speechifyingcausa . . Would he make me a good secretary ?He corresponds in one grand particular with the Diary.2 B 2556 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1811.strict idea I used to form of the person likely to suitme ; he has been buffeted about in the storms of life,and would know the value and comfort of getting intoa port, snug and peaceful, with wood and water inplenty, if not abounding in all the luxuries of life.But to turn to Gore and Sierra Leone. . . . HereI was interrupted even a forest you see has itscallers. . I resume my pen in great haste andpressed for time. We are all greatly scandalized atseeing the advertisement of Scott's Final PerseveranceSermon staring people in the face on the outside coverof the last Christian Observer, next adjacent to theadvertisement of his Reply to the Bishop of Lincoln.Seriously it is very unfortunate that is too strong aword, but it is to be regretted ; and the recollection ofsome former advertisements leads me to ask whethersome little check could not be provided against suchimpressions ? I am ashamed to name the verywords Christian Observer ; but really you would havehad a paper from me, but for my being obliged towrite all my letters myself. Farewell.Believe me ever affectionately yours,W. Wilberforce."To Lord Lancaster, whose daughter was soon to bemarried to Lord Lindsay, he writes a few days later.Yoxall Lodge, Nov. 20, 1811.My dear Lancaster,I am quite disappointed. Hearing that theBishop of Llandaff had promised to cross the moundMARRIED LIFE. 557pains to officiate on a certain occasion, I conceivedthat I should ere now have seen in the newspaper areport of the formation of that lasting union, whichour grandiloquous friend had undertaken to cement.I am tired of waiting to congratulate you, and thereforeI take up my pen. * *These qualities are in truth indispensable to thetrue happiness of the married life. A couple may agreeto be civil to each other before spectators, they mayact the part of husband and wife, but there will notbe that identity of interests and feelings which constitutesthe very essence, the vital spirit, of the union.It is a favourite opinion of mine, which I should beglad to call my own, but which I think I have seenin some great author, that to the institution of marriage,as it exists in all countries where Christianityprevails, is to be ascribed that superiority which isso marked in the European over the Asiatic natives.The consciousness on both sides that the union is tobe for life, produces effects in various ways which arealmost incalculable. It is here as in other of theworks and dispensations of the Almighty ; at first sightwe observe something to admire and love, but themore closely we inspect, the more thoroughly we examine,so much the more cause do we find for loveand admiration. The direct reverse this to what weexperience in the works of human art, where a closerexamination always brings to our view defects, if notdeformities.So all our rumours of dissolution have died away,and we old folks a parliament of four years' antiquity558 LIFE OF Wilberforce. 1811.are to meet again upon the 7th of January ! Asusual you have heard more politics, at least moreparty intelligence, than I have. I had anticipatedyour account in one point ; and had fully expectedthat the Prince would try to make a broad-bottomedadministration by taking in others besides LordGrenvilleYou do not mention, perhaps you have not heard,that T. has been obliged to sell his lovely place,beautified extremely by himself, and of which theyare passionately fond. His losses have been occasioned,I am told, by the mismanagement of a partner. Hebears it admirably, and such blows are the most difficultto bear of all the strokes of Providence. How unspeakableis the consolation derived in such a seasonfrom the persuasion that the event has not happenedby chance, and that it may be rendered themeans of ultimate benefit ! I cannot help thinkingthat in this I see the hand of God. It will lead himto clear away the rubbish and cleave to the foundation; his spiritual sun, which the fogs and vapours ofworldly bustle obscured, will shine out at the close ofhis natural day. In truth, my dear friend, we are alltoo apt to forget that the time is short, and that thefashion of this world passeth away ; that here we arebut strangers and pilgrims. Farewell, my dearLancaster. I will not apologize for the serious straininto which I have just given. I know you wish meto say what is uppermost, to pour forth the effusionsof the heart. Farewell once more, and may Godbless you. When that is said seriously, as I say it,1811. CAMBRIDGE BIBLE SOCIETY. 559well may it be added in the phrase of the Orientals,What can I say more ?I am ever yours,W. Wilberforce."By the end of November he was again at home.He found the political world talking " of a change ofministers, and the Morning Chronicle pushing hardfor the Grenville and opposition parties giving thePrince strong hints." 22 But soon afterwards 23 he describesthe " opposition as very angry and distrustfulof the Prince Regent, though they affect to hold that,bound as he is by the ties of honour, it is impossiblefor him to retain Perceval. Prince's health said tobe bad he is very nervous. It is reported that he isinsane, and many well-informed people seem half tosuspect it. Sir W. Scott looked significantly at Stephen,and said, ' He certainly has done no businessfor some time." 'A few extracts from letters written at this timeto Mr. Simeon exhibit some of those secret linksby which all through his long public life he was connectedwith the efforts of religious men in every quarter.Mr. Simeon was anxious to set up at Cambridgean Association of the Bible Society, and he at onceappealed to Mr. Wilberforce for help. In his firstreply he merely promises " to do his best." The nextday he writes at greater lengthDiary, Nov. 29. * Ib. Dec. 13.560 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1811.Dec. 6, 1811.My dear Sir,* * * * The Dean judgeson the whole that his attending the meeting as it nowappears would do more harm by lessening his influenceon other occasions on which it might be useful to thecause of religion, than good by the gain in this particularinstance. I do not concur with him in thisopinion. Still however I believe the Dean wouldattend, if you could name to him almost any respectablepeople who would be present. Cannot you do this ?Would not the Earl of Bristol attend ? He is a noblemanof the most respectable sort, and I believe hisname is still on the boards. Could you not procurean application to be made to him, and confirm his dispositionto attend, by stating the need that there isof the higher order as general officers to lead on thelegion of rank and file which I trust will flock to yourstandard ? The Dean would be quite decided if theBishop of Bristol would attend. He is afraid ofappearing the head of a number of under-graduates,and being thought thereby to encourage insubordination.I am sorry the Duke of Gloucester is out oftown. As nothing can be done rebus sic stantibusyou should desire Lord Hardwicke to prevail on someother grandees to be present. The last address fromthe Bible Society quite inflames the heart. Farewellmay God bless you.Ever affectionately yours,W. WILBERFORCE."1811. TO THE REV. CHARLES SIMEON. 561The day following he wrote again.Near London, Dec. 7, 1811.My dear Sir,I am sorry to be the messenger of bad tidings,but I have no good ones to transmit. I found bysending to the Duke of Gloucester's residence thathe was expected in town last night* and I resolved toeffect an interview with him this morning. AccordinglyI sallied forth, and was with him some time ;but I am sorry to say, that not only is his going downout of the question, but that I fear he will not evenwrite a letter approving of the scheme, for which Ipressed, when I found no more could be obtained.I shall however continue to do mybest ; but alas, that best is very little ; however, f it isin my heart.'Believe me ever affectionately yours,W. Wilberforce."Another post brought a more favourable bulletin.Near London, Dec. 10, 1811.My dear Sir,lo triumph ! or rather let me more properlypraise God for the greatly altered view of things.When all my prospects were dark and gloomy, beholdthe light suddenly breaks forth. Who should be announcedto me this morning, but the Duke of Gloucester,who with a cheerful countenance accosted meby saying, that he had come himself to let me know562 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1811.that though on the whole he still thought it would notbe proper for him to attend in person, he had writtento desire that it might be stated to the meeting thathe highly approved of it, and took a lively interest inthe Society's success ; that he desired to be put downas a subscriber of 50 guineas ; and that if there shouldbe a request made to him to become President orPatron of the Society, he should not decline thesituation. The Duke suggested, that if the Bishop ofBristol, from delicacy toward his brother of Ely,should not like to attend, Lord Hardwicke would bethefittest person to represent and speak for him atthe meeting. The Dean has not absolutely decided,but I think he will go. I press him to go down asstrongly as with propriety I can.With kind remembrances to common friends,Believe me ever most sincerely yours,W. WILBERFORCE."The day following the meeting, its success was thuscommunicated to him.Trinity Lodge, Dec. 13, 1811.My dear Sir,Were I ever inclined to think lightly of thecharacter and merits of the British and ForeignBible Society, your opinion of it would convince methat I could not be wrong in lending my humble assistanceto that which has deserved the support of thefriend of every thing which is right, humane, andgood. Unfortunately, for reasons I will explain when1811. CHRISTMAS HOLIDAYS, 563we meet, I could not attend the meeting. But ourgreat and admirable friend, the Dean of Carlisle, whois himself instar omnium, did ; and there exercised hisextraordinary powers to the credit of himself and thefurtherance of this most important cause, which Ihave the happiness to say was well planted, and islikely to be most thriving. I have the honour to be,with the sincerest regard, my dear sir,Yours most obediently,W. BRISTOL."The Christmas holidays had now brought his twoschool-boys home, and all his six children were gatheredround him " A true family party," but " howsadly do I feel my own exceeding incompetency tothe work of education ! O Lord, to Thee do I flee.Thou hast promised wisdom to them that ask it sincerely; grant it then to me, that I may be kindand cheerful, and yet steady with my young ones." 24He was at this time labouring under a distressing oppressionon the chest which for some weeks almostdeprived him of his voice. "The visitation underwhich I am now labouring is, like all providential dispensationstowards me, very mild, though so seriousin its effects ; my voice much affected to-day." 25 Yetwas he striving to make their home cheerful to hischildren. " It is of great importance to preserve boys'affections, and prevent their thinking home a dullplace." 2G " R.'s birth-day, so they had their play of94 Journal, Dec. 15. * Ib. 22. ^ Diary.564 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1811.King and Queen in my court dresses in the eveningchess. Evening, air-pump, and Sou they 's Curse ofKehama imagination wild as the winds prodigiouscommand of language, and the moral purity trulysublime the finest ideas all taken from the Scriptures."2r " Oh what a consideration is it, that magnificentas are the visions of glory in which Southey'sfancy revels, and which his creative genius forms,they are all beneath the simple reality of the Christian'shope, if he be but duly impressed with it ! Maythe eyes of my understanding be enlightened, that Imay know what is the hope of His calling, and whatthe riches of His glorious inheritance. Amen." 28Hearing Thalia again I admire its moral sublimity; but surely it is a most false impression that itconveys of Mohammedanism, and the measure is mostunreasonably harassing, and the music often destroyed."" 23rd. Being still afraid of talking, sent thetwo eldest boys to Mr. Venn's on a visit, hoping tojoin them on Thursday." 29 Two days afterwards hewrites to Mr. Venn.TO THE REV. JOHN VENN, CLAPHAM.Kensington Gore, Christmas-day, 1811.My dear Friend,Though I thank God I am better, and thoughDr. Bailie gives me reason to believe there is nothingalarming to life or health in my complaint, yet as it is27 Diary. Journal, Dec. 22. 29 Diary.1811. CHRISTMAS AMUSEMENTS. 565very serious to me in its effects, especially just nowwhen parliament is about to meet, I believe I shoulddo wrong in going to you this week ; since I musteither be nearly silent or must talk to my injury. AsI know I should be with those who would be kindlydisposed to put the best construction on all my conduct,perhaps I should not dread the being thoughtby your young ones to be a very dull, because so silent,a fellow ; and I can truly say, I should wish withyou to hear rather than to speak ; but still I distrustmyself and my own powers of taciturnity under astrong temptation to talking, and therefore Q. E. D.I had fully intended to send for the boys tomorrowif I should not go to you myself ; but consideringthat to-day is a day on which probably there is noexercise for the turning machine, I have an idea, ifperfectly convenient and advisable, of sending forthem on Friday, probably between two and threeo'clock. I really long for them to-day, as I beg youwill tell them.But I have a secondary reason for their stayingtill Friday, which is, that perhaps your son may thenaccompany them. Mr. Allen, the lecturer, is to dinewith me at four on Saturday next, in order to show myfamily afterwards some experiments philosophicaland chemical, and I dare say it will be a pleasure toyour son to be of the party ; and on Saturday morninghe could accompany them to the Liverpool Museum,or to see Mr. Parker's glass manufactory, or somethingof the kind. I could get Allen no other day, or Iwould, in hopes of your coming too. I will treat566 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1811.Henry on Sunday, indeed always, as my own childand I am with kind regards,Ever affectionately yours,W. WILBERFORCE.P. S. I hope the boys behave quite well, and desiremy kindest remembrances to them and to allyour family."On Saturday " William Allen the Quaker dinedwith us by three ; and soon after dinner, till half-pasteight, showed us galvanic and chemical wonders."How truly edifying," he continues in that tone ofhearty praise which sprung ever readily from his habitualhumility, " to see such a man's goings-on !Though so attached to science, in a large business,and so busy at Lancaster's schools, lecturing at Guy'spublicly he attends all charitable meetings whereneeded, and assigned as a reason why he could notattend us on Monday, that he must be at the meetingfor distributing soup at Spital Fields from six to nine.Thus can he contract into the smallest dimensions, orexpand into the largest, for beneficent purposes." 30The year closes with a letter of congratulation tohis early friend at Lancaster.Near London, Dec. 31, 1811.My dear Lancaster,It does indeed give me pleasure to witness thesolid satisfaction with which you can contemplate the30 Diary, Dec. 28.1811. HIS ILLNESS. 567connexion which your daughter has formed ; and Iheartily wish, and indeed hope, that it may be a growingpleasure, which will subside into a less tumultuous,but not a less solid and permanent, because a calmerjoy. At this season, when it is usual for friends tointerchange good wishes, accept of mine, and be assuredof our kind sympathy in all that concerns yourhappiness both here and hereafter, and that of thosewho are most dear to you.ee You will be sorry to hear that for above a fortnightI have had a complaint which still continues,though I trust it is better, of a nature not alarmingas to life, but very serious in its consequences to anyonein my situation. It affects my voice ; and Bailie,whom I have consulted, advises inter alia my restingit as much as I can. This is a very difficult regimenthe regimen I mean of silence, to the head of alarge family, especially now that my young ones areat home. Shall we not see you on the 7th ? Iscarcely conceive that, in the present state of parties,the opposition will divide against the Address. Butwe shall very soon get, as you truly say, into difficultand complicated states of men and things, in whichyour statesmen by profession will find it no easy matterto shape their course. But Perceval has so gooda bottom of firm integrity, that I trust he will neverfind his vessel drive from its anchor. I think of himin many respects as I plainly see you do, only thatyour youthful fire still causes you to think, and feel,and speak, more glowingly than such a colder personageas myself.568 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1811.I must break off. I begin to fear I shall not beable to attend the House at first. With kind remembrancesto Lady Lindsay, if still at the Castle,I am ever, my dear Lancaster,yours affectionately and sincerely,W. WILBERFORCE."END OF VOL. in.JOHN Child AND SON, BUNGAY.