LIFE OF WILBERFORCE.TABULAR VIEW OF THEILLUSTRATIVE OF TH1772.Slavery provedillegal in Englandby GranvilleSharperecedingyear.ForeTrade Bill rejected.s byan increased ma ,Majority. ther1804.Abolition carried .in Commons. c il1808.IH^-^S-ment given up toGovernment.African Institutionformed.i 01 ^Slaves in Ceylon P; M ^'emancipated. ' %*g% sandlolo. . iconiJftSiSiwaM-pjtVJS 1 ^:Spam on receive . * . by Great ' the Slav e P Trade 'ln g a sum of Britain, m amoney promises '^ Abolition inw, and present .the north ofthe equator.treaty with theArabs on the Red 'Sea;And by theUnited States.riW OF SLAVERY AND THE SLAVE TRADE,HEllFE OF WILLIAM WILBERfORCE.1785. . 1786. 1787.1788.1789-90. 1791.Pecked . Sir Charles WilberforceMiddle PassageExamination Sierra Leonelii 1 poses the Middleton re . avows his designa) eve Trade as * quests Gilbert of giving forcut . subject for . force to move for Abolition.Bill. of evidence, and . Company formmotions in par ed.hum. nt.EssayatCam- Abolition. . Abolition Corn-bridge,mitted formed.'1le prize is ' Thomas Clarkeed by Tho . . son employed to:|-i Clarkson. collect evidence.;bo . L'*<!, . 1the 1'11797. 1798. . 1799.lie new par . Annual motion . Annual motionlent adopts for Abolition ^ for AbolitionEllis's plan ' again defeated. * again lost,leaving the Slave Trade1800-1.Motion for Abo .f lotion deferred, inexpectation of a 'general Convents.1803.Assignment of ' Annual motionlands in Trinidad postponed in con-opposed.. sequence of theAnnual motion excitement of the'htion to the . . Limitation Billt inn of European .for Abolition re ' expected inva-colonists. carried in Com-powers.need. . sion.tion for Abo ' . mons.James Stephen>n again lost. . .,publishes hisCrisis of the'.Sugar Colonies.")inventedy appeals to the dread of Jacobins.a i nt'liiion begins again to revive.1810. . 1811. 1812.1813.1814. . 1815.kin-,tnew govern . Slave Trade . Buenos AyresSweden abolishes. .Denmark and . France abolishes.tfr- . nit at Venerate a felony by . abolishes,i abolishes* Great Britain.'Holland abolish. Portugal, on re-francepromises * ceiling a sum ollive Trade. Portugal reteabolisheutirely money, abolishesounces Trade .in five years, and . to the north olout of her ownterritory.immediately to the equator, andthe South ol Cape ' intimates thatChili abolishes. ..Formosa ; . she will finallySpain promises abolish in eightto abolish in eight * years.[years.oiihhabits'not.1823. . 1824.ive Trade being abolished by . Slave Tradehis far as the influence of hug made piracy bynjrxii'iids, Wilberforce publishes ' Great Britain.Ji " Appeal" against Slavery.Ilion lier emancipation. Canning'sresolutions.1825-8. .Colonial Legis .natures in vainurged to mitigate "Slavery.1829. . 1833.Series of petit Bill for Emotionsagainst cheating SlavesSlavery. carried.Great meeting .of Abolitionistsin London, Wil-antislaverySociety formed.perforce presiding.1 vlave Trade hurried on, chiefly by France, Spain, and Portugal.[To b* iiiM-rttd in Vnl.THEBY HIS SONS,ROBERT ISAAC WILBERFORCE, M. A.VICAR OK EAST Harleigh. LATE FELLOW OF ORIEL COLLEGE ;ANDSAMUEL WILBERFORCE, M. A.RECTOR OF Brimstone.IN FIVE VOLUMES.VOL. II.Happy is the stateIn which ye, father, here do dwell at ease,Leading a life so free and fortunateFrom all the tempests of these worldly seasLONDON :JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMDCCCXXXinil.UA.KLK STREET.SEEN BYPRESERVATIONSERVICESOR*2-JOHN Child AND SON, Begat.THELIFE OF WILBERFORCE.CHAPTER X.DECEMBER 1792 TO JULY 1794.Alarming aspect of the times Revolutionary principles Wilberforceanxious to prevent war Attends East-riding meetingHis first great difference with Pitt Motion for Abolitionlost in the Commons Unpromising aspect of the causePlan of national religious instruction for India AdjournmentHis habits in society Correspondence with ClarksonVisits Return to town in December Foreign Slave BillSubscription for Clarkson Visit to Portsmouth.THE autumn of 1792 set in with heavy clouds darkeningthe political horizon. " Heard of the militiabeing called out, and parliament summoned talkedpolitics, and of the state of the country, which seemsvery critical." 1 Upon the 5th "left Rothley Temple,and after talking with Mr. Robinson (of Leicester)upon the state of the times, I travelled on to Newporti Diary. Dec. 3.VOL. II. B2 LIFE OF Wilberforce. 1792.Parnell. Thursday 6th. Arrived in town andalighted at Pitt's."None but those who were altogether blinded by theviolence of party spirit could contemplate withoutalarm the troubled aspect of the times. The democraticalexcitement which the revolutionary fever ofour continental neighbours had imparted to a portionof our own population, had been eagerly fostered byartful and disaffected men, and was ready in manyplaces to break out into absolute rebellion.I cannot omit," writes Mr. Wyvill, " to communicateto you by the earliest opportunity what I haveheard since I came here concerning the disposition ofthe lower people in the county of Durham. Considerablenumbers in Bernard Castle have manifesteddisaffection to the constitution, and the words, f NoKing,' ' Liberty,' and * Equality,' have been writtenthere upon the Market Cross. During the late disturbancesamongst the keelmen at Shields and Sunderland,General Lamb ton was thus addressed : * Haveyou read this little work of Tom Paine's.' ' No.'Then read it we like it much. You have a greatestate, General ; we shall soon divide it amongst us.'You will presently spend it in liquor, and what willyou do then ? ' ' Why then, General, we will divideagain'" " At Carlisle," writes Dr. Milner, "we hadmany reports concerning tumults and sedition, and theaffair seemed to be of considerable magnitude. Somefew gentlemen I understand are disposed to favourFrench principles, and I' am exceedingly sorry to find1792. POPULAR DISTURBANCES. 3that Mr. Paley is as loose in his politics as he is in hisreligion. He has considerable influence in promotingthis sort of work by [his conversation, which has astrong tendency to destroy all subordination, and bringrulers of every description into contempt. He isnaturally very good tempered, and my stay there wasshort. These two circumstances alone prevented ourcoming to a rupture. I have given myself little or noconcern about politics for years, but of late the aspecthas been so black that I could not help attending toour future prospects with some anxiety. SupposingFox to oppose, I think it is well at this criticalmoment that he has gone so far. There is scarce oneof his old friends here at Cambridge who is not disposedto give him up ; and most say that he is mad.I think of him much as I always did : I still doubtwhether he has bad principles, but I think it prettyplain he has none ; and I suppose he is ready for whateverturns up. The tide at present seems settingstrongly in support of government amongst all ranks.I believe this arises in great measure from the alarmof the moment ; and when that is over, or abates, Ifear the democratic principles will be found to havefirmer roots."The same apprehensions were excited amongstsober-minded men in all parts of the country. " Immensepains," he heard from Leeds, 2 " are now takento make the lower class of people discontented, andto excite rebellion. Paine's mischievous work onLetter from W. Hey Esq.B 24 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1792. -the Rights of Man,' is compressed into a sixpennypamphlet, and is sold and given away in profusion.One merchant in this town ordered two hundred ofthem to he given at his expense : you may see themin the houses of our journeymen cloth-dressers. Thesoldiers are every where tampered with ; no pains arespared to render this island a scene of confusion."All this was sufficiently alarming ; while the dangerwas increased hy the probability of a French war,which must necessarily add to the burdens of thepeople, and so further the designs of the revolutionaryfaction. With his eyes fully open to these evils, hetook a calm and sober view of the amount of danger.To you," he tells Mr. Hey, " I will frankly own,that I entertain rather gloomy apprehensions concerningthe state of this country. Not that I fear anyspeedy commotion ; of this I own I see no danger.Almost every man of property in the kingdom is ofcourse the friend of civil order, and if a few mad-headedprofessors of liberty and equality were toattempt to bring their theories into practice, theywould be crushed in an instant. But yet I do foreseea gathering storm, and I cannot help fearing that acountry which, like this, has so long been blessedbeyond all example with every spiritual and temporalgood, will incur those judgments of an incensed God,which in the prophets are so often denounced againstthose who forget the Author of all their mercies."Your letter," he writes again in answer to a detailof facts, " and accounts I have received of the state of1792. TRUE GROUNDS OF ALARM. 5other places, have convinced me that there is morecause for alarm than I had apprehended. From mysituation I feel loaded with responsibility. I am considering,and shall consider diligently, what is best tobe done ; and I pray God to give me wisdom to discern,and courage and perseverance to walk in thepath of duty. I own to you that what throws thedeepest gloom over my prospects is the prevailingprofligacy of the times, and above all, that self-sufficiency,and proud and ungrateful forgetfulness ofGod, which is so general in the higher ranks of life.I think of proposing to the Archbishop of Canterburyto suggest the appointment of a day of fasting andhumiliation."The same sober estimate of present appearances, ledhim to check the exultation with which Mr. Heyregarded a temporary burst of loyalty in the town ofLeeds. " ' God save the King' was sung, with achorus of three cheers after each verse, by the wholemeeting, the most numerous I ever saw upon any suchpublic occasion; about 3000 in number. Thepopulace paraded the streets until night came on,carrying an image of Tom Paine upon a pole, with arope round his neck which was held by a man behind,who continually lashed the effigy with a carter's whip.The effigy was at last burned in the market-place,the market-bell tolling slowly. I never saw so quiet amob ; a smile sat on every face ; the people wentpeaceably home ; no outrage, no opprobrious language,but * God save the King' resounded in the streets.6 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1792.A happy change in this town." 3 " I rejoice to hearthat so much unanimity prevailed at Leeds," wasMr. Wilberforce's answer, " but I do not build muchon such hasty effusions : this one word in reply toyours."Parliament met upon the 13th of December, whenthe Address upon the King's Speech, which Mr. Foxopposed and Mr. Windham defended, expressed astrong desire of maintaining peace. <f I had thoughtmuch upon it, yet found myself indisposed for speaking."4 But upon the following day, on the debateupon Mr. Fox's amendment to the Address, he declaredhis opinions. " War," he said, " he consideredat all times the greatest of human evils, and nevermorepregnant with injury than at the presentmoment ; but he supported the Address, as the mostlikely means of preserving peace."This was now his great object. " I depend much,"writes Mr. Wyvill to him, " upon Mr. Pitt's wisdom,but more upon your friendly and seasonable counsels, toprevent extremities." He was himself convinced thatMr. Pitt was honestly pursuing the same policy. " Thatthere is no solid ground," is his deliberate judgment, 5for the charge that has been brought against Mr. Pitt,that some time before the war broke out he had beencontemplating and wishing to commence hostilities,must be manifest to every unprejudiced mind that willfairly consider his speech in the preceding month of3 Letter from W. Hey Esq.Diary. s MS. Mem.1792. WAR NOT EXPECTED BY PITT. 7May. When taking off some taxes, he intimated thathe hoped to be able to propose a similar remission ofthe burdens of the country in every succeeding year.He declared that though no prudent man durst presumeto predict the future circumstances of the country withanything like positiveness, yet that he might ventureto affirm that the continuance of peace for sixteenyears, had never been more probable than it was at thatmoment. Had he then formed but the slightest ideathat it would be advisable for him to join the othercontinental towns in their war against the French, hewould have taken such an opportunity as was affordedhim by the general view he was giving of the situationof the country, for preparing the public mind for theintended measures. He would have endeavoured toimpress on them a sense of the danger to be apprehendedfrom the encroaching spirit of France. Hislanguage however was precisely of an oppositecharacter.""There is, I think," he wrote to the author ofJasper Wilson's letter, " one radical error which runsthrough your pamphlet : that I mean of imputing toMr. Pitt a war system ; as if it were his plan, his wish,his predilection, to engage in war, and that he had sethimself to consider how he could effect his purpose.In point of fact great political events are rarely theoffspring of cool, deliberate system : they receive theirshape, size, and colour, and the date of their existence,from a thousand causes which could hardly have beenforeseen, and in the production of which, various unsLIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1792.connected and jarring parties have combined andassisted."Throughout the warm debates with which thissession commenced, he was constantly at his post;watching every opportunity to promote the continuanceof peace. " Dec. 18th. Fox's motion aboutambassador to France he very strong. 19th and20th. House again. 21st. Gave up the idea of amotion about the French King's fate. House of Lordsin the evening saw strong French decree, and ' Jesuis Thee.' ' ; Yet though thus anxious to prevent awar, no one could hold in more deliberate abhorrencethe principles of the Revolution party. " Dec. 26th.A letter came from Mr. Clarke, announcing theintended East Riding meeting for the counteractionof French opinions. Took it into consideration and determinedto set off immediately in order to attend it.Got off at three o'clock overtook Duncombe, Milnes,and Burgh at Biggleswade slept at Eaton. OnThursday got to Barney Moor, and on Friday nightto Beverley occupied all the way in preparing tomake a long speech, which proved all labour thrownaway. Saturday. The meeting went off quietly. Gentlemennumerous they and the people pleased withmy appearing. I spoke for about five minutes ; andhardly could more without appearing to show off, atleast I thought so then, though now I believe I hadbetter have held forth for half an hour."But his hostility to French principles did notlead him to abandon the opinions he had always1793. HE CONTINUES FRIENDLY TO REFORM. 9held upon the necessity of reform in parliament.After this very meeting, he joined Mr. Wyvill, theprofessed champion of parliamentary reform, at thehouse of his colleague Henry Duncombe. " Jan. 2nd.Got off betimes the horses fell, and the carriagebroke near York. Through God's mercy I was unhurt,and arrived safe at Congreve by night-fall.3rd. Wyvill came to dinner affectionate, well-intentioned,and kind well-founded I think in the measuresof reform he recommends, though excessive inhis ideas of danger chatted all the evening and mostof the next day." The reasons which led him, unlikeMr. Pitt, to maintain even in this hour of danger theexpediency of his former views, would require, he tellsMr. Hey a strong opponent of reform, too much spaceto be discussed here ; yet thus much I will say, thatthough considering the case of such persons as haveactually imbibed the republican notions as altogetherdesperate, and of consequence, though I would not forthe sake of bringing them back by fair means deviatea hair's breadth from the line I should otherwise pursue,yet I look upon all moderate reformers, who aresincerely attached to our present constitution of King,Lords, and Commons, with a very different eye, andshould think it right to pay great regard to them, andto the object of bringing them to act cordially for theconstitution, and against the republicans. Unless somereforms be made, though we should get well throughour present difficulties, they will recur hereafter withaggravated force."B 310 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1793.By the 16th of January he was again in the neighbourhoodof London ; and on the 21st " came toWimbledon (Mr. Dundas's) by Pitt's invitation, to bealone with Pitt, Dundas, and Scott instead found astrange mixed party. 22nd. Going away becauseLord Loughborough coming, but on the whole thoughtit best to stay, considering that he is about to be madechancellor." The question of peace or war was nowbecoming highly critical. " Dined at Lord Elgin'sLord St. Helen's, Bishop of Lincoln, Mrs. Carter, &c.Elgin and Lord St. Helen's seem to think against war,though averse to oppose the wishes of government." 6The war which broke out almost immediately, led tothe first decided political separation between himselfand Mr. Pitt. It was not without great reluctancethat he brought himself to oppose a minister, of whoseintegrity and talents he had so high a value, and withwhom he had so long lived upon terms of the mostintimate private friendship. The difference betweenthem arose gradually, and did not ripen into openseparation until the end of the following year ; yeteven from the beginning of the war he was not fullysatisfied with the conduct of administration. ThoughMr. Pitt's was not a " war system," yet he was in Mr.Wilberforce's judgment too much guided in its commencementby his own sanguine disposition, hithertountempered by any disappointment. " It will be avery short war," said Mr. Pitt and his friends, " andcertainly ended in one or two campaigns." " No, sir,"6 Diary, Jan. 28.1793. PREVENTED FROM SPEAKING AGAINST WAR. 11said Mr. Burke when this language was addressed tohim, " it will be a long war, and a dangerous war, butit must be undertaken." Mr. Wilberforce was aliveto its perils, but not convinced of its necessity. " Notthat," he thought, 7 " peace could be a state of as muchsecurity as the term ' peace ' had commonly implied,but as far the less of two evils. Though at the commencementof the war I could deliberately declarethat we were not the assailants, and therefore that itwas just and necessary ; yet I had but too muchreason to know that the ministry had not taken duepains to prevent its breaking out." In the debatetherefore upon the King's message, 8 which intimatedthe necessity of some military preparations in consequenceof the murder of the King of France, he hadresolved to declare his persuasion that it was the truepolicy of this country to continue strictly upon thedefensive; that the delirium which now distractedFrance would probably pass over by degrees, and thatshe would then see the folly of provoking a war withGreat Britain, in addition to the continental stormwhich was already gathered round her. " I was actuallyupon my legs to open my mind fully upon the subject,when Pitt sent Bankes to me, earnestly desiring menot to do so that day, assuring me that my speakingthen might do irreparable mischief, and pledginghimself that I should have another opportunity beforewar should be declared." " House on King's messagesadly distressed on my legs to speak againsti Letter to W. Hey, Feb. 14, 1801. 8 Feb. 112 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1793.the Address, when stopped by Bankes, and note andassurance from Pitt. Sat very late, and much disturbedafterwards." 9 "Feb. 4th. Navy voted embargolaid by France nothing said. 5th. Pitt's onpolitics discussing Ryder, Steele, and Warringtontill ten at night they too violent. 10th, Sunday. Sacramentmuch affected oh that it may be for good."The week had passed away, and in spite of Mr. Pitt'sassurance there had been no opportunity upon whichhe could state his sentiments. By an incident to whichhis whole parliamentary experience could furnish noparallel, the House was compelled to adjourn everysuccessive day without entering upon other business,because there were not a sufficient number of memberspresent to make a ballot for an election committee.Meanwhile war was declared by the French againstEngland and the United Provinces, and when hostilitieshad actually begun, " I deemed it," he says, " the partof a good subject not to use language which might tendto prevent the unanimity which was so desirable at theoutset of such a war." 10 Yet even now he was notsatisfied with the tone held by the administration.Feb. 12th. Message on the war vexed at Pitt andDundas for not being explicit enough." n " Our government,"he wrote long after to Mr. Hey, 12 " hadbeen for some months before the breaking out of thewar negociating with the principal European powers,for the purpose of obtaining a joint representation to9 Diary. ' MS. Mem. " Diary.'* Letter of Feb. 14, 1801, to W. Hey Esq.1793. DESIGNS OF GOVERNMENT. 13France, assuring her that if she would formally engageto keep within her limits, and not molest her neighbours,she should be suffered to settle her own internalgovernment and constitution without interference. I.never was so earnest with Mr. Pitt on any other occasion,as I was in my entreaties before the war brokeout, that he would declare openly in the House ofCommons, that he had been, and then was, negociatingthis treaty. I urged on him that the declarationmight possibly produce an immediate effect in France,where it was manifest there prevailed an opinion thatwe were meditating some interference with their internalaffairs, and the restoration of Louis to his throne.At all events, I hoped that in the first lucid interval,France would see how little reason there was for continuingthe war with Great Britain ; and, at least, thedeclaration must silence all but the most determinedoppositionists in this country. How far this expectationwould have been realized you may estimateby Mr. Fox's language, when Mr. Pitt, at my instance,did make the declaration last winter (1799).If,' he said, ' the right hon. gentleman had madethe declaration now delivered, to France, as well as toRussia, Austria, and Prussia, I should have nothingmore to say or to desire.' 'Yet while he condemned impartially the errorsof the minister, he was ready to defend him from allunmerited censure. Thus, to the author of JasperWilson's letter, (Dr. Currie,) a work which he commends," as exhibiting originality of thought and14 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1793.force of expression, and solving finely the phenomenaof revolutions," he writes shortly after this time, " Ithink that you have spoken very uncandidly of Mr.Pitt's motives and general principles of action. Now,I believe you will give me credit for not being anidolatrous admirer of Mr. Pitt, though bound tohim in the bonds of private friendship. I will talkof him freely and impartially. Faults he has, aswho is free from them ? but I most solemnlyassure you that I am convinced, if the flame ofpure disinterested patriotism burns in any humanbosom, it does in his. I am convinced, and that onlong experience and close observation, that in orderto benefit his country he would give up not situationmerely, and emolument, but what in his case is muchmore, personal credit and reputation, though he knewthat no human being would ever become acquaintedwith the sacrifice he should have made, and recordthe patriotic gift in the pages of history. I couldrun on here, but I will check myself : I will only add,that I never met with any man of talents who wouldso fairly discuss political measures, so honestly askadvice, and so impartially consider it. Believe mewho am pretty well acquainted with our public men,that he has not his equal for integrity as well asability in the ' prioress' of either House of parliament.I am almost ashamed of having been drawn into thislong panegyric, but I will not burn it ; it is thelanguage of the heart, and as such will be acceptable.Another point wherein I greatly differ from J. W.1793. CRITICAL POSTURE OF AFFAIRS. 15is that of the degree of public danger from populardiscontents last winter. This is too large a field toenter into here, but I must say I believe it to havebeen very great. You know as well as I, on hownice a point political affairs of the utmost magnitudeoften turn. The cry of the multitude is a givenquantity which may be thrown into either scale,and though that into which it is cast will sink withrapidity, yet had it been cast into the other, theformer had then kicked the beam. Go to the utmostsummit of Mont Blanc, descend on one side and youwill find yourself in Italy, on the other and you willbe two hundred miles off by the side of the Lake ofGeneva. I know no more common source of error injudging men for their political conduct than inattention,one way or other, to this consideration ; we forgethow long we balanced, how slowly we formed ouropinion, and when it is formed we are apt to treatthose who differ from us, as men who can have nothingto say for themselves. I cannot help saying, thatmuch of what J. W. urges respecting the inexpediencyof our entering into the war may be viewed inthis connexion, which it is enough to point out to you ;I am sure your sagacity will discern the rest. ButI must finish. I have scribbled on so fast, that Ifear I shall hardly be intelligible, and I cannotexpend so much eyesight as to read over what I havewritten." 13Now that the war had actually commenced, andAug. 13.16 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1793.circumstances had thus prevented his openly opposingMr. Pitt, according to his general rule he supportedthe King's government whenever he was able. Hismode of life was much what has been described inthe preceding year. Retiring often to Clapham forsolitude ; " the very prospect of which, even for asingle afternoon, evidently mends me, fixing andsolemnizing my mind;" 14 and cultivating more andmore the company of those who lived habitually inthe fear of God, he maintained his usual intercoursewith general society. " March 12th. Three ballots.So between the first and second gave a dinner tosome of my older friends, Apsley, Villiers, F. North,Belgrave, &c. a civil, friendly thing, at a moderateexpense of time and money." " Mason dinedwith me. Burke's wild speech' to Mason, aboutreplacing the French clergy." " Dined at Pitt'sbefore House two ballots, and friends came over tomy house for dinner between them." " Venn preachedan excellent introductory sermon I received thesacrament and had much serious reflection. Oh mayit be for good ! I renewed all my solemn resolves, andpurpose to lay afresh my foundations." " Mr. Cecilcame to dinner, and tete-astute with him ; having sentaway Burgh for that purpose, according to our socialcontract. Much pleased with Cecil he is living likea Christian. Oh that I were like him ! " " I havemuch the same confessions to make as heretofore, yetI hope, on the whole, I have of late read the Scrip-diary.1793. ABOLITION BECOMES UNPOPULAR. 17turns with more attention, and preserved on my mindrather a more constant sense of God's presence. Mychief faults to-day, amongst innumerable others, havebeen, a want of self-denial, too little real respect forthe excellent of the earth, too few aspirations, impatienceunder provocation, and not sufficient kindnessto my servants." " Expecting Lancaster, meaningserious discussion ; when sent for by Henry Thorntonto town, on the state of public credit, &c. then toPitt's with and for him. A sadly interrupted day."To Battersea with the two Venus they with me allday profitable conversation Venn talked of M. thebackslider. Oh may I beware ! "Early in this year he was again occupied with theconduct of the Negro cause. The session of 1792 hadclosed the period which he has described as the firstassault upon the Slave Trade. The effects of the newtactics so skilfully introduced by Mr. Dundas, werenot slow in making themselves felt. No practicalmitigation of the evil had been yet obtained, but inhis Resolutions the indignation of the country hadfound a vent, and was rapidly subsiding into comparativeindifference.It appears to me very likely," wrote Mr. Wilberforce15 shortly after they had been carried, " notwithstandingall that Grenville and Pitt declare to thecontrary, that the examination before the House ofLords may be protracted beyond the period of thenext session. Bear in mind, that under all the favour-june15, 1792, to Mr. Gisborne.18 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1793.able circumstances of our late discussion it was asmuch as we could do to carry 1796, and that accountsof population differing from those on which Pittargued will certainly be sent from Jamaica, or hisreasonings opposed by evidence directly shaped tocounteract them. Consider also that the public mindhas been, at least till lately, vacant for our subject,but that we can no longer expect to retain quiet possession; not to mention that people who act fromfeeling more than principle will begin to nauseate atopic of which they hear so much."These anticipations were soon verified. The decentdelay afforded by the forms of the House of Lordswas fatal to the progress of the question. The enthusiasticmarch of its ordinary supporters grew slow andheavy ; the interest of the country manifestly ragged ;the excitement of the revolutionary war distracted theattention of the volatile ; the progress of French principlesterrified the timid ; the seed which had been sofreely scattered by the revolutionary politics of someleading Abolitionists had sprung up into a plentifulharvest of suspicion. " I do not imagine," writes Mr.Clarke during this period, " that we could meet withtwenty persons in Hull at present who would sign apetition, that are not republicans. People connectdemocratical principles with the Abolition of the SlaveTrade, and will not hear it mentioned. This is I hearprecisely the case in Norfolk." From Suffolk CapetLoft writes word, " Of collective applications in anyshape I see not now any probability in this county,1793. WEARISOME DELAYS. 19though I well know what great numbers in it, andhow respectably composed, were earnest for theAbolition : but a damp and odium has fallen on thesecollective applications." In this state of public feelingthe tactics of the Abolitionists were necessarilychanged. Instead of appealing confidently as of oldto the sympathies of the nation, they simply prolongedin parliament the almost hopeless contest; 16whilst perpetual delays, small divisions, and incessantdefeats tried the skill and patience of the leader in theconflict, and of those faithful followers in the Housewho still continued under arms.Yet during this darkest period his courage neveryielded, nor was his patient diligence relaxed. He wasearly at his post in the first session of 1793; and inorder to hasten the proceedings of the Lords by a newvote of the lower House, moved, upon the 26th ofFebruary, the further consideration of the Abolitionof the Trade. The principal opponent of the measurewas Sir W. Young, whose appeal to recent observationwas not lost upon the House ; since in defianceof the claims of consistency and justice enforced bythe eloquence of the mover, seconded by the seldomunited arguments of Mr. Pitt and Mr. Fox, it refusedby a majority of eight votes to renew its own decisionof the preceding year.This defeat in the Commons was succeeded by a16 This period was passed by the London Committee in a state oftorpid vitality. They met in 1794 seldom; in 1795, 96, and 97, buttwice each year ; and after that did not reassemble until May 23, 1801.20 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1793.postponement of the business in the Lords ; where theadvocates for the trade in slaves were reinforced bythe zealous and avowed support of a member of theroyal family. The only favourable incident of thesession was the decision of the Lords upon the lathof April. The further adjournment of the question tothat day six months had been moved by the eccentricEarl of Abingdon, in a speech remarkable onlyfor its length and incoherent violence. The horrorsof St. Domingo, of Jacobinism, and dissent, were alikeinvoked to influence the fears of the House ; butLord Grenville and Bishop Horsley reassured its resolution,and the motion of adjournment was withdrawn.This decision of the Peers Mr. Wilberforcereported to the London Committee as a circumstancefavourable to their hopes. But the examinationscarcely proceeded. The session closed when only sevenwitnesses had been summoned, while both in this andin the following year, all intermediate efforts to obtaintheir grand object were suspended in the Commons inexpectation of the promised progress of the Lords.It had always been one part of the tactics of hisopponents to assert that Mr. Wilberforce grew wearyof the cause. As early as 1790, he wrote to Dr.Currie in answer to this charge : " I cannot help expressingmy surprise at its having been reported Ihad given up the business. I attended for the greaterpart of the last session the whole of every morning inthe Committee of the House of Commons, receivingevidence; and we have printed, I believe, at least 11001793. DISCOURAGEMENTS. 21folio pages. In truth, the principles upon which I act inthis business being those of religion, not of sensibilityand personal feeling, can know no remission, and yieldto no delay. I am confident of success, though I darenot say any thing positive as to the period of it."Amidst the disappointments of the succeeding yearssuch rumours were naturally revived by those whocould not comprehend his principles. He had indeedpresent encouragement in the mitigated sufferingswhich had followed the regulation of the middle passage,whereby the average loss of life fell from 14^ to5 per cent. He had a loud call for continued exertionin the constant evasions of this very bill, 17 as well asin the undiminished horrors of the trade in Africa.Yet, in spite of these motives, some ardent supportersof the cause of humanity retired from the protractedcontest. His ardour also might have cooled if hehad not acted from higher motives than mere sensibilityof feeling. " You have found, sir, in the Houseof Commons," writes Dr. Currie, 18 " human reason amore imperfect instrument than perhaps you expected ;the heart of man a more callous thing than mighthave been supposed; you have been repeatedly defeatedwith every advantage of talents, eloquence, andvirtue, on your side, and after a hard won victory, are>7 The captain was answerable for any breach of its regulations, butas he could not be detained, he constantly escaped as soon as he hadbrought his vessel into harbour, and the restrictions of the bill were thussuccessfully evaded.w Aprils.22 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1793.at last likely to be deprived of success by the cunningand selfishness, as well as the ignorance, of your opponents.It is said, that at length you faint in yourcourse ; that tired of the obstacles which present themselves,and fearful of embarrassing the minister in hispresent difficulties, you are about to give up thecause of the poor African until a quieter season*'"Though I cannot," he replies, "enter upon thetopics contained in your letter, I must notice oneof them ; that, I mean, of my being supposed to be,as you delicately express it, fainting in my course.Nothing I assure you is further from the truth : it isone of those calumnies, for such I account it, to whichevery public man is exposed, and of which, though Ihave had a tolerable proportion, I cannot complain ofhaving had more than my share. In the case of everyquestion of political expediency, there appears to meroom for the consideration of times and seasons. Atoneperiod, under one set of circumstances, it may beproper to push, at another, and in other circumstances,to withhold our efforts ; but in the present instance,where the actual commission of guilt is in question, aman who fears God is not at liberty. Be persuadedthen that I shall never make this grand cause thesport of caprice, or sacrifice it to motives of politicalconvenience or personal feeling." " If," repliesDr. Currie, " you have still a hope of procuring anAbolition of the Slave Trade, it must be from yourtrust in God and not in man. The war will render1793. ABOLITION OF FOREIGN SLAVE TRADE. 23all attempts at discussing the subject vain ; andstrengthen the arguments against the Abolition longafter you and I are mouldering in our graves."All present attempts to carry a general vote of Abolitionbeing thus suspended, Mr. Wilberforce proposedsome restrictive regulations which might mitigate thepresent evils of the trade, and prepare for its entiresuppression.Upon the 14th of May he moved unsuccessfully forleave to bring in a bill which for a certain time shouldlimit and regulate the importations into our own colonies.On the same evening he proposed the prohibitionof the trade in slaves through which foreign colonieswere supplied by British merchants. This motionhe carried by a feeble majority of 41 to 34, but thebill which he brought in and long maintained againstthe vexati vous opposition of incessant postponements,was lost at last upon its third reading.These measures were planned and carried on in themidst of many interruptions. " Alas," he says, 19what a hurrying life I lead, with little time for seriousreflection ! " " Some serious thought this morning,and found the benefit of early rising, but it sadlywears my frame." The canal and other local businessof his great county consumed much time. SierraLeone was a constant source of trouble : the causes ofunnumbered private clients pressed upon his scantyleisure, while the general business of the House calledhis attention to the conduct of the war, the trial of'9 Journal, April 1G.24 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1793.Warren Hastings, and the question of reform in parliament." May 6th. 20 Parliamentary reform day.Came from Clapham after dinner sat late up tospeak in vain. 7th. Adjourned debate up severaltimes in vain to speak. Sat till half past four 282 to41, Pitt capital, but rather too far for me. 8th.Fagged from late sitting House and Sierra Leonehouse. 9th. Hastings' trial day so House late,11th. Up early, but tired and weak out on businessall morning." " Dr. H. miserable before the House ofCommons. Apsley's repartee ' Better one of Burke'sspeeches : as much abuse of French and more religion.' "He was engaged at this time in another most importanteffort. The renewal of the East India Company'scharter afforded him an opening for attemptingto improve the moral state of our Asiatic fellow-subjects.Since the reign of Anne a deep indifferenceto such attempts had settled upon the mind of thenation : he now attempted to arouse it from this longlethargy. After having " studied the subject withstrenuous and persevering diligence," and consultedlong and earnestly with the Archbishop of Canterbury,the Speaker, and his friend Charles Grant, hebrought the question forward in the House of Commonsupon the 14th of May, in the form of certainResolutions, which were agreed to in committee, andentered on the Journals. These Resolutions pledgedthe House in general terms, to the " peculiar andbounden duty of promoting by all just and prudent40 Diary.1793. PLAN FOR NATIONAL CHURCH IN INDIA. $means, the religious improvement" of the native Iideans. Two days afterwards he proposed specieresolutions for sending schoolmasters and chaplainthroughout India. To these Mr. Dundas had pnmisedhis support. " May 15th. East Indian Resolutionsin hand, and slave business, Lord Carhamptcabusing me as a madman. 17th. Through Godhelp got the East Indian Resolutions in quietly. Suiday, 19th. Scott morning. Cecil afternoon. Called iGrant's Miss More there. The hand of Providedwas never more visible than in this East Indian assaiWhat cause have I for gratitude, and trust, and humilation!" "'My time is contracted and my eyes bad, y<I must record the grace and goodness of God inenablinme to be the instrument of carrying through the EaiIndian clauses. Never was His overruling providencemore conspicuous than in the whole of this businessOh let me remember that Judas was used as an instrumentwith the rest of the twelve disciples, and themany will say, ' Have we not prophesied in Thy nameto whom He will answer, ' Depart from Me, ye workedof iniquity.' This affair gives me fresh occasion tdiscover the pride of my own heart. How properly iGrant affected ! yet let me take courage. It sis cGod's unmerited goodness that I am selected as thagent of usefulness. I see His overruling power. I g*o adore His wisdom and goodness, to humble myselfs tore Him, and to implore His forgiveness for Christ'dike. Amen." 2141 Journal.L. II. C26 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1793.During some following days he was absent from London.Upon the 22nd he " returned from Salt Hill(Eton Monte) by the middle of the day. EastIndian directors met and strongly reprobated myclauses." The effect of this opposition was soon seenin the altered tone which Mr. Dundas assumed.Upon " the 24th, House on the East India Bill : Iargued as strongly as I could, but too much in my ownstrength." " It is not meant," he said, ' to break upby violence existing institutions, and force our faithupon the natives of India ; but gravely, silently, andsystematically to prepare the way for the gradual diffusionof religious truth. Fraud and violence aredirectly repugnant to the genius and spirit of our holyfaith, and would frustrate all attempts for its diffusion.. . To reject this measure would be to declare tothe world that we are friends to Christianity, not becauseit is a revelation from heaven, nor even becauseit is conducive to the happiness of man, but only becauseit is the established religion of this country.In India we take equal care of Hindooism ; our enlargedminds disdain the narrow prejudices of the contractedvulgar ; like the ancient philosophers, we areled by considerations of expediency to profess thepopular faith, but we are happy in an opportunity ofshowing that we disbelieve it in our hearts and despiseit in our judgments. Beware how this opiniongoes abroad. Think not that the people of this laiwill long maintain a great church establishment from.motives of mere political expediency. For myself1793. HIS CLAUSES NOT SUPPORTED. 27value our established church as the means of preservingfor us and for our children the blessings of thetrue religion; and I well know that to spread sucha notion would be to inflict on it a fatal stroke."In spite of this appeal he lost all the practical partof the Resolutions he proposed. " My clauses thrownout Dundas most false and double ; but, poor fellow !much to be pitied." " The East India directors andproprietors," he tells Mr. Gisborne, " have triumphedall my clauses were last night struck out on thethird reading of the Bill, (with Dundas's consent ! !this is honours and our territories in Hindostan, twentymillions of people included, are left in the undisturbedand peaceable possession, and committed to the providentialprotection of Brama." "How mysterious,how humbling, are the dispensations of God's providence! " was his own private meditation. 22 " I see thatI closed with speaking of the East India clausesbeing carried, of which I have now to record thedefeat ; thrown out on the third reading by a littletumult in the court of proprietors. Oh may not thishave been because one so unworthy as I undertookthis hallowed cause, (Uzzah and the ark,) and carriedit on with so little true humility, faith, self-abasementand confidence in God through Christ ? Yet where canI go but to the blessed Jesus, Thou hast the wordsof eternal life I am no more worthy to be called Thyson ; yet receive me, and deliver me from all my hindrances,and by the power of Thy renewing grace,Journal.c 223 LIFE OP WILBERFORCE. 1793.render me meet to be a partaker of the inheritance ofthe saints in light."The general apathy with which his proposals werereceived, pained him deeply ; while he especiallycomplained that the bishops as a body gave him nosupport. Nor was it until he had thus fruitlesslyattempted to rouse the nation and the church to theirundoubted duty, that he turned, as a poor substitute, tovoluntary associations. Yet something had been done.The assertion of the general duty of attempting toevangelize the East, barren as it was for twenty years,remained upon the Journals of the House, and contradictedpublicly the profession of infidelity which wasmade this very year, in the person of our nation, atthe cotirt of China. " The English," declared LordMacartney, " never attempt to disturb or dispute theworship or tenets of others, &c. . . they come to Chinawith no such views . . they have no priests or chaplainswith them, as have other European nations, &c." 23A few extracts from his Diary mark his chiefemployments for the remainder of the session. " 25thMay. African Association Beauty's oasis, and JupiterAmmon; hse nugee, &c. Dined at E.'s routafterwards what extreme folly is all this ! yet muchentertained ; perhaps too volatile. 27th. Brought inForeign Slave Bi. 28th. Pitt's birth-day, 34.House till late, then dined Dundas's, and up too lateDuke of Buccleugh, Grenville, Chatham, Margrave,Steele, Ryder, Rose, Bashan, Apsley, Eliot,43 Lord Macartney's Journal, Oct. 21, 1793.1793. SESSION ENDS. 29Pitt. June 4th. To town busy about Slave Bill-drawingroom then dined at Pitt's. 5th. Exceedinglyhurried Slave Bill in Committee ; but put offagain. 7th. Very busy again all day then House tilleleven. American guarantee of French islands. 12th.Foreign Slave Bill thrown out : less consequencebecause we could not have carried it through theLords. Had written no notes to-day, 24 but relied onother business. 13th. Busy early then OrleansGallery, to which I have been going all the winterthen to Clapham, with Burgh, Thornton, and Heybusy on Report Jos Reformation Society. 14th.To town to the annual meeting of the ProclamationSociety. 18th. Slave Committee anti-saccharine.Had intended to go to Bath and taken lodgings,but put it off to see about Dowlin's affair ; on whichvery busy. 22nd. To Holwood with Pitt in hisphaeton early dinner and back to town. Discussionabout . Dowlin religion political character, &c.June 22nd till July 8th. Very busy about Dowlin'saffair reading over trials and drawing up a case,and pressing it in proper quarters. Dined one day atDundas's. Lady and great party. The conversationon natives of New South Wales, duels, &c. Ifelt strongly how little I was fit for these people, orthey for me ; (* What doest thou here, Elijah ?') but Iwent upon Dowlin's affair. Next morning had a longdiscussion with Dundas about it ; and on ecclesiasticalestablishments of England and Scotland, &c."4 To secure the attendance of friends.30 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1793.Yet in all this continual employment he maintaineda careful watch over his mind and spirit. M I havethis day* is one of his Sunday's entries, " beencommemorating the redeeming love of Christ. Maythis be to me the beginning of a new era." " Howhard do I find it to trust Christ for all ! Yet this isthat simple faith, that humble, child-like principle,which produces love, and peace, and joy. Oh let meseek it diligently whilst it is called to-day ! " " Howmuch do I yet want of the enlarged philanthropy andpurified affection (this consists in the love of holinessas such, and the hatred of sin as such in ourselves andothers) of the real Christian. I have been mixing\ a little with worldly people : and their pursuits andcares and joys do indeed seem most contemptible ; butit is not enough to see this, I should be filled also with^ the love of God and Christ, and of all mankind for Hissake, with a fixed desire to please Him and do all forHis glory."At length upon the 9th of July he got free fromLondon engagements, and set off for Bath. Hisjourney was somewhat impeded by the unusual warmthof the weather, and the day after his arrival, findingthe heat of Bath intense and being unable to get acountry lodging, he wrote to Mrs. H. More :My dear Madam,After having been detained day after day forabove a fortnight in or near London, I at lengthemerged with Mr. Venn on Tuesday last, and arrived1793. COWSLIP GREEN. 31here yesterday afternoon. The heat is such as torender the Bath waters a potation as little suited tohealth as pleasure, and unless the weather change, wemust withdraw from this roasting without and stewingwithin whilst we have strength to get away, and seeka more genial climate amongst the mountains of Wales.Meanwhile we cannot quit these parts without beinggratified, and I hope profited, by a survey of youroperations ; and therefore we propose, if it be convenient,to be with you tomorrow evening. Both Mr.Venn and I prefer being witnesses of your Sunday lecturebefore your week-day conventicles. You mustnot engage a pulpit for him, as all his sermons are inhis trunk and he does not extemporize before strangers ;but if his trunk arrives in time, he will put one or twosermons in his pocket, and perhaps you could get apulpit on short notice for the Rector of Clapham,M. A. though not for one of Miss Patty's lank-hairedfavourites. I am sure you will thank me for makingyou acquainted with so good and so agreeable a man.I am always very sincerely yours,W. Wilberforce."Sat. July 13th. The heat still intense thermometer87|, and the air still more balmy. Left Bathin the afternoon, and reached Cowslip Green late.Sunday, 14th. Off betimes for ' the round' with Vennand two Miss Mores. He preached at Abridgeand Cheddar wonderful scenes God is with them.Walked in the evening amongst Cheddar rocks with32 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1793.Venn, and home late. 15th and 16th. At CowslipGreen all day the heat moderated. 17th. Left MissMore's early on to old passage, where so cold thatwe had a fire. 15th. Crossed the Severn, and sleptat Must Ferry weather cold. 19th. Sent Venn onpony to Piercefield, and staid at Must Ferry all day."The next day he was established at Perry Mead,in the immediate neighbourhood of Bath, where heand Mr. Venn remained for about three weeks longer.Such society, and comparative retirement, he valuedhighly, and sought diligently to employ to his ownimprovement. " I have had," says his Diary, " Vennwith me near a fortnight ; he is heavenly-minded,and bent on his Master's work, affectionate to allaround him, and above all to Christ's people, as such :how low are my attainments ! Oh let me labour withredoubled diligence, to enter in at the strait gate.An indolent soothing religion will never support thesoul in the hour of death ; then nothing will buoyus up but the testimony of our conscience that we havefought the good fight. Help me, O Jesus, and byThy Spirit cleanse me from my pollutions ; give me adeeper abhorrence of sin ; let me press forward. Athousand gracious assurances stand forth in Christ'sgospel. I humbly pray to be enabled to attend moreto my secret devotions; to pray over Scripture, tointerlace thoughts of God and Christ, to be less volatile,more humble, and more bold for Christ. Sunday,Aug. 4th. Venn preached this morning at theAbbey church, where I had asked for the pulpit from1793. TO HANNAH MORE. 33Dr. Phillott. I more interested for his credit, alas !than his usefulness."During this stay at Bath, he began the execution ofhis long-cherished plan of addressing his countrymenon their estimate and practice of religious duty.Saturday, Aug. 3rd," he says, " I laid the firsttimbers of my tract." The Diary of this autumncontains frequent notices of its continuance ; andthough it was almost four years more before its publication,it was from this beginning that his " PracticalChristianity" arose.My dear Madam," he writes at this time to Mrs.H. More, " I have been designing to ask almost eversince I returned to Bath what books you have alreadygiven B., that I may know what to send him. I wishyou would be kind enough to give some little gratuitiesfor me to the teachers of such of the schools as Isaw, and to any of the young people whom you may thinkit useful to distinguish ; this little notice may animateand spur them on, and we all want such enliveners.Be kind enough to let me know how much you disposeof, that I may repay you. I rather think I shallgo over to R. next week, having a very kind invitation; can you give me any hints which might be usefulin directing me there. Is Lady T. or are any ofthe daughters at all seriously inclined, and which ?I am ever sincerely yours,W. Wilberforce."Aug. 14th. After dinner I set off for R. where Ic 334 LIFE OF Wilberforce. 1793.got at nine, but made nothing of it the first night.18th. The ladies all good-natured, but alas, I madenothing of it. Some talk with Y. but he not serious,and I perhaps too timid. I think Lady Y. has a feelingof religion. Music at night. How relaxing all thisis to the mind ! "It was certainly a peculiar task to which he wascalled. His rare conversational talents, once so greata snare, were now regarded as a means of fulfillingthose high functions for which Providence had markedhim out. With this view he entered into society,and in it he possessed a talisman, which even when hefailed in his purpose of doing good to others, kept hisown spirit from the benumbing influence of the enchantedscenes which he visited. " I fear I made nohand of it at R." he tells Mrs. H. More ; " nor do I think(to speak unaffectedly) that this was altogether myown fault, although I am fully sensible that I mighthave managed better. But though with Lord Y. Ihad some little serious conversation, (God grant thatthe seed may remain and spring up hereafter,) I hadno opportunity of any such intercourse with the others ;and I fear I seemed to them a gay, thoughtless being.My judgment prescribed cheerfulness, but perhaps mytemper seduced me into volatility. How difficult itis to be merry and wise ! yet I would hope that evenby this gaiety, though somewhat excessive, a favourableentrance may have been provided for religiousconversation, if any future opportunities of explanationshould occur, as I think they will. You see how1793. USE OF SOCIAL INTERCOURSE. 35honestly I open myself to you. But this is the resultneither of vanity nor emptiness, but because I reallywish you would perform that best office of friendship,advising me upon the subject in question, and tellingme whether I ought or ought not to endeavour toadopt a more staid and serious demeanour. It is veryuseful for the regulation of our practice, to know howour conduct has been understood; and if it shouldcome in your way to learn the impression produced bymine in the present instance, I should be glad to bemade acquainted with it. I was at R. but two days,yet I declare to you I found the luxurious, dissipatedway of going on so relaxing to my mind, that I felt itwould have been dangerous to stay longer withouta special call."Doubtful," he says at this time, " whether or notI ought to go to Windsor tomorrow to take the chanceof getting into conversation with some of the royalfamily. Lady E. may afford me the opportunity.Also I may do good to N. and H. Yet I distrustmyself; I fear my eye is not simple, nor supremelyset on God's glory in this scheme. Perhaps I shoulddo better to attend to my proper business, and this isSatan's artifice to draw me off. Yet on the otherhand, if any good is done it is great. I will pray toGod to direct me. Thought over the Windsor schemeand resolved against it."How little, alas ! in the six weeks that haveelapsed since I left this place," says his Journal on hisreturn to Battersea, " have I preserved a cordial love36 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1793.of heavenly things, a true relish of their enjoyment,or a practical sense of their value. This last week Ihope upon the whole has gone on rather better ; thatI have been more conversant with spiritual subjectsand more earnest in prayer. Yet what proofs do Ireceive of my readiness to enter into the pleasures ofdissipation when at such a house as Lord T.'s, whereit does not shock me by the broad stamp of vice ! Ohmay 1 by God's grace learn to be spiritually-minded,relishing the things of the Spirit, living a diligentand self-denying life so far as regard to my weaklyframe and social duties will allow."Blaming himself for having been of late less diligent,he resumed his plan of noting down the exactexpenditure of his time during the two months whichhe now spent at Battersea Rise. Here he describeshimself as " reading Butler, Barrow, Some Jenyns,and the Scriptures, and going on with tract, which Idiscussed with Cecil, who is now staying with me ;he strongly recommends it. Let me not lose theseopportunities of converse with such men as Vennand Cecil." " How many, how great, how almostunequalled," he says, on the recurrence of hisbirth-day, " have been my mercies ! how many andhow great my sins ! The good things I enjoy, of God'sproviding ; the evils I labour under, of my own. Letme press forward with all diligence, and may God forChrist's sake quicken me by His Spirit. I hope Ihave been more under the habitual fear of God, andyet how little do I live worthy of my high calling !1793. FRESH EXERTIONS FOR SLAVE TRADE. 37My time has been wasted ; let me labour to improvethe talents God has given me, and to use them for Hisglory."Abolition business now occupied much of his attention." Motley came to me and staid long discussing.I wished much to see him for Slave and connectedpurposes." To a friend whose zeal in this causehad been somewhat checked by the disgust withwhich he had heard of the revolutionary tenets avowedin the neighbouring town of Bradford by a leadingAbolitionist, he writes, " I am half affronted by yourmanner in speaking of the Slave Trade, and if eyesightwere as .plentiful a commodity with me as thespeaking faculty, I might scold you for it handsomely.However it is a subject upon which practically we cannever disagree. When you read the Sierra LeoneReport, you will find your old feelings respecting theSlave Trade refreshed. I cannot help considering thisunjust and cruel traffic as a weight which at this momentlies heavy on this country, and which, with ourconduct in the East Indies, may finally sink us, thoughlong spared by the mercy and forbearance of God."Lord Grenville and Mr. Pitt had " confidently-anticipated" that the House of Lords would enterdiligently upon the examination of the evidence whichthey had demanded on the Slave Trade. For this examinationit was of the greatest moment that theFriends of Abolition should be well provided, and whilstthere remained any prospect of it, he was diligent inmaking preparations.38 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1793.Upon the 23rd of August he wrote to the governorof Sierra Leone, urging him to forward the informationwhich the House of Lords required. " Youmust neither smile nor be angry' he says at the conclusionof a copious letter, " at my issuing these directionsfrom the quiet and security of my country study.I am fully aware of all the difficulty and danger whichmay attend their execution ; but as it is your part toact, so it is ours to speculate." The conduct of theAbolition question involved him at the same time inaless pleasing correspondence. It was no unusualthing for those who had rendered assistance to thecause he had so much at heart, to claim in return hisgood offices with the King's government. These hewas always ready to exert when he could do so withpropriety. But there were times when he was compelledby what was due to his own character todisappoint their expectations ; and in these cases theconclusion of the matter sometimes wore no veryamicable complexion. A single instance which occurredthis year illustrates his command of temper insuch circumstances. 25 Mr. Clarkson, whose devotionto the great cause of Abolition had been indefatigable,was desirous of procuring the promotion of his brother25 The reader is reminded here of what has been already said concerningthe obligation incumbent upon the'writers of this work, to exhibitthe true character of Mr. Wilberforce in his various relations. Uwould better have accorded with their feelings to have suppressed thiscorrespondence, and that which shortly follows ; but they could not esteemthemselves at liberty to withhold all mention of facts which throw somuch light upon the connexion which existed between Mr. Clarksonand Mr. Wilberforce.1793. Carson CORRESPONDENCE. 39to the rank of captain in the navy through the influenceof Mr. Wilberforce. That influence had beenexerted as far as it could be used by an independentman, but had been ineffectual. Under these circumstancesMr. Clarkson addressed to him a letter ofcomplaint, from which the following sentences areextracts :My opinion is that my Lord Chatham hasbehaved to my brother in a very scandalous manner,and that your own timidity has been the occasionof his miscarrying in his promotion."I think Lord C. may be said to have actedscandalously, &c. . . Yet, after all, my opinion is thatmy brother's miscarriage is to be attributed to yourown want of firmness. I can have no doubt but youhave frequently written to my Lord Chatham, andthis with singular zeal and warmth, on the subject, butyou have not, I apprehend, waited on him often, orinsisted on his promotion in strong language. He hastold you of difficulties, and you have been satisfied ;though other persons with infinitely less interest thanyourself have got promotions the next day. Willyou tell me that if you went to my Lord Chatham andinsisted upon it, it would not be done ? Will you saythat if Lord C. said to the Lords of the Admiralty,There are many members of parliament who have thisyoung man's promotion at heart,' that he could havebeen resisted? And yet you cannot command yourpoint. I never will believe, but that your own want offirmness is the true reason why my brother has notsucceeded before. You will observe that I give you40 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1793.credit for having a great desire of serving him, andperhaps for having even expressed yourself by letterin his behalf in a stronger way than for any otherman ; but letters will not do, and unless 'personal applicationsbe made you will not serve him."To these solicitations Mr. Wilberforce replied.TO THE REV. THOMAS Carson.Dear Sir,Your letter reached me when in the very actof leaving Bath; where, after paying a visit to afriend by the way, I arrived on Saturday evening. Ifind as usual an accumulation of packets, but yoursclaims the precedence ; and I sit down to reply to itwithout delay. To say I have read it without emotionwould be to go beyond the truth ; but certain it is,that the perusal of it has moved me less than mightperhaps have been expected. The fact is, I am used tosuch remonstrances. It is the mode wherein I amaccustomed to be addressed by people who, having forthemselves or their friends expected the favours ofgovernment in consequence of my solicitations, havehad their too sanguine hopes disappointed or deferred :they always, like you, seem rather to approve of one'sdelicacy in the general, but claim a dispensation fromit in their own particular instance. This is languageagainst which a man must arm himself who is resolvedto maintain his independence. I am always preparedto expect it, and though habit has not rendered me insensibleto its selfishness, it makes me hear it without1793. Carson CORRESPONDENCE. 41surprise ; and yet, to speak more correctly, I hadthought you in a good degree exempt from this commoninfirmity, and from the esteem and affection Ifeel for you, it is not without regret that I discover myerror. I am willing however to persuade myself thatyour tender solicitude for a beloved brother has beguiledyou into the adoption of sentiments which inyour cooler judgment you would be the first to condemn.I cannot argue the point with you at length, Ihave not leisure for this, and still less have I eyesight,for I need not say this is a letter wherein I cannotemploy my amanuensis : but I will suggest thoseprinciples on which I rest the propriety of my conduct; principles which seem for once to have escapedyour recollection.You acknowledge, ' you have no doubt of myhaving frequently written to my Lord Chatham,and this with singular zeal and warmth, on the subject.'Again, you ' give me credit for having a greatdesire for serving your brother, and perhaps for havingeven expressed myself by letter in his behalf in astronger way than I have done for any other man : 'but, ' I have not, you apprehend, waited upon himoften on the subject, or insisted on his promotion instrong language.' * It is my want of firmness which isthe true reason why your brother has not succeededbefore;' and, ' Will I tell you that if I had gone toLord Chatham and insisted on it, it would not bedone,' &c.Now need I enter into a regular argument to42 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE.prove the vicious nature of the principles on which allthis proceeds ? Principles which, however too muchacted upon and even sometimes avowed in the world,I must fairly tell you I abhor, have ever disclaimed,and will resolutely and systematically oppose and discountenance.I think it really will be enough for youto read such sentences hi the hand writing of anotherperson to become conscious of their real nature andcharacter. If indeed you saw me proceeding in thisway in other instances, if you saw me makingfavourite exceptions to my stricter rule, you mighthave reason to complain ; but you must, or at least youmay, know that the reverse is the fact, and that I haveadhered, as I will continue to adhere, to my ownsystem in the case of those with whom I am the mostnearly connected, or who most warmly support me inmy election struggles ; . . a species of obligation this,which according to the plan of making one's politicalsituation subservient to one's personal convenience,is held to convey a claim to a particular return. Toyour own mind let me appeal ; I am warranted in sodoing, not only by what I know of your general sentiments,but by what you say in this very letter, ofyour having been and your still being prevented fromasking any favour of this sort, lest it should seem,if granted, to have the appearance of a reward for yourown labours. Why are things thus to change theirnatures and their names accordingly as you or I arein question ? Why is that, which is in you proper delicacy,timidity and want of firmness in me ? Why are1794. Carson CORRESPONDENCE. 43you to have the monopoly of independence ? Is it lessvaluable to me than you, and less deserving of regardlesssuitable to my circumstances, less ornamental tomy character, less essential to my usefulness ? Consideringall the peculiarities of my condition and fortunes,is not this general duty of a public man moreurgent in mine than almost in any possible instance ;and how criminal should I be, if I were to truck andbarter away any personal influence I may possess withsome of the members of administration, which oughtto be preserved entire for opportunities of publicservice ?But I will enlarge no further on this topic. Letme assure you however, that strongly as I have condemnedsome parts of your letter, I am obliged to youfor the freedom with which you have spoken of myown conduct ; and though you say, ' I shall not considerit as at all serving my brother's promotion,' I believeyou do me the justice to think that it will not obstructit ; in truth I may make myself easy on this head,because had you not thought thus you would not havesent it, for it was not certainly to injure your brother'scause with me that you took up the pen, nor yet solelyfor the purpose of sowing dissensions between friends,or of wounding my feelings by an useless attack onthe conduct of those with whom I was living inhabitsof intimacy. Be this as it may, my line isclear ; I have, as you confess, your brother's promotionsincerely at heart, and I will exert myself for him asmuch as I think I ought, but I must neither be seduced44 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1793.nor piqued into doing more. I will say no more. Ihope I have not said too much : perhaps indeed Ishould have been less warm, if the attack had not beenmade on me in a quarter, where expecting only whatwas kind and affectionate, I had been the less armedagainst any thing of a hostile nature : but I wasprompted to write thus freely not only because Ithought it due to my own character, but because Iwished rather to discharge what was in my mind thanto let it smother in silence, as being less likely tointerrupt the cordiality of our connexion ; for unfeignedlydo I return your assurance of sincere esteem andregard. We have long acted together in the greatestcause which ever engaged the efforts of public men,and so I trust we shall continue to act with one heartand one hand, relieving our labours as hitherto withthe comforts of social intercourse. And notwithstandingwhat you say of your irreconcilable hostility to thepresent administration, and of my bigoted attachmentto them, I trust if our lives are spared, that after thefavourite wish of our hearts has been gratified by theAbolition of the Slave Trade, there may still bemany occasions on which we may co-operate for theglory of our Maker, and the improvement and happinessof our fellow-creatures.I remain, my dear Sir,very sincerely yours,W. WILBERFORCE.Battersea Rise, Aug. 19, 1793."1793. DIARY. 45His neighbourhood to London during this period ofthe recess, enabled him to see more of Mr. Pitt thanhad been lately possible ; and earnest were their discussionsupon public business, now that the spirit ofthat great man had risen to the exigencies of thosedifficult times. " To town 14th of September to seePitt a great map spread out before him." " 16th.To town on Admiralty business of my constituents.Dined t6 te-astute with Pitt he disengaging himself todoso much politics. Home at night. 18th. Totown on business. Pitt asked me to dine with LordG. Conway and grandees ; I pondered and, approving,went Dundas, Hawkesbury, Chatham, Grenville,Warrington, &c. Slept at Pitt's he verykind. 28th. Felt a strong disposition to go toWimbledon, where Pitt and Dundas are, but believingit vanity and idleness, resisted it. Oct. 11th. To townearly. Pitt's on 's affair then long 'discussion(Elgin) about the war' dined with him, and home atnight. 14th. Off for Holwood. Pitt and I t6te-a-tete he very open, and we discussed much."Even in his own severe judgment of himself, hedeemed the greater opportunities of reflection nowafforded him not wholly lost. " I am more seriously-mindedI hope than formerly." " I hope I have goneon rather better, that my humiliation is nowdeeper, my seriousness more abiding, and thatthrough God's grace my purposes of amendment willbe more permanent. May God strengthen me forChrist's sake. Oh that by any means I might learn to46 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1793.maintain a humble, watchful, self-denying, lovingframe of mind ; living above this world, lookingforward to a better, and having here fellowship withthe Father, and with His Son Jesus Christ."Upon the 22nd of October he left Battersea Riseto pay his annual visits at Yoxall Lodge and RothleyTemple ; and during the two months which he spentbetween them, was principally occupied in preparingthe materials for his work on ' Practical Christianity.'Fuller entries in his Journal mark thisseason of comparative leisure, and their altered toneshows in striking colours the increasing power ofreligion over his character.I feel," he says, " a deep conviction (mixed sometimeswith vague doubts of Christianity altogether,not solidly formed objections ; and I fly from them)that one thing is needful, and I humbly resolve toaim high. His strength is perfected in weakness.Oh tarry thou the Lord's leisure, &c. Labour andstrive earnestly. How unreasonable would it be formeto expect, after having lived so long a lukewarmlife, to experience at once the power and energy ofreligion. This scarcely ever happens. But God'spromises in Christ are yea and amen. They thatwait on the Lord shall renew their strength." " Ihave been praying with seriousness, and consideringthat the promises of grace, and repentance, and a newheart, and strength, and peace, and joy in believing,ure made to all that wait on God through Christ,and will be performed in spite of Satan's .RETURN TO TOWN. 47dances. Oh may I be the temple of the Holy Ghost.With what shame do I discover my worldly heartdesirous of gaining credit by my tract ! I have beenmore diligent and self-denying lately : I have foundthis morning the advantages of a little religioussolitude ; (I have prayed three quarters of an hour,for myself, my country, and friends, &c.;) let meseize proper occasions for it, and not make my Sundaysdays of hurry : solitude seems to give me overas it were from worldly to spiritual things."By the end of December he was again establishedin the neighbourhood of town, and was soon obligedto lay aside his tract for the ordinary business of hisLondon seasons. " Jan. 18th. Long political discussionwith Pitt on the King's speech. 20th. To townto dinner with Duncombe to confer with him aboutpolitics then called at Bankes'. 21st. To Grant'sto prepare for debate, and be uninterrupted Housetill very late. Feb. 3rd. House Pitt uncommonlyfine on armed nation, c." Finding manyhindrances to that "perfection," after which helonged, from the " troublous stage upon which I amnow entering, I proceed," he says, " to frame a kindof plan for a journal of my interior and exterior conduct,on which I propose almost daily to examinemyself with a view to progress in holiness, tendernessof conscience, and that watchfulness which my situationin life, so abundant in snares, particularly requires.This scheme is to be drawn up with a view to my mostbesetting sins and temptations." The results of these48 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1794.times of self-examination are regularly recorded in aplan which extends through this and the five succeedingyears; with such persevering diligence did hewatch over his heart, and so strictly pains-taking andpractical was his personal religion.He was soon engaged in parliamentary attendance ;and keeping aloof from party strife, regrets oftenthe violent work," and " acrimony of debate,"which characterized that stormy period. Though hestill supported administration, he was watchingeagerly every opening for peace ; and " witnessingwith deep solicitude, and not without some gloomyanticipations, the progress of the war." 26 He was everready in his place to maintain the cause of moralityand religion ; and took commonly a leading part inall discussions bearing upon these points. In thisyear, he supported a bill brought in by Mr. Main-waringfor promoting a stricter observance of theLord's day ; and his Diary notices, upon this occasion,Much sparring with Courteney."Early too in the session he was engaged inthe Abolition contest ; moving upon the 7th ofFebruary for leave to bring in a bill to suppress theForeign Trade. Although this measure left unrestrictedthe supply of our own islands, and could nottherefore impede their cultivation ; yet against itwas arrayed almost the whole force of the WestIndian interest. From this opposition, headed by SirWilliam Young, must be honourably excepted theeMS. Mem.1794. FOREIGN SLAVE BILL. 49names of Mr. Vaughan and Mr. Barham, whose argumentshowever found no favour with their colonial brethren.Though the measure was described by an influentialplanter, in a letter to its mover, as " a compromisewhich ought to attach every West Indian to you, andinduce them to support you in every future plan youmay propose ; " yet in every stage of its progress, itmet with their determined opposition. " The continuanceof the Foreign Slave Trade," argued one ofits supporters, " is essential from its magnitude to theexistence of the general trade." It is useless," continuedanother, " to abolish by legislation a trade which ofitself has already actually ceased." This oppositionwas part of a system of general resistance to theinterference of parliament with the arrangements oftheir private property.I do not dispute," wrote Mr. Dundas, whose supportMr. Wilberforce had endeavoured to secure by aprivate appeal, "that a great deal of very good reasoningcan be offered on the principles you state ; but I knowwith absolute certainty that the Bill will be consideredby the colonies as an encroachment upon their legislativerights, and they will not submit to it unlesscompelled. Upon this ground I have used all theinfluence I possess to prevent any question on the subjectbeing agitated, at least during the war. Myopinion does not prevail, and therefore the only thingto which I can reconcile myself is being perfectlyquiet on the subject ; and even to that I should feelit very difficult to reconcile myself, if I did notVOL. II. D50 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1794.believe that your Bill will not pass the House ofLords."With great personal labour Mr. Wilberforce succeededin carrying the Bill through the House of Commons,after four divisions upon its three readings andrecommitment. In the House of Lords on the secondreading ^ it was abandoned by the ordinary friends ofAbolition (Lord Stanhope alone remaining firm) tothe assaults of Lord Abingdon and the Duke ofClarence, and the second reading was postponed tillthat day three months. Lord Grenville consented todefer this first instalment in humanity until thegeneral measure should be adjusted. " He deems it,doubtless," writes Mr. Gisborne, " an e excess of zeal.'I have not forgiven him that expression I am excessivelyconcerned at the decision. This in truth ishonour, and a fair specimen of worldly-minded,political craft. I am the more disturbed, as I hadnot expected this blow after your original success,the extent of which had also amazed me. At allevents you have done your part, and let us hope that inthis, as in other instances which we can recollect, Providencewill bring real good out of seeming evil." " Asfor my Foreign Slave Bill," writes Mr. Wilberforceto Lord Lancaster, 28 " I have, I confess, no hopesof its getting through the Lords, yet I do not relishits being suffered to lie upon the shelf, and therefoream half vexed at Grenville. However in allthe disappointments of life of every kind, we must87 May 2. April 5.1794. DELAYS IN THE LORDS. 51learn to say f Thy will be done.' Every day's experienceserves more fully to convince me how little wecan foresee what is best for the success, even of ourown measures."The progress of the Lords in their examination ofthe general question could scarcely justify this deference.Upon the 10th of March they rejected a propositionmade by Bishop Horsley for referring toa select committee the examination of the neglectedwitnesses. In the House at large the business wascontinually deferred ; and it was not until the 6th ofMay, four days after the defeat of the Bill sent to themfrom the Commons, that they summoned to their bara single witness : two only were examined, and thesubject was entirely laid aside.The prospect of affairs out of Parliament was notmore encouraging. " The rising matters of Dawsonand Kimber," says his Diary, 29 " look foul." " Parliamentmeets again, and this awkward business ofKimber's is coming on, in which my life perhaps is atstake." Nor was it only by the violence of his opponentsthat his patience was tried. Many were thesources of annoyance which this cause furnished forits leader. Thus in the course of this spring he haddetermined, by a subscription amongst the adherentsof the Abolition, to reimburse Mr. Clarkson, whosebroken health compelled him to retire entirely fromthe contest in which he had taken hitherto so warm apart. The conduct of such a business must, underMarch 30.D 252 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1794.any circumstances, have proved distasteful to him ;and there were not wanting some aggravations peculiarto this case. How he conducted its details maybest be seen in a few extracts from the correspondenceit occasioned.By the post of to-day, my dear Wilberforce,"writes Lord Lancaster, 30 " I have received a letterfrom Clarkson, in which he tells me a subscription hasbeen opened to procure him the sum of 1500 bywayof reimbursement, &c. To the justice of thisproceeding I say nothing ; but its policy appears tomeopen to objection from the prevailing idea ofClarkson's prejudices, and the attempts made by ourenemies to colour the cause with those alarming principles.Clarkson tells me I am down in your list,and that it is your intention to apply to me. Theassurance, my dear friend, that it is your wish that myname should be among the rest is sufficient with me ;whatever Smith and Montague, &c. write their namesfor, I will do the same, and hope you will approveof this."My dear Lancaster, 31My eyes have been but poorly, and unusuallyexercised, and my time much occupied, or I wouldhave written sooner. With respect to Clarkson'sapplication, I meant to mention the matter to you,and have only been restrained by a certain feeling ofdelicacy. The truth is that he has expended a congoMay 9. 31 May 19.1794. SUBSCRIPTION FOR MR. Carson. 53miserable part of his little fortune, and though notperhaps very prudently or even necessarily, yet I think,judging liberally, that he who has sacrificed so muchtime, and strength, and talents, should not be sufferedto be out of pocket too. We should not look forinconsistent good qualities in the generality of men.Clarkson is ardent, earnest, and indefatigable, and wehave benefitted greatly from his exertions : economyand discretion are virtues not often associated withthose in which he excels, ergo, &c. My idea wasthat (however we may choose to phrase it these voluntaryaids are always the most compulsory things in theworld) there should be no register of names or sums :that the collection should be private, every man contributingwhat he might like, assured that it would neverbe known what he had contributed : that when thequantum sufficient should be obtained, the money shouldhave been lodged in the shape of a life annuity, andthe secretary of one of those bodies should have beentold to write Clarkson word, that a certain annuitydue to him appeared in the books of the society, andasking where and to whom he would have it paid.All my fine scheme is at an end. Understand thathe has not, and does not conceive he has any claimupon me ; so act according to your own judgment.I must leave off.Yours ever affectionately,W. Wilberforce.P. S. Saturday's debate dreadfully bitter, and truly54 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1794.disgusting to any mind the least tinged with theprinciple of Christian love. One face I shall neverforget (not Fox's) ' cruel his eye' he really mighthave sat for the picture. How different the apostle,Let all bitterness, and wrath, and clamour, and evilspeaking be put away from you, and be ye kind oneto another." 3During the course of the negociation he himselfheard from Mr. Clarkson : " Dear sir, can you sendme any news relative to Mr. Samuel Smith ; he promisedme he would give, if you signified your approbationof the thing. I should hardly like to leaveLondon till Mr. Smith has been canvassed ; you haveonly this one thing to do for me." In reply to hisapplication Mr. Smith reports to Mr. Wilberforcethat he has " placed 50 for this object to his creditwith his bankers," adding, " I should I confess havedone so with more pleasure, had Clarkson forborne tomix politics with the subject of the Slave Trade whenhe travelled through the country."I must stay somewhat later in town," Mr. Clark-sonagain writes, " at least ten days, and have only toentreat all the exertion you can give with convenienceto yourself in this time. You do not know what tendays may produce, particularly if we act together.There are some persons independently of those onyour list, to whom I mean to apply. . I do not pressyou to ask where you are not warranted, and thereforeshall say nothing more of Beauty or Belgrave. I1794'. SUBSCRIPTION FOR MR. Carson. 55think however you might do two things ; first, writeto Mr. W. Smith and press him to ask Currie ; second,write to Mr. Eliot ; third, write to Burgh anddesire his assistance. You can ask it, and if you doask it, it will be done. I have already written to himthree or four times, but he has never answered myletter ; he might perhaps think it wrong in me toapply to him : . he could both raise and remit sucha sum as 100 in ten days. If events turn out favourablythe whole business may be settled in a fortnightfrom this time." It was not much longer before thematter was completed, to Mr. Wilberforce's great relief.The session . meanwhile advanced, and he was inthe midst of hurry and turmoil ;" " never recollectingto have had so much business on his hands.Thank God I keep pretty well, though pulled downby my labours, and the unavoidable irregularity of myhours." 3 The effect of this necessary irregularity, inthe interruption of his times of devotion, is frequentlylamented in his Diary. " This last has been a morehurrying week from business than any one preceding.The House has kept me up late, and my devotions atnight have been curtailed. I seem to have felt theeffects of this all to-day, (Sunday,) in wandering anddistracted thoughts. I must try in this next week toget more time to myself for evening devotions, andlabour to pass through this world as a stranger. Whenlying awake last night how much more naturally didmy thoughts run on earthly than on heavenly objects."Letter to W. Hey Esq.56 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1794.What a world' he writes to Mr. Hey, 33 " is this ;and how different is the Christian life, how justly ahidden one ! Pray for me, my dear sir, that amidstall my bustle, my heart may be filled with the loveof Christ, and a desire to live to the glory of God."Yet though thus jealous of himself, he could not butperceive that his habits of self-government werestrengthened, and that his prayers were more lively ;whilst in every interval of pressing engagement hisJournal records, " seasons of fasting ;" " days ofpeculiar devotion, and receiving the sacrament :" andhours of prayer at large ; for God's mercy throughChrist ; for all Christian graces ; for all my schemes ;for the poor slaves ; Sierra Leone ; Indian missions ;home reform ; intercession for friends ; for help to beuseful to them ; for my country at this critical time ;and for grace to discharge all my duties aright"'His intercourse too with general society was markedby more constant watchfulness to do good to others,by his " preserving in it a more lively sense of God'spresence, and labouring to conciliate to religion, not torelinquish it, and assume a worldly character."Spent the evening at Mrs. A.'s declined playing atcards, (I had played there before,) but not austerely.""On' Wednesday with S. tried at a little talk. Ohthat my desires were really more active." " I havestaid here to try to do good to I. but how little am Ifit to preach to others ! " " Dined at Mrs. N.'s > totry to do her good, but I fear it did not answer. BetterApril 3.1794. PORTSMOUTH. 57to call." "Dined with Cecil he is a true Christian, thenearer he is approached the better he appears.'Breakfasted at W . Had some talk with I. Poorfellow ! not open enough to him, partly from hopingfor another opportunity, which did not occur." " AtS. all day extremely good tempered, pleasantpeople. This kind of society indisposes me sadly forreligious communion ; I either had not, or seized not,opportunities of religious conversation ; no good donetherefore by this visit, except in general, showingthat I have no tail, which to them well knownalready." " Dined at T.'s with Robinson of Leicester,Venn, and others ; yet nothing truly serious : acrowd is a crowd be it of whatever sort." " Dined atHampstead to meet Jay, (the American envoy,) hisson, &c. quite Americans sensible. I fear thereis little spirit of religion in America ; something ofFrench, tinctured with more than English simplicity ofmanners ; very pleasing, well-informed men. AmericanAbolition of Foreign Slave Trade." " My time isoften frittered away by my many acquaintances ; yetgood is sometimes done and county interest kept upby my being in or near London."Towards the end of this session he made a hasty excursionwith Mr. Grant and Mr. Henry Thornton tovisit the fleet then in Portsmouth harbour. " June25th. To Portsmouth and saw the Gamblers. 26th.Rowed in a revenue boat to the prizes ; then to Spithead(firing grand). The Queen and Defence, wherepleasing confabulation with Gambier then valiantD 358 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1794.Captain Prince, where ate then Queen, where dinedsea scene officers civil afterwards got off when theladies did saw the ship marine officers and sailorscharacteristic manners. Rowed to Haslar hospital,where saw our poor wounded Gambier well spoken of.Terrible appearance of the men blown up. Home andGambier's. Portsmouth point wickedness and blasphemyabounds shocking scene. 27th. To Mortonprison, where much talk with French prisoners ; truedemocrats ; saw their wounded and then off towardsLondon," to be present in the House until the conclusionof the session.In these last debates he observed with pain thatMr. Pitt seemed more averse from peace than in theearlier part of the year. " July 10th. To the HouseSheridan, Grey, &c. Pitt much too strong forwar." On the day following parliament was prorogued,and his dissatisfaction could therefore for thepresent lead only to private remonstrance ; but it wasan omen of that public opposition to which he felthimself compelled to resort at the commencement ofthe following session.CHAPTER XI.Wilberforce preparing his religious work Summer spent atTeston and Yoxall Lodge Returns to town Opposes theAddress Pitt's temporary alienation Displeasure of hisfriends and constituents Letter from Dr. Burgh, &c.Abolition negatived Allowance to princes Second motionfor peace Grounds of Pitt's opposition Personal sentimentsTour in Yorkshire Pitt's letter, professing agreementabout peace.His parliamentary attendance being thus suspended,I now mean," he says, 1 " to enter upon my summerplan of steady reading, and, in particular, to resumemy tract, which may well take me all the recess.Began thinking of it to-day. Being pressed to go toCamels I wrote plainly that I wished for quietthought. They take it very kindly and let me off.Apsley, &c. to be there. I Want to resume my work ingood earnest ; and think of retiring, if I can, for a littlequiet. I propose to go to Betchworth. To Holwooddined tete-astute with Pitt, and political discussionEliot and his child came in the evening. 15th. Pittwent early to town. I staid and discussed with Eliot1 Journal, July 12.60 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1794.about my tract to little purpose. Dined with hislittle girl, &c. Afternoon, walked and read. Wednesday.At Holwood all day, and much the same asyesterday. Quiet, comfortable, and ,1 hope usefulafter all my bustle."TO LORD Lancaster.Holwood.My dear Lancaster,I am spending a day or two here with Eliot.Our tete-astute is only interrupted by his little girl,who has had a fever, but who (I know you will hear itwith pleasure) is now recovering. I am meditatingthe resumption of the task I discontinued last autumn,and concerning which I formerly spoke to you. If Ican get a little quiet I may proceed. As for politics,I will not enter on them. Pitt's speech, both fromthe treasury bench and the throne, was too pugnaciousfor me. It required our friend Hawkins Brown'snerves and warlike propensities to bear it. May Godprotect us. . . Then all these changes ! It really amusesme, though I fear there is a noble personage not manymiles from hence, at Beckenham, who does not lookon them with such philosophic indifference. Adieu,adieu, my dear Lancaster. Kind remembrances toLady Lancaster.I am ever yours,W. WILBERFORCE."1794. PRACTICAL CHRISTIANITY. 61On Thursday, 17th, after dinner I set off forBetchworth, and reaching it at night, began nextmorning thinking in earnest about my tract." " Herefor the first time I have got a little quiet, and haveresumed my work diligently ; yet I doubt whether Ican do any thing worth publishing. Henry Thornton,Venn, and Parish came to me on different daysfor discussion about it. I cannot receive their ideas,and get no benefit from them. I begin to think thathelp must come either from thinking over a subjecttogether, or criticizing one's productions when done.27th, Sunday. Quiet all day, and a serious Sunday,in which I found solitude useful and comfortable."From Betchworth he removed after a few days toTeston ; and though rejoicing in its " retirement," complainsof " slow progress " in his work. " Not havingyet completed my arrangement, I stare at my subjectinstead of closing with it. Surely it is impossible tobe under better circumstances for exertion if indeedI had a little more pleasant society it might be astimulus. Read Tom Paine's ' Age of Reason ' Goddefend us from such poison. A long walk this eveningby myself. To-day I have got on better atwork all morning about an arrangement. I find thatthough ever so temperate I cannot work well in theevening ; miscellaneous reading, therefore, at thattime Swift, Voltaire's Louis XIV. Vicar of Wakefield,newspapers and letters, Idler and Rambler."I am going on," he writes to Mr. Hey, " with thework lately mentioned to you, a sort of protest against02 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1794.the religion of the higher and, indeed, of the middlingorders ; very slowly however, partly I think fromnatural inability for such a work, and utter disuse,and partly from being unable to keep myself entirefor this sole concern, though I make it the standingorder of the day. How striking are the events ofwhich the last newspapers inform us ! not that theysurprise me ; they are the natural consequences of arepublican government, in the case of a country suchas France in numbers and morals, and seated in acity containing five or six hundred thousand inhabitants.How thankful ought we to be for the unparalleledmercies we enjoy ! It makes one shudder toread Barren's speeches. May God yet spare us."The preparation of his work formed his main occupationduring the whole of this recess, which wasspent, after leaving Teston upon the 2nd of September,at Milford ; and latterly at Yoxall Lodge.TO LORD Lancaster.Yoxall Lodge, Nov. 3.My dear Lancaster,I have been here but about ten days, andmean after a short stay to repair to London. Am Inever again to hear from you ? I really have been forsome time looking out for your superscription, andam wearied of looking to no purpose. I am nowdoubtful where I must direct to you, and not knowingbut this may lie at Lancaster, I shall confine1794. TO LORD Nunc ASTER. . 63myself to a few short words. I principally want toask you whether you mean to be in town at themeeting. I shall be glad to see you again, thoughon but a mournful occasion. For my own part, I amat present very doubtful whether I can persist in thesystem we have hitherto pursued, and little as onecould hope for a secure peace with such a set of fellowsas the French conventionalities, or rather withFrance a republic, of which Paris is the seat ofgovernment, yet I begin to think we can look for nogood from the prosecution of the war ; and if so, itis time to stop for a while the ravages of that scourgeof the human species. I own my political horizon ismuch clouded, though it would be better, if it werenot for that thoughtlessness of God and His providence,which so generally prevails through the upperclasses of society.A French Abbe 2 who, poor fellow, was a man offortune when Pitt, Eliot, and I were abroad, has latelyescaped, after being hunted for a year and a half, bythe committee of safety, through thirty departments,and is now come to London. I want to see and talkwith him. I understand he says only the Frenchcan conquer the French, and concluded one of hisspeeches with ' Dieu vous garde, messieurs, d'unerevolution.' Duncombe informed me of your beingat Congreve. I wished myself between you.Ever affectionately yours,W. Wilberforce."The Abbe De Laggard.64 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1794.At Yoxall Lodge, upon November 8th, " I leftoff," he says, 3 " my tract till next year, and began toapply to politics." After a short and pleasant visitto Lord Narrowly at Canton, " where I found Rydernot strong about the war, but yielding to direction,"he left Yoxall Lodge for town, and arrived at King'sArms Yard, upon the 18th of November. "Discussedpolitics with H. Thornton and Grant. 19th.Off at ten to Pitt's heard that parliament would beprorogued until December 30th, giving me time tomake up my mind strongly at present disposed topeace. Talked much politics with Gisborne, whoquite agrees with me. Threw out some hints of tinystate of mind, and accepted Pitt's invitation to dine.Party of friends no general politics. Conversationon the pending trials (of Home Tooke, &c.) for hightreason. 21st. To dine Ryder's Grenville, Pitt,Steele, Lord Camden, &c. very friendly. 27th. Totown to breakfast with Pitt and discuss politics."Dined at Samuel Hare's Jay, 4 Hope, (his millionhardly seems to raise him,) Mrs. Knowles, &c. Talkwith Mrs. Knowles about Quakerism, &c. Godwintold her he was himself an atheist."He was now giving his whole attention to the state ofpublic affairs, and the important question of the continuanceof the French war. Most soberly and gravelydid he enter upon this important question, seeking firstearnestly for direction from on high, and then endeavouringto form his own opinions upon the fullest3 Diary. * Mr. John Jay, ambassador from the United States.1794. PREPARATION FOR THE SESSION. 65information and most careful reflection. " I mean toset aside a day this week for fasting and religiousexercises ; for seeking God and praying for politicaldirection, for a blessing on my parliamentary labours,on my country, and on those who have specially desiredmy prayers. May God for Christ's sake enable me toseek in all things to please Him, and submit to Hiswill to repress vanity, cultivate humility, constantself-examination think of death of saints in pasttimes." " I find that I must as little as is really rightask people to Battersea Rise to stay all night, as itrobs and impoverishes the next morning. I had meantthis for a fast day, but it has been broken in upon inthis way. I refused to go to the Wilderness, wherePitt and the rest are, to keep quiet ; yet in this wayI lose my time, and find indeed that less is done atBattersea Rise than elsewhere, though more rationalconversation on matters of business actually depending."" To town, and dined at Palace Yard tete-tetewith Jay heard openly his opinion in politicsa friend to peace many American war anecdotes.Then at nine, Pitt's for political discussion till nearone, and not bed till near two. Head and mindfull, and could sleep but very disturbed." " I ammaking up my mind cautiously and maturely, 5 andtherefore slowly, as to the best conduct to be observedby Great Britain in the present critical emergency.Oh that there were in our rulers more of a dispositionto recognise the hand of Him who inflicts these chas-letterto W. Hey Esq.66 LIFE OF Wilberforce. 1794.tenements ! ' This people turneth not to Him thatsmith them, neither do they fear Me, saith theLord is but too applicable, I fear, to the bulk ; yet,I trust and believe, that we shall not be given overinto the hands of our enemies. I beg your earnestprayers, my dear sir-for my direction and support."To the early friend whose inflexible independencehe most highly valued, he wrote as follows :TO HENRY BANKES ESQ.My dear Bankes,I have often found much comfort, and I hopesome advantage, from consulting with you on politics,and we seem to have agreed in the main, both beforethe war broke out and since. There never was atime when I more wished to deliberate maturely, andtake the advice of impartial friends, than at present ;and therefore I take up my pen to say, that if you wouldbe in London a day or two before the meeting, it mightafford us the opportunity of talking the matter overfully before we should be called to pledge ourselves tothe Address. From what I collect on this subjectPitt's ideas are as warlike as ever. I allowmuch to the argument that any peace we couldmake with a French republic would be insecure,and require an immense peace establishment, &c. :but then I see no grounds to hope for a better issuefrom prosecuting the war. There appears to me,humanly speaking, no probability of a limited mon31794. TO HENRY BANKES ESQ. 67archly being established in France by means of it.I am inclined to believe it might be our best plan todeclare our willingness to make peace on equitableterms ; and for my own part I should make no difficultyabout giving up all our conquests ; but as to thisvile Corsica, I do not know how to act. We cannotsurrender it to the tender mercies of the French. Iam in hopes the Dutch will make peace with France,which will be a fair divorce, and then if ever I consentto a reunion it will be my own fault. Let me knowwhat you think. Remember, all the French know ofthe intentions of Great Britain is from our declarations,and from Pitt's speeches, and these have beenuniformly point-blank against any accommodationwith the existing system of government in France, orinother words, against a republic. Therefore unlesswe make some new declaration, they can have no ideabut that we mean to fight against the republic usquead internecine. I would gladly get an end put tothis war without Pitt's being turned out of office,which will hardly be possible I fear if it continuemuch longer. Much however as this weighs with me,and that not merely on private grounds, the otherobvious considerations are far more important. Iam quite sick I own of such a scene of havoc andmisery, and unless I am quite clear I shall not darevote for its continuance. With every friendly wish Iam always affectionately yours,W. Wilberforce."68 LIFE OF Wilberforce. 1794.Dec. 26th. Much political talk with Grant andH. Thornton, making up my mind. 27th. Muchagain in political talk." His mind was at lengthdecided. The more settled aspect of affairs in Francesince the fall of Robespierre gave him some hopes ofthe possibility of an accommodation, and peace hedeemed so inestimable a blessing that no possibleopening for restoring it should be neglected. " Dec.29th. To town. Dined Palace Yard Duncombe,Mun caster, H. Thornton, Bankes, Montague ; talkedpolitics agreed that I would amend."It was not merely his unwillingness to join inan open opposition to his early friend, which madehim slow and cautious in arriving at this conclusion.There were other considerations which weighedeven more strongly with him than the personalsuffering with which his course must be attended.He could not take this ground without giving somecountenance to a violent and unprincipled opposition,who had throughout condemned the war with allthe asperity of party feeling. He feared too thathe might increase the popular ferment which, whereverrevolutionary principles had been actually disseminated,was ready to burst forth into open violence.He knew, moreover, that he could not hope to carrywith him the mass of sober and well-affectedpeople. They still thought the war necessary, andregarded all opposition to it as the effects of someRabbinical tendency, or party motive. All theseobjections to his course he had well considered ; but1794. RESOLVES TO MOVE FOR PEACE. 69having made up his mind to the line of duty, he had-courageto face them boldly. " Parliament, he says," 6meets on Tuesday. I am going to London tomorrow,and I am too little fortified for that scene of distractionand dissipation, into which I am about to enter ;perhaps my differing from Pitt, by lessening mypopularity and showing me my comparative insignificance,may not be bad for me in spiritual things. Iwould now humbly resolve to begin a stricter course,as becomes me on entering a scene of increasedtemptations self-denial, attention, love to all, andgood for evil ; in particular to bear with kindnessthe slights and sarcasms I must expect from politicalcauses. Oh may God enable me to walk more byfaith, and less by sight ; to see the things that areunseen. Oh may He fill my heart with true contrition,abiding humility, firm resolution in holiness,and love to Him and to my fellow-creatures. I go topray to Him, as I have often done, to direct me rightin politics, and above all to renew my heart. It is aproof to me of my secret ambition, that though Iforesee how much I shall suffer in my feelingsthroughout from differing from Pitt, and how indifferenta figure I shall most likely make ; yet thatmotives of ambition will insinuate themselves. Giveme, O Lord, a true sense of the comparative value ofearthly and of heavenly things ; this will render mesober-minded, and fix my affections on things above.Tuesday the 30th of December. A disturbed8 Journal.70 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1794.night full of ambition. How small things confoundhuman pride ! why not such small things God'sagents as much as locusts ? worse this morning. PreparedAmendment at Bankes's. Moved it in a veryincoherent speech ; good arguments, but all in heapsfor want of preparation ; had no plan whatever whenI rose." The Amendment was seconded by hiscolleague Mr. Duncombe, who was followed by Mr.Bankes; and though supported by many who hadhitherto voted with the minister, it was negatived by alarge majority. He moved it indeed under peculiardisadvantages ; fearful on the one hand of excitingpopular discontent, he was guarded and measured inhis own statements ; whilst on the other, he was"forced to adopt an Amendment stronger than hehimself liked, by the violent language of the government.We are in a very alarming state, the honestmen so obstinate, the others so active and dangerous."7 " 31st. Walked with T. Steele, &c. allmore candid to me than I could expect. Jan. 1st,1795. Politics rush into my mind when I wakein the night, and prevent my getting to sleep again.To the Lock head full of politics. I had intendedthis for a day of more than usual seriousness, butmuch wasted." Upon the 26th, on a motion forpeace made by Mr. Grey, he again declared hissentiments, and voted with the opposition. " Totown on Grey's motion spoke wellup in the Housetill half-past five."Letter to W. Hey Esq.1795. PITT'S TEMPORARY ESTRANGEMENT. 71The painful consequences which he had foreseen,had attended his conscientious determination. It waswith no ordinary feelings of annoyance that the ministerhad seen him propose an Amendment to the Address.There were indeed but two events in thepublic life of Mr. Pitt, which were able to disturb hissleep the mutiny at the More, and the first openopposition of Mr. Wilberforce ; and he himself sharedlargely in these painful feelings. He had livedhitherto in habits of such unrestrained intimacy withthat great man, he entertained towards him so heartyan affection, and the spring of his life had been socheered by his friendship, that it was with bitter regrethe saw the clouds begin to gather which were tocast a comparative gloom and dullness over theirfuture intercourse. " No one," he wrote many yearsafterwards, 8 with a warmth derived from his keenremembrance of his feelings at this time, " no onewho has not seen a good deal of public life, and felthow difficult and painful it is to differ widely fromthose with whom you wish to agree, can judge at whatan expense of feeling such duties are performed."Wednesday, Feb. 4th. Dined," he says, " at LordCamden's Pepper and Lady Arden, Steele, &c. Ifelt queer, and all day out of spirits wrong, but hurtby the idea of Pitt's alienation. 12th. Party of theold firm at the Speaker's; I not there."Nor was this the only painful circumstance attendanton his present course. He promoted overturesTo Archdeacon Wrangham, December 20, 1820.72 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1795.for peace, amongst other reasons, because he foresawthat the war must ultimately become unpopular,and then that Mr. Pitt's administration " would besucceeded by a faction, who knew that they hadforced themselves into the Cabinet ; and feeling thatthey had no footing at St. James's, would seek it inSt. Giles's." It was not therefore without pain that hefound himself repeatedly dividing with this very party,and heard Mr. Fox, in a friendly visit which he paidhim at this time, express a confident expectation ofhis speedy enrolment in their ranks " You will soonsee that you must join us altogether." For thoughhe loved the frank and kindly temper of this greatman, and though he duly honoured his steady supportof the Abolition of the Slave Trade, he regarded hispublic principles with a settled disapprobation, whichwas never stronger than at this very moment. Thesame reasons also which led the opposition party toclaim him as their own, rendered him suspected bythe bulk of sober-minded men. " Your friend Mr.Wilberforce," said Mr. Windham to Lady Spencer,will be very happy any morning to hand your Ladyshipto the guillotine." And others less violent thanMr. Windham partook in a great measure of the samesuspicions. " When I first went to the levee aftermoving my Amendment, the King cut me." " Mr.Wilberforce is a very respectable gentleman," saidBurke to Mr. Pitt, " but he is not the people ofEngland." He was well aware himself, that thecountry was not generally with him. " It is not yet1795. THE COUNTRY AGAINST HIM. 73ripe," he wrote this spring to a friend, who asked ifhe should endeavour to get up petitions for a peace,for the measure of petitioning, which would thereforedo more harm than good. If I thought that the bulkof the middle class throughout the nation was againstthe continuance of the war, the effect of their interferencein stopping it might more than compensatefor the great evil of exciting a spirit of discontent.But it is not so yet." 9 Though their strong personalregard for him kept his constituents silent, he wellknew that they disliked the course his conscience ledhim to pursue.In this respect indeed he was exposed to difficultieswhich no party man can properly appreciate ; for a partyman is always immediately surrounded by those whoagree with him, and in their good opinion he can entrenchhimself. But the politician who truly thinksfor himself, and takes his own stand, must be assailedwith unwelcome judgments on every side. Thus whilstat this very time he generally offended the partisans ofadministration by his Amendment upon the King'sSpeech : 10 by supporting the supply of due resources tocarry on the war vigorously, if it must continue, and by9 If the able author of " The Doctor " shall ever be pleased to throw offhis incognito, the writers of these volumes doubt not that they shall beable to convince him, that he has attributed to Mr. Pitt an expressionreally at variance with his settled estimate of Mr. Wilberforce's character.Indeed his conduct on the present occasion shows how far he wagfrom acting with an eye to the peculiarities of any of his adherents. Hewas not afraid of differing from them ; and when he agreed with them,it was because he had himself given a direction to their sentiments.M> Jan. 2.VOL. II. E74 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1795-defending the suspension of the Habeas Corpus act, 11 heequally irritated opposition. " The opposition," wroteDr. Milner, " will rejoice either in getting you. virtuallyto their side, or in ruining you in the public opinion ;and further, say or think what you will, I am sure it willnot be long before there will be a coldness betweenyou and government. Both opposition and your disgustedfriends of administration are inclined to admita notion that you are endeavouring to raise a consequentialparty of your own, and on that score bothsides will concur in having a fling at you." " Many,"wrote Mr. Robinson from Leicester, " exulted at yoursupposed desertion of your old friend, but in theirhaste they concluded too much, expecting that youwould go all lengths with a factious opposition. Withthese persons, however, you have lost all credit fromyour subsequent conduct, and are now condemned bythem as an apostate."These trials were increased in his case by the expresseddisagreement of almost all those personalfriends with whom he most freely communicated uponpolitical questions, and by the concurrent accountsthey forwarded him from different parts of thecountry of the disapprobation of his conduct generallyfelt by sober-minded men. " I do not perceive,"wrote the Dean of Carlisle before the meetingof parliament, " the nature of the opposition to Pittwhich you are likely to make. Weigh it well, mydear friend. I hope you will not prove a dupe to the11 Jan. 5.1795. DISTRESS OF HIS FRIENDS. 75dishonest opposition, who will be glad to make use ofyou in hunting down Pitt, and for no other purpose.All will not he so sincere as you will be ; nor will theybe proof against the artifices of Fox, Sheridan, &c.You may I see clearly raise a phalanx, but it may turnoutthat you will not be able to direct its motions. Ispeak plainly, because I wish well to the country andlove you personally." "I think indeed," he wroteagain upon the 4th of January, " that you are in a verycritical situation, both as to the general good or badeffect which your conduct may produce in nationalaffairs, and also in regard to the judgment which willbe formed of you personally. On Friday night I readover the debates, and I can truly say I never wasso much concerned about politics in my life ; I wasquite low, and so I continue. There was not any oneof the speeches that I liked. In the first place, Inever conceived that you had intended to take so decideda part in this business as to lead the oppositionagainst Pitt. There is not the slightest doubt butyou will be represented as having gone over to theopposition, nor will it be easy to do away the impression; for, 1st, You opposed government in thegreat question of peace or war. 2nd, You made themotion. 3rd, The opposition approved of it and hailedthe accession of their new forces. . I wish I may bemistaken, yet as I understand your Amendment andthe consequent division, it will certainly tend to weakenthe government and divide the sentiments of thecountry, to strengthen a factious opposition, and toE 276 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1795.encourage the French convention. These things, Isay, are certain," &c. " Let it be but supposed thatyou are against the war, that you are for peaceand your name and authority is made use of to amuch greater extent than you ever intended. Thepart you take is of great consequence." " I am verylow about public affairs, and am looking for somethingmore tremendous. The prospect is constantly beforeme. We ought, every one for himself, to make hasteand keep His commandments."Nor was the account he gave of the opinions formedby others much more encouraging. " The bulk ofpeople think you are doing a great deal of mischief.A very few, who know your sincerity andthink pretty closely, believe that you may be doing agreat deal of good, by drawing the minister to hissenses and hastening peace. But even these are notwithout doubts. It is an intricate and thorny business.The sentiments of your constituents through theWest Riding respecting the part you have taken inparliament I have had some opportunity of learning,and I am sorry to say, that excepting a few notoriousdemocrats, I have not met with a single person whodoes not disapprove your conduct. Mr. Sheepskinsa principal clergyman at Leeds, of good character,extensive connexions, and of popular talents, tells methat you have stood high with the manufacturers, youhave managed all their business to their satisfaction ;but that they differ from you on these late questions,and think you wrong ; in short, that if it had1795. IMPORTANCE OF HIS DECISION. 77been possible for you to have ruined yourself withyour friends at Leeds, you have taken the way todoit. The same sentiments pervade the mostsensible people in all these parts, (Carlisle,) thedemocrats still excepted." From Cambridge hewrites again, " I pray God bless you for writing me soaffectionate a letter. I wish that you should learnfrom others, rather than from myself, how vehementlyI have defended you from the attacks of Dr. Kipling,Jowett, Turner, &c. ; some of whom hold that youhave done the country much more harm than anydefeat could do. H.'s conduct is imputed to personaldisappointment, and as he wants weight of character,they have no mercy on him. It is now more thanever before in your life, that the consequence andforce of your independence is felt." So too wroteDr. Burgh, to whose manly and impartial judgmenthe was accustomed to yield much attention.My opinion does not concur with yours. On whateverside I look I tremble, but above all evils I mostdeprecate a peace, in whatever form the presentmoment could obtain it. Even our wretched andcalamitous war is comparatively speaking a stateof security and quiet. We must fight till we canfairly lay our arms aside, or compound for afate similar to that of Holland. There is no moredangerous error than results from a man's ignoranceof his own consequence. I remember whenSir Joseph Yates was censured for leaving the King'sBench, where he had counterpoised Lord LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1795.field, he excused himself by declaring he had neverknown his own consequence, or he would not havedone so. You shall no more he ignorant of yours. Iintroduce you to it. The eyes of the country are uponyou, and look to your sentiments as a rule for theirown. I have seen your authority weigh in minds thatbefore considered every merit of the question to be onthe other side. Is not this a reason for pausing andtrembling over every step you advance ? The hour oftaxation is at hand ; think then to what deep and dangerousdiscontent your opposition may give not risealone but sanction. That you, surmounting the partialitiesof friendship, and unswayed by the argumentssupposed to be agitated in private communications,should yet resist the minister whom you respect andlove, will be, nay is, deemed an arraignment of hismeasures so potent, that men whose modesty wouldobviate the force of objections rising in their ownminds, and impute them rather to ignorance and defectiveopportunity, now resort to your judgment, andconsider themselves possessed of an authority sufficientto warrant their most severe suggestions. Factionbegins to claim you ; you are quoted, and are growinginto the subject of panegyric. It is of infinite importancethat you should not appear to the country as aleader of opposition; it affords a strength to them whichI am sure you do not desire to contribute. The painsthat are taken in this part of the country to procurepetitions to parliament for a speedy peace, are hardlyto be imagined ; and your name is the constant authorMR. PITT'S PARTISANS. 79city on which the propriety of such a proceeding issupported. In proportion to the appearance of yourattachment to opposition, will the attachment of thosewho adhere to administration relax towards you.Strange as it may sound, it is not so much the warthat is in the mind of many of its supporters, as theindividual person of Mr. Pitt. Though they like not hisnew connexions, yet still they attach themselves to him,and do not love to see him opposed ; they look to a dayof division, keep him distinct in their eye, and mark himas boys do a particular beast in Smithfield which theymean to drive out of a herd : and oh would they onlygive him chace, with what delight would I join in it,till we had got him to the greatest possible distance fromthe black cattle with which he is mingled now ; andthen, when caught and confined to his former solitude,we should acknowledge, revere, and confide in ourApis again. Here you may indeed stand forward asthe benefactor of your country. If his new associatesmust have their dividends, let them take theemoluments of office, but do you urge him to themaintenance of that control and monopoly of administrationwith which he benefited the country atthe head of his natural friends. It is not from thefriends of his co-ordinates that he will ever receivesincere support. No, I speak from the specimen beforeme, the old adherents of Wentworth House havenot now with their leader changed their note, but arein general high talkers against the war, continuing toarraign it, as if the fellow who first slit their tongues80 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1795.had not lately assumed the appearance of instructingthem in another language." To the same effectwrote Mr. Hey from Leeds, though, before the warbroke out, his earnestness against it had led him toexclaim, " What a world we live in ! The nations areagitated like poor Calabria. When they will rest inquietness He only knows who knows all things. Myearnest prayer for our own favoured but ungratefulland is, Give peace in our own time, O Lord." Yetnow so convinced was he of the necessity of continuingthe war, that he sent Mr. Wilberforce the most earnestexpostulations upon his present conduct. So general,and sometimes so strong, was this feeling, that " inone family of my most zealous partisans," he says,when I visited Yorkshire even as late as the middleof the summer, the ladies would scarcely speak to me."Yet none of these things moved him. The trialwas indeed severe, but it did not shake his constancy ;he calmly and steadily adhered to what he saw to betheline of duty, neither deterred by opposition, norpiqued by unmerited reproach into irritation or excess.Upon the 6th of February, whilst he declaredhis disapprobation of its more violent expressions, heagain supported so much of Mr. Grey's motion astended to promote immediate pacification; and throughoutthe session he favoured every similar attempt.During this anxious time he frequently laments theinjurious effects upon his spirit, of a life of suchconstant occupation, and shows the watchful care withwhich he strove to mitigate the evils he detected.1795. JOURNAL. 81Though I have been interrupted' he writes atBattersea Rise, " by Eliot's coming, having designedto devote this evening chiefly to religious exercises,(my own fault still that I have not,) yet this is solitudecompared with London ; and how serious a thingit is to look into one's own heart, to think of heavenand hell and eternity ! How cold am I, to be ableto think of these subjects with little emotion ! Excitein me, O God, more lively sensations, and enable meto awake to righteousness. The seriousness of spiritI now feel seems favoured by this solitude, and Iwill try the effect of often retiring from the worldto commune here with my own heart." " I havesince " (a few days later) " lived in a crowd, and toomuch as usual. This last has been a very hurryingweek, seeing many people at home, &c. This morningI have been much affected I fasted, and receivedthe sacrament. Oh may I be renewed inthe spirit of my mind. May this little recess fromthe hurry of life enable me seriously to look into myheart, plan of life, and general conduct, and to turn untothe Lord with my whole soul ; what can be too muchfor Him, who bought us so dearly I go to prayer."Easter Sunday. What a blessing it is to bepermitted to retire from the bustle of the world,and to be furnished with so many helps for realizingunseen things! I seem to myself to-day to be insome degree under the power of real Christianity ;conscious, deeply conscious of corruption and unprofitableness; yet to such a one, repenting and confesse382 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1795.ing his sins, and looking to the cross of Christ,pardon and reconciliation are held forth, and the promiseof the Holy Spirit, to renew the mind, and enablehim to conquer his spiritual enemies, and get thebetter of his corruption. Be not then cast down, Omy soul, but ask for grace from the fulness which isin Jesus. He came not to call the righteous, butsinners ; He was the friend of sinners. Look thereforeunto Him, and plead His promises, and firmly resolvethrough the strength derived from Him, tostruggle with thy sins ; with all of them, allowingnone of them in any degree ; and to endeavour todevote all thy faculties to His glory. My frame ofmind at this time seems to me compounded of humiliationand hope ; a kind of sober determination tothrow myself upon the promises of the gospel, as myonly confidence, and a composure of mind, resultingfrom a reliance on the mercy and truth of God. Ihave also this comfort, that I feel love towards myfellow-creatures. Still I perceive vanity and otherevils working ; but Christ is made unto us sanctification,and our heavenly Father will give His HolySpirit to them that ask Him. Wait therefore on theLord. Wait, watch and pray, and wait."His own immediate cause was not neglected in theimportant general questions with which this sessioncommenced. It had formed one subject of discussionbetween himself and Mr. Pitt, upon his arrival in theneighbourhood of London at the close of 1794;and on the 26th of December Mr. Pitt wrote to him,1795. ABOLITION PROSPECTS. 83Nothing has happened to add either to my hopes orfears respecting the Slave question, with a view to theissue of it next session, but I think the turn things takein France may be favourable to the ultimate Abolition.Lord Effingham's going to Jamaica may bethemeans of furnishing us with some further goodinformation, and I mean to instruct him as fully as Ican on those points in our accounts which want to becleared up. If any queries occur to you, pray sendthem to me." He writes himself, at about the samedate, to one of the most zealous and consistent friendsof Abolition, the Venerable Archdeacon Corbett : " Icannot conclude without a word or two on our greatcause. Suffice it then to say, that I am in no degreediscouraged. Great efforts will probably be necessary,and at the proper time they will be made. It is myintention to move, next year, for," Abolition in January,1796; and though I dare not hope to carry a bill forthat purpose through both Houses, yet, if I do notdeceive myself, this infamous and wicked traffic willnot last out this century. Let us all be active, persevering,unwearied, and trust to the good providenceof God, disposed at the same time to acquiesce in Hisdispensations whatever they may be."Conformably with these resolutions, he gavenotice of a motion early in the session for theAbolition of the Trade. On the 18th of March,1795, he says, 12 "There being no business in theHouse, and Slave business approximating, I resolvedDiary.84 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1795.to go down to Clapham to apply to it." Themotion was deferred until the 26th, and its resultis thus recorded: "Feb. 26th, To town SierraLeone general meeting and afterwards Slave businessin the House. Said to have spoken well,though less prepared than at any other time. Beat,78 to 61. Shameful !" " My dear sir," he writes onthe 28th to Mr. Wyvill, " I cannot help finding an argumentfor reform in the infamous vote of the House ofCommons the night before last. The Slave Trade isa load which (from my heart I believe it) hangsheavy on the country." In opening the debate hebriefly referred to the arguments against the Tradewith which the House was now familiar. He calledupon parliament " to suppress the greatest, the mostcomplicated, the most extensive evil by which thehuman race had ever been afflicted. It had beenproved to be the occasion of frequent and bloody wars ;as well as of innumerable acts of individual outrage.It dissolved all social intercourse ; it armed every managainst his fellow, and rendered the whole coast of thatvast continent a scene of insecurity, of rapine, and ofterror." These charges against the Trade he establishedafresh by the evidence of the governor and council ofthe new colony of Sierra Leone, and ended by a referenceto the fast of the preceding day, which a nationalsupport of cruelty and injustice would stamp " as apiece of empty pageantry, and a mere mockery of God."The motion was opposed in the speeches of Mr.Barham, Mr, East, and, Sir W. Young, by the usual1795. INTERCOURSE WITH PITT RENEWED. 85reasonings of the West Indian body, reinforced by newarguments drawn from the existing war, and the dangersto be apprehended from French intrigue. Mr.Dundas again came forward to plead for a gradualabolition to take place at some indefinite period afterthe termination of the war. He was powerfullyanswered by Mr. Pitt, who in rescuing the cause fromthe imputation of French principles, showed that itwas in direct opposition to those abstract propositionsby which " the rights of man " were maintained, anddeclared " that he knew not where to find a moredetermined enemy of such delusions, than his hon.friend the proposer of the motion."It was highly to the honour of Mr. Pitt, that hiszeal in this cause had suffered no abatement from thepolitical difference which had sprung up between himselfand Mr. Wilberforce. All personal estrangementindeed was soon at an end. " Dined March 21st,"says the Diary, at " R. Smith's (met) Pitt for the firsttime since our political difference I think both meaningto be kind to each other both a little embarrassedpoor Lord C. clinging to what may amuse him, andstave off fears of death." " Dined," he says shortlyafter, " at Bob Smith's to meet James Grenville,Warrington, &c. They attacked me on politics, andJames Grenville declared I was right, unless believingas he did that ministry were determined to make peacewhenever they could with the present French government."" April 15th. Called at Pitt's the first timesince before the beginning of the session he having86 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1795.the gout, and I going out of town talked about LordFitzwilliam." " 25th. To Battersea Rise calledEliot's, knowing that Pitt was there, and that Eliotknew I knew it, and thinking therefore it would seemunkind not to do it. 26th. Sunday Venn; morning. Ihad meant to be quiet to-day, and had hoped to be ableto employ myself in devotional exercises, when afterchurch Pitt came with Eliot ; and considering he didit out of kindness, I could not but walk back with him.He talked openly, &c. After my return home, R. Smithcame to see me, and afterwards Rennes came, self-invited,to dinner, and staid talked all the afternoonvery clever, much good in him, great courage,scarcely serious enough, but much respect for good,and zeal against vice talents to make him eminentlyuseful. Oh may God support me in this hurryingweek upon which I am entering." " Saturday, May2nd. All Pitt's supporters believe him disposed tomake peace. To Royal Academy dinner sat near LordSpencer, Windham, &c. too worldly-minded catchesand glees they importunate for Rule Britannia Idoubt if I had much business at such a place. Whata painted shadow ! It is not right for me entirely toabstract myself from the world; yet what a gaydream was this ! O God, do Thou for Christ's sakefill my soul with the love of Thee, and all other thingswill grow insipid."The tone which he preserved throughout this periodwhen forced into opposition upon the war question,was calculated to soothe the irritation which such a1795. TEMPER IN OPPOSITION. 87difference must naturally excite. " Your old friends,wrote Dr. Milner to him in the early part of thesession, " have every thing at stake, and you mustbear with them if they are now and then unreasonable.Guard yourself against saying any thing satirical atgovernment : let there be no bitterness ; nor theslightest ground for suspecting peevishness, or a dispositionto thwarts an eagerness to carry points.Your opposition in one point of view must do greatmischief; this you cannot help, but there is the morereason for avoiding exacerbations of every sort, amongwhich are to be reckoned nibbling altercation."This was the exact spirit in which he acted, and itwas by maintaining this unruffled temper that he keptpolitical difference from becoming a cause of personalalienation. So mild indeed was his tone, whilst hisconduct was most decided, that there were not wantingsome who asserted, that " there was a completeunderstanding between himself and Mr. Pitt, andthat his opposition was only a pretext." " TheDuchess of Gordon told me yesterday," he says onthe 13th of May, " that the Duke of Leeds, Duke ofBedford, and Lord Thurlow dining there the otherday, the latter said he would bet (or did bet) fiveguineas that Pitt and I should vote together on mymotion on Thursday for peace. This shows he thinksthere is a secret understanding between Pitt and meall this time."But though thus temperate in the manner of hisresistance, he was not beguiled by rekindling friendship88 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1795.into any unsuitable compliance with the wishes ofadministration. Truth he knew was to be valued abovepeace, and integrity of conduct above the harmonyobtained by compromise. Upon the 21st of April, hegave notice of a specific motion upon the continuanceof the war ; and even before this debate came on, he wascompelled, upon another subject, to oppose the wishesof the minister. Mr. Pitt at this time proposed toraise the income of the Prince of Wales greatlyabove all former precedent. " Bankes," says hisDiary, May 11th, "tells me that Pitt is furiousabout our meaning to resist the Prince's additional25,000." Upon the 14th of May he opposed thisgrant in the House of Commons, in a speech whichwas warmly commended, and which bears, in the imperfectrecord of the parliamentary debates, the impressof that high moral tone and that graceful eloquencewhich rendered it so effective. He dwelt stronglyupon the actual distresses and discontented tempersof the times ; and showed that though in a rude andbarbarous age the Crown must be supported by themagnificence of its connexions ; in a time of universalluxury " it might win to itself a higher measureof respect and veneration by a certain chaste anddignified simplicity, than by vying with its wealthiestsubjects in the number of its retainers and the magnificenceof its entertainments." " It is more pleasingto me, sir," he continued, " to express gratitudethan censure, and I rejoice thus publicly to declarethe deep obligations under which we lie to their1795. MOVES AGAIN FOR PEACE. 89Majesties upon the throne for their admirable conduct,by which they have arrested the progress oflicentiousness in the higher classes of society, andsustained by their example the fainting morals of theage."This renewed opposition produced no unkindly feelings.Two days before the debate, he says, " Eliotcalled and asked me to dine at Battersea Rise tomeet Pitt and Ryder called and staid two hourswith them all ; walking, coining, and laughing, andreading verses, as before." And the day after the debate," called at R. Smith's to see Lady Camdenbefore their departure for Ireland ; found Pitt there ;he very cordial. Call at the Duchess of Gloucester's,who talked much about Prince of Walesscandal but abusing the vicious is not religion."20th. Kept in town till late. (I had shown mymotion to Pitt on Saturday he very kind now andgood-natured ; he wrung from me to show it others ;so I showed it to Grey and Fox.) To Battersea Rise,refusing Eliot in order to be quiet. 21st. Busy allmorning preparing for motion to town at three.Thornton met me, and told me that owing to Epsomraces only twenty-eight members glad at themoment, but afterwards annoyed. Called at Pitt's tosettle with him when it should come on. FoundGrenville, Dundas, Pepper Arden, Ryder, and Pittlast very kind, first shy, second sour, and my pridewounded, alas !27th. Preparing in the morning then to town90 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1795.debate I not so good I think as usual in manner,and pressing home. Too proud, and thereforetoo much hurt by Windham's personalities ;much doubting if right to reply to them Pittkind." " Does the hon. gentleman expect," saidMr. Windham, " that when the executive governmenthave formed their plans coolly and upon duedeliberation, they will lay them aside for his arguments.No ! rather do we charge him with rashnessand inconsistency, since praising the talents andintegrity of the minister, he is determined in mattersof so much importance to oppose him and follow outhis own opinions." He repressed the evident retortwhich Mr. Windham's recent change of sentimentsupplied readily to Mr. Fox's indignation, and contentedhimself with a powerful assertion of his rightto form an independent judgment. " My highopinion of the minister's integrity, (and of no man'spolitical integrity do I think more highly,) and myrespect for his understanding, (and no man's understandingdo I more respect,) ought certainly to makeme give due weight to what I know are his opinions ;but when I have allowed them their due influence, andafter carefully surveying, and closely scrutinizing,and coolly and gravely and repeatedly weighing thecircumstances of the case, have formed at last adeliberate judgment, that judgment, whatever itmay be, I am bound to follow. I am sent here bymy constituents not to gratify my private feelings,but to discharge a great political trust ; and for the1795. HIS CONSTITUENTS DISPLEASED. 91faithful administration of the power vested in me, Imust answer to my country and my God." Themotion, which was a general overture towards a peace,was still rejected by a large, though a decreasedmajority ; but amongst the minority of 86 who votedwith him, were no less than 24 county members.Though he persevered in pressing a peaceful policyupon the House, he was well aware that the countrywas not with him. " L. told me," he says, " that myconduct in differing from Pitt was universally praised.How much people represent things as they themselvesfeel!" So generally were his views misapprehended,that he had almost determined upon explainingthem at length in a printed letter to his constituents ;a design which he laid by for " two strong reasons, anunwillingness to put myself forward, and a dread ofexciting popular ferment." He bore, therefore, patientlythe present odium which attended on hismeasures ; and within about six months, had thesatisfaction of hearing from Mr. Pitt himself that hetoo was now convinced of the necessity of peace.That this clear-sighted statesman did not soonerarrive at this conclusion, that he resisted all argumentswhen they " battled the matter together privately" before the commencement of the session,was much to be attributed, says Mr. Wilberforce,to the sanguine temperament of his mind, too littlechastened by experience. He could not believe thatit would be possible for the French government tofinal. resources sufficient for the immense amount of92 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1795.their expenditure both of men and money. How welldo I remember his employing in private, with stillgreater freedom and confidence, the language whichin a more moderate tone he used in the House ofCommons, that the French were in a gulf ofbankruptcy, and that he could almost calculate thetime by which their resources would be consumed." wBut besides this natural leaning of Mr. Pitt's ownmind, Mr. Wilberforce ever believed that he had beenpossessed by the influence of Mr. Dundas with a thirstfor colonial conquest. The hope of capturing St.Domingo, an island which in its commerce with Franceemployed more ships and tonnage than our wholeWest Indian trade, led him to resolve on continuingthe war, until he could " make peace on terms whichshould afford indemnity for the past, and securityfor the future." That Mr. Pitt should have allowedinferior minds to obtain this influence over him, is astriking instance of the inconsistency of human genius.It was not, as has been suggested, from a love of flatterythat he yielded to them ; for if there were flatterers inhis circle, it was not the general tone of those aroundhim. " Neither Grenville, nor Ryder, nor manymore," says Mr. Wilberforce, whose own manly independenceis the surest guarantee of his accurate observation," would ever condescend to flatter Pitt. Thetruth is, that, great man as he was, he had very little13 " I should like to know who was Chancellor of the Exchequer toAttila," was Monsieur De Lageard's remark, when this argument wasmaintained at Mr. Wilberforce's table.1795. BATTERSEA RISE. 93insight into human nature." 14 Perhaps he had learnedto consider all too much as tools whom he was todirect ; and therefore never troubled himself to studythe peculiarities of their individual characters. Nothingcertainly but this, can account for the feeblenessand indecision of his military expeditions. Geniusand vigour which were paralysed in their governmentat home, rendered the armies of France every wherevictorious ; whilst under Mr. Pitt's administration, allwas energy in domestic policy, and all weakness in ourmilitary operations.Upon the 17th of June, " the last," he says, " ofreal business in parliament, some serious talk in theHouse with Smyth and Dudley North. Poor DudleyNorth says he never attempts to unsettle any man'sfaith. The session is now closing, and I ought to fallseriously to work."He now established himself at Battersea Rise,where, from its vicinity to London, he could transactcounty business, and maintain a useful intercoursewith many friends whom he had scarcely leisure tosee during the sitting of parliament. " Dined andslept at Pepper Arden's. A. shy about politics. He allkindness and openness." " Old Newton breakfastedwith me. He talked in the highest terms of Whitefield,as by far the greatest preacher he had everknown." " Dined at Mr. Stephen's some conversationwhich may not perhaps prove thrown away.He said his strongest temptations were to duelling."14 Con. Mem,94 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1795.John Smith, Grant, and Mr. Voght dined with meinteresting and animated conversation." " Readingmy book to Henry Thornton when going toGrant's, not having dined with them so long, montaguecame in with their three boys made themstay in the garden. Returned to Montagu's, (sheexpecting to lie-in in a few days, and anxious tosee me,) but found De Lageard there. Grant'schildren brought, and all played." " To town togive a dinner to two Gamblers, Forbes, Newton,and Serve conversation instructive Serve self-denyingForbes pleasing. Lord Abercorn, he says, verygenerous to the poor round Stanhope visits theirhouses himself, and relieves them through the clergyman.Lord A. brings people to church. Condescensionin the great does much." " Dined atThornton's conversation not improving enough.Oh how much I want a heavenly, sober frame, as ifI was always in God's sight !" " July 6th. Off earlyfor the Speaker's reading by the way, and seriousthoughts. Arrived by dinner time. By themselvesexceedingly kind and friendly discussed long. 7th.Speaker kind in letting me have my own way. Iwould have gone the next day, but he insisted inso kind a manner on my staying, that I could notbring myself to refuse. Dined with the Speaker attheir Berkshire club, at Reading the second toastmost gross Deans of Hereford, Worcester, andother D.D.'s there extremely shocked. They laidit to the chairman's vulgarity." " 9th. To town about1795. SCARCITY. 95Sheffield corn business. Privy Council. Hawkesbury,Portland, &c. Honest-looking baker." " Busyall day writing letters about scarcity. This nowmuch dreaded. Meeting of merchants and bankers.Privy Council agreement."On the 15th, he hears from Sheffield: 15 " Therewas a very numerous meeting at the Cutlers' Hallyesterday, when I opened business by reading yourletters. They were so much struck by the proprietyof your recommendations, that they agreed tosign a resolution, pledging themselves to the greatesteconomy in the use of flour. . I was particularlydesired by the whole meeting to reiterate theirwarmest thanks for your unremitting attention totheir interests." " Price of wheat at Nottingham,12s. per bushel. Meeting in St. George's Fieldsof parliamentary reformers ; calling out ' War andWant, or Peace and Plenty.' " " Captain Sharpeon his business all morning drawing up his case.Thought it right, though very disagreeable, to go toRose about him. Interview but little done. Unfairnessof both." " Slave Committee meeting at myhouse. Talked with Samuel Hare, Hunter, &c."Amidst these various employments he found time,besides his correspondence, now very large, " toread Cowper's Letters, Blair's Rhetoric, Scriptures,comparing one part with another, Modern History,Fortin's Sermons, Horace by heart, and to beginfor my own use a sort of compilation of political4 Letter from D. T. Browne, July 14.96 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1795.facts and arguments." He was anxious also tomake use of his present leisure for cultivatinghabits of devotion. " July 15th. Spent the day inmore than ordinary devotional exercises and fasting,and found comfort, and hope some benefit." " Itseems something providential that, wanting to devotethe day mainly to secret religious exercises, fasting,self-examination, humiliation, and supplication formyself and others, I should be left unexpectedlyalone. The result of examination shows me thatthough my deliberate plans are formed in the fearof God, and with reference to His will, yet that whenI go into company (on which I resolve as pleasing toGod) I am apt to forget Him ; my seriousness fliesaway ; the temptations of the moment to vanity andvolatility get the better of me. If I have any misgivingsat the time, they are a sullen, low grumblingof conscience, which is disregarded. Although, therefore,I am not defective in external duties to God, orgrossly towards my fellow-creatures, but rather thecontrary, (though here no man but myself knows howmuch blame I deserve,) yet I seem to want alarger measure, 1st, of that true faith which realizesunseen things, and produces seriousness ; and, 2nd,of that vigour of the religious affections, which bymaking communion with God and Christ through theSpirit more fervent and habitual, might render meapt and alert to spiritual things. My finding no moredistinct pleasure in religious offices (vide David'sPsalms every where) argues a want of the Holy1795. JOURNAL. 97Spirit. This might not be inferred so positively inevery case, because different mental constitutions aredifferently affected. Mine I take to be such as arecapable of a high relish of religion. I ought to bethankful for this ; I am responsible for it ; it will be ablessing and help well used, and if neglected it willincrease my condemnation. Therefore let me cultivatethe religious affections. I think it was betterwith me in this respect formerly ; at least I felt thenmore religious sensibility. This was in part natural.Yet let me quicken those things which are ready todie."Yet though he. was thus disposed to condemn himself,his private Journal bears the clearest marks of anunusual warmth of spiritual affections. " My eyes,"says an entry of this time, " are very indifferent tearsalways make them so, and this obliges me to checkmyself in my religious offices."But while he watched carefully over the affectionsof his heart, no man's religion could be more freefrom that dreaming unreality, which substitutes a setof internal sensations for the practice of holy obedience." This morning, (Sunday)" he writes, " I feltthe comfort of sober, religious self-conversation. Yettrue Christianity lies not in frames and feelings, but indiligently doing the work of God. I am now aboutto enter upon a trying scene. Oh that God may giveme grace, that I may not dishonour but adorn Hiscause; that I may watch and pray more earnestlyand seriously."VOL. II. F98 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1795.The scene of difficulty to which he looked forward,was a series of visits which he was about to pay inYorkshire. " This last has been a hurrying week,and I have gone on too little as one looking into himself,after the tumultuous service of the session, andpreparing for my Yorkshire encounter. Gisbornepresses me much to this expedition. My judgment hasbeen extremely puzzled whether to visit it, or go onwith my york." 16 Complaints of the infrequency ofhis personal intercourse with his constituents had beenforwarded to him by Mr. Broadley. " No man whohas had occasion for your parliamentary assistance inhis private business, or who considers the part whichyou take in public affairs, can possibly accuse youof neglecting, for a moment, the interests of your constituents.But all of them are not capable of appreciatingthe real value of their representative, and someof them miss the attentions which were formerly paidto them by Sir George Savile, who attended at theraces and such other occasions. I must do the EastRiding the justice to say, I have never heard the leastsyllable of complaint there. As our countryman andfriend, we follow the line of your parliamentary conduct,and are too sensible of your attentions to us,both public and private, to require from you those ofform. Still I think it would be well, if you wouldseize any proper occasion which may arise, for yourseeing as many of your constituents as you can."Upon the 23rd of July, he says, " Grant and Henry16 Journal, July 5.1795. YORKSHIRE TOUR. 99Thornton at breakfast, and we discussed what Iought to do. Yorkshire, in August or October ?Decided upon August ; chiefly on the ground, that myfriends differing from me in politics, but personallykind, would go from home in September and declaretheir difference. That this might suggest an opening,and that certain parties were actually upon thewatch."For Yorkshire he accordingly set out, and joinedhis mother and sister at Scarborough upon the 28thof July. " Got acquainted with Mr, Clowes ofManchester, and he dined with us very pleasing,simple, warm, devotional ; but evidently too muchdisposed to believe, and conversant with stories ofmagic, witchcraft, &c. He told some that werestriking."Upon the 4th of August he began a set of visits,which carried him through a great part of the county.His private entries abound in striking remarks uponcharacter and manners, and show in the strongestlight the care with which he now watched over himself,and sought for opportunities to do good to others.At we walked about all the evening ;then music, and after supper, singing. (B. wentaway in the morning had said that the Atkinsonwere democrats, and though confessed extravagant inprejudices, yet the account believed.) G. very lightand profane ; I looked grave ; they all laughed ;immediately after this, family prayers, where confessedourselves miserable sinners. Much shocked atF 2100 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1795.all this. Good nature and ease, when not alloyed bygross vice, seem the popular requisites ; every bodywho has them is styled e the best man in the world.'Though failing in some respects and much in want ofstrict truth, I declared against levity, and there beingnothing in serious things ; and I hope my cheerfulnessin society might do good. Aug. 6th. To Crimson,where a letter met me from Sir. R. Hildyard that hedid see those he could without form. Crimson'striangular Castle House ; very kind and friendly ;taking an active part in raising volunteers (yeomanrycavalry) which do not seem to do well here peoplehave not been enough alarmed to know their value. Inthe evening on to Sir Robert Hildyard' s obliging andhospitable talked about all things, but neither withCrimson or him much politics. . . . There is muchawkwardness in a visitation like mine from having nohead-quarters as a centre whence to diverge. Thiswant gives a canvassing air. Also another awkwardness,that I go from one house to another which ishostile without intermediate purifying; and when itis known. Bacon's remark that people more easilyforgive ill will to their friends than good will to theirenemies. This most important when visiting for conciliation.Dined at Horse, and through Barton,where the clergyman, Mr. Good, and Mr. Garland ofBurlington, met us and asked us out. Went in withthem and discussed. Obtained leave to send someof Miss More's tracts accidental good. Then on toBurlington Quay; saw Osborne and others, and walked1795. YORKSHIRE TOUR. 101with them on the pier. Then on to Creyke's, whovery kind and hospitable ; his seven daughters athome very pleasing, modest, and rational. SpentTuesday at Marton. Burlington church. Mr. Wadecurate a good man ill. Mr. preached a dryessay on * Woe to those who call evil good,' &c.which I disliked much they did too. Creyke rememberedit to be Dr. Clarke's ; we looked andfound it word for word. Monday, 10th. Unwell witha cold ; but though otherwise I should have liked tostay in this family of domestic harmony, diligence, andhospitable kindness, yet fearing that Mr. Broadleywould have asked people to meet me I thought it bestto come off. Brought Osborne, and though tete-teteand no reading all the way, yet shamefully backwardin talking with him seriously : felt awkward,no launches occurred, alas ! yet it was in my mindthe whole way. Got to Ferry to dinner Mr. andMrs. B. B. Thompson, Osborne, Robert Broadley, andT. Thompson very civil ; Broadley frank, and kind,and manly in his politeness, a rational companionused the word ' providential,' not immediately after Ihad used it, when speaking of the prevention of LordFitzwilliam's and Mr. Beresford's duel. Sir. H.Etherington came in after dinner. Broadley 's treatmentof him proper and highly exemplary. Mrs. Osbornegrateful for my former kindness I hope to speak openlyand honestly to him yet. Dined at East Dale with B.B. Thompson she rational and pleasing his son a fineyoung man. I made no use of the visit for pouring in102 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1795.any good suggestions ; perhaps no good opportunities,but certainly not watchful for them. Called on B.just as absurd and speech-making as ever. Wentwith Williamson about his grounds he friendlyrather avoiding politics. To Barnard's, who receivedme very kindly he and Mrs. Barnard live veryquietly much employed in planting, farming, &c.active magistrate books, drawings, &c. This is arational life when divine things are first. (P. toldBroadley that he wished to sell his house becausehe knew not what to do in the country ; timehung so heavy on his hands, and he did not believethat there was any body who was not tired ofreading in half an hour.) I opened (but very faintly)to Broadley yesterday, by launches of my book, andcondemning Paley's he pleased with it, and I pleasedalso with them." " 17th. To Philip Langdale's he,Mrs. Langdale, and priest. Rational evening heatprayers when I arrived. 18th. Much talk withMr. Langdale and the priest about their tenets,and pleased to find him much in earnest, andurging me strongly. Called at Basket's, and hegoing soon to dinner, could not but stay pleased tosee old scenes perhaps I was rather too light, yet Ihope on the whole I should impress them not unfavourably,as I was able to drop some things. On toYork. Saw Burgh, who was all affection. Called onT s. They violently incensed by my political conduct.G. would jilt come down poor woman, how foolish !The coldness of the others seemed to give way by my1795. TALENT FOR CONVERSATION. 103being quite unaffected, and apparently undiscerning."There were few who could resist his powers ofconversation. It possessed indeed a charm whichdescription can but faintly recall to those who havelistened to it. As full of natural gaiety as the mirthof childhood, it abounded in the anecdotes, reflections,and allusions of a thoughtful mind and well-furnishedmemory ; whilst it was continually pointed byhumour of a most sparkling quality. In this particular,the kindly, though somewhat grotesque, representationof an author 17 once before referred to unquestionablyfails. Though any one admitted to the societyof Mr. Wilberforce would have found him "full ofkindness towards all," and would have witnessedcertainly the workings of a spirit which abounded inbenevolence; yet the most transient observer couldnot have failed to remark also the continual flashes ofwit, which lighted up his most ordinary conversation ;harmless certainly, yet playing lightly over all hetouched upon the sports of a fervent imaginationsweetened by a temper naturally kind, and chastenedby the continual self-restraint of a conscience whichwould not bear the offence of giving pain to any. Thiswas a natural endowment, and had been one great charmof his early years ; but it was now carefully cultivatedas a talent for his Master's use. It was this highsense of its importance, which led him so often to condemnhimself. He was not contented to wait for the'7 Vid. p. 73.104 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1795.chance entrance of profitable subjects of conversation,he was diligent to make it useful.I have been dining out' says his Diary, 18 a fewweeks after this time, " and was then at an assembly atthe Chief Baron's. Alas ! how little like a companyof Christians ! a sort of hollow cheerfulness on everycountenance. I grew out of spirits. I had not beenat pains before I went to fit myself for company, by astore of conversation topics, launches, &c." Thesewere certain topics carefully arranged before he enteredinto company, which might insensibly lead theconversation to useful subjects. His first great objectwas to make it a direct instrument of good ; and inthis he was much assisted by his natural powers, whichenabled him to introduce serious subjects with a cheerfulgravity, and to pass from them by a natural transitionbefore attention flagged. He was also watchful todraw forth from all he met their own especial information,and for some time kept a book in which was recordedwhat he had thus acquired. This watchful desireto make society useful saved him from the danger towhich his peculiar powers exposed him ; and he neverengrossed the conversation. No one ever shone morebrightly, or was more unconscious of his own brilliancy.How carefully he watched over himself duringthese Yorkshire visits, is seen by numerous entriesin his Diary. " Aug. 9th. This rambling lifeamongst various people abounds with temptationsto vanity, forgetfulness of divine things, and want of'8 Nov. 15.1795. YORKSHIRE TOUR. 105boldness in Christ's cause ; and I too readily yield tothem. My health is not equal to this graciouskind of life, and at the same time preserving and redeemingtime for serious things. Oh how muchought I to quicken the things which are ready to die !This plan was undertaken from a conviction of itsbeing right, but it sadly disorders and distracts mementally." His blaming himself for want of boldnessin the cause of Christ, is another instance of the highstandard by which he tried himself. For not onlydid he at the moment steadily discountenance all unbecomingconversation, but he took private opportunitiesof reasoning afterwards with those who so transgressedhis principles. In this very visit he addressedat length by letter, with plain and honest boldness,one gentleman of great influence, who (a clergyman)had in his presence taken the name of God in vain.Aug. 13. This hurrying company life does notagree with my soul. How little courage have I inprofessing the gospel of Christ ! How little do I embraceopportunities of serving the spiritual interests ofmy friends ! How much insincerity am I led into ! howmuch acquiescence in unchristian sentiments ! I wishI had written my tract, that my mind might be clear ;yet as all this more plainly discovers me to myself, itmay be of service. If my heart were in a more universallyholy frame, I should not be liable to thesetemptations. Remember they show your weaknesswhich when they are away, you are apt to mistake forstrength. Entire occasional solitude seems eminentlyF 3106 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1795.useful to me. Finding myself without support, Ibecome more sensible of my own wretchedness, and ofthe necessity of flying to God in Christ, for wisdomand righteousness, and all I want here and hereafter."A quiet Sunday is a blessed thing ; how much betterthan when passed in a large circle ! My life is notspent with sufficient diligence, yet I hope I do somegood by my conversation ; and I thank God I thisday enjoy a more heavenly-minded frame than common.Alas ! how ignorant are people of Christianity 1" 19From York he passed on into the West Riding, visitingLeeds, Halifax, and Huddersfield, receiving everywherea cordial welcome, and winning back by personalintercourse those whom political difference had in anydegree estranged. Aug. 22nd. To Smyth's, who receivedme most affectionately sweet place. LadyGeorgians a most engaging woman kind, unassuming,unaffected. Clowes there as positive in whimsies asin certain and important truths what a pity ! He ispious, affectionate, humble, self-denying, and I dare sayfirm. 24th. A sad birth-day no time for prayer orreflection. Smyth very kindly made calls with me atWakefield came back to dinner, and evening on toLeeds to Cooksonon's, who received me most frankly.25th. Cooksonon a large party to dine. Morning ClothHalls saw the trustees assembled. 26th. Wentover Mr. Gottt's factory. A clever young man.pined Mr. Buck's. 28th. To Halifax, where receivedwith great kindness by the Warehouses.>9 Sept. 6.1795. YORKSHIRE TOUR. 10729th. 'Cloth Hall. 31st. With Mr. Warehouse toBradford, where breakfasted Mr. Moreover. Returnedto Mr. W.'s to dinner, where large party,who very cordial.Sept. 1st. Breakfasted Edward's. Dined at theTalbot with a large party toast given, ' May thepeace of the county not be disturbed' people verykind. Evening the whole party adjourned to Dr.Coulthurst's, where tea and supper. Wanted me to explainabout my Amendment they most decidedly forwar. 2nd. Breakfasted Walker's, Crowned. To Jas.Milnes's to dinner. Evening walked and talked Jas.Milnes rambling about religion and politics good-naturedand well-intentioned. 3rd. To Spencer Stanhope'she told me that B. had declared he wouldgive 1000 to turn me out. Party ; and music all theevening. I perhaps too gay, though I thought ituseful. Much surprised at my objecting to the childof religious parents marrying an irreligious man, ' ofno vice,' as the world says conversation rose by thematch between Lord D. and Lady C. L. beingbroken off from family insanity discovered. How sadthat this should be more thought of than the madnessof irreligion ! Stanhope and I called on Edmundand Lady Stafford, and home to dinner interestingtalk at night about religion. Sept. 8th. Off earlyfor Huddersfield. Mr. Whitacre and T. Atkinsoncame then some Saddleworth friends. ClothHall. Sheepshank's corn idea, and natural eloquence.Felt I should be inferior to him. Saw Mrs. Law108 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1795.Atkinson. Dined about twenty-five, very friendly.Evening Whitacre's. 10th. After breakfast, andmaking up books for Stanhope, Burgess, and LadyGeorgians Smith, off for Flashy Hall. Prestonreceives me very affectionately sweet poetical lakeof his own making at night some serious talk, towhich Preston led I told him my case. 11th.Tried for more serious talk gave him some books,and told him of my intended publication, and itsreasons. Off after dinner for Kendal, where stoppedfor the night. 12th. Off early breakfasted Low-woodleaves withered, and scene appears less beautifulthan I used to think it. On after breakfast toBoughton, where I am writing. In the afternoonwent on over Stonyhead, a most steep and toilsomemarch, to Lancaster. Lancaster very glad to seeme,and all kind." There he staid until the 28th ofSeptember, making one excursion to visit the Bishopof Llandaff, whom he found " more grandiloquent, andsuo genere, than I ever saw him. Went on to visit SirJohn Regard he out Mrs. Crimson and daughterthere." " How many scenes," was his private reflectionon revisiting Lancaster Castle, " have Igone through, to how many dangers have I beenexposed, since I was last here in 1788 ! I ought tobe very grateful. What reason have I to devote allmy powers to the service of God, who has preservedme from innumerable evils, and still holds out to methe hope of mercy ! I am vexed not to have had anyserious talk with M. ; yet I scarce had any oppor-1795. RETURN TO TOWN. 109unity. Lancaster, to whom I have told my feelingsabout E. thinks him irreligious, and that he wouldnot bear to be spoken to."He left Lancaster Castle at the end of September ;and on his road to Yoxall Lodge passed through apart of Yorkshire, spending " Oct. 6th with Mason,to whom I opened a little on religious matters, takingoccasion, in particular, from my book to press uponhim the duty of talking plainly to our friends. He didnot know, he said, whether E. (a man of great moralworth, and with whom he was unusually intimate)believed in revelation or not." On the 8th hedrove to Lord Hawke's, where arrived two hoursbefore dinner. Dr. Scandello, a Venetian, there, anda Mr. St. Victor, a French emigrant. They seem togo on rationally-^no appearance of cards he fond offarming. Off early the next morning but LordHawke's family early, and he down. On to Ferry-bridgeto breakfast, and thence by night to meetSamuel Smith at Nottingham."He spent three weeks at Mr. Gisborne's, but theLondon season was approaching. " Oh, this vilemeeting of parliament!" he writes to the Speaker,when we shall have to discuss again about governmentscapable of maintaining the relations of peaceand amity. Poor fellow Pitt I mean I can feelfor him from my heart, particularly on a Sunday."On Friday, Oct. 23rd, he set out " early for town,and travelled hard, but only got to Newport Parnellan immensely high wind in the night. I thought of110 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1795.our fleet." The following afternoon he reached PalaceYard, and " found a letter from Pitt wishing me tocome up, hoping we should agree."Downing Street, Saturday, Oct. 24.My dear Wilberforce,R. Smith tells me that, from the letters he hasreceived from you, he doubts whether you will be intown till just before the meeting. I own, if it is notvery inconvenient to you, it would be a great satisfactionto me if you could come so as to allow time forour having some quiet conversation before we meet inthe House. This I am afraid there will not be muchchance of, unless you are here a day or two before.I cannot help being more anxious for this, as I thinkour talking over the present state of things may do agreat deal of good, and I am sure at all events it cando no harm. It is hardly possible to form any preciseopinion of what is to be done till we see the immediateissue of the crisis just now depending, but I cannothelp thinking that it will shortly lead to a state ofthings in which I hope our opinions cannot materiallydiffer. I need not say how much personal comfort itwill give me if my expectation in this respect isrealized.Yours sincerely and affectionately,W. PITT."His own " personal comfort " was no less promoted bythe tone of this letter ; and this was highly increased1795. PITT DISPOSED TO PEACE. Illby the further intercourse which immediately followed.Monday, 26th. Kept myself open for Pitt. 27th.Saw Pitt at breakfast this morning, and had a mostsatisfactory conversation with him. Gave dinner toDuncombe, Samuel and Henry Thornton, and Lancasterall pleased with my report. 29th. Meant togo to Battersea Rise, but Pitt wished to see me onWest Indian subject (Address) another confidentialand satisfactory conversation with him."On public grounds he rejoiced sincerely in thealtered sentiments which led the minister to seek forpeace, and to his personal feelings the gratificationwas complete. In proportion to the pain with whichhe had entered at the call of ,duty on a course of opposition,was the satisfaction of returning to a renewedcareer of cordial co-operation ; all misunderstandingwas now gone, and both Mr. Pitt and his adherentsrecognised the purity of principle from which hisformer conduct had arisen. " We might differ atthe commencement of last session," wrote LordCamden from Dublin Castle, 2 ^ " as to the line whichyou then thought it right to pursue. I am candidenough to own that I can conceive it not as inconsistentas I then thought it ; and that with the explanationyour subsequent conduct has given, I perfectlyunderstand it. Pitt appears to me to havebeen more able than ever since the meeting ofparliament, and I have little doubt of his making apeace, and of the country supporting him in it."*> Dec. 24.CHAPTER XII.OCTOBER 1795 TO JULY 1796.Disordered state of the public mind Pitt's readiness forpeace Sedition Bills Popular discontent Yorkshiremeeting, and petitions Danger of the West Indies Christmasrecess Abolition Bill reaches a third reading in theCommons Slave-carrying Bill Parliament dissolvedCanvass Re-election.WITH the autumn of this year began the darkestperiod of the revolutionary war. Though the armsof France were every where triumphant, yet it wasnot from them that our greatest danger arose. Anevil spirit was spreading through Europe, and the enemiesof order were but too successful in their attemptto introduce French principles amongst ourselves.At such a time it was most important that goodmenshould combine for the preservation of thecountry ; and on public grounds therefore, as well asprivate, Mr. Wilberforce rejoiced unfeignedly in thatchange of Mr. Pitt's views concerning peace, whichpromised to enable them to act cordially together.Parliament met upon the 29th of October, and Mr.Pitt at once avowed his pacific inclination. " Walked1795. SEDITION BILLS. 113down to Westminster Hall, and then to the House,Pitt spoke capitally, and as distinct as possible onthe main point. Duncombe, and Lancaster, and SirRichard Hill appeared to me to be won by his frankavowal. Bankes suggested the necessity of a parliamentaryrecognition." 1 In the course of the debate he declaredthat all difference between himself and Mr.Pitt was at an end. On the following day, he heardwith pleasure the same sentiments uttered by LordGrenville in the House of Peers. " Heard Lords'debate Grenville distinct Vanstone absurd andclever. Duke of Bedford heavy and pompous RobinHood that can't get on, with newspaper argumentsand fustian animation."The evil humours which abounded in the state werealready drawing to a head. The King was violentlymobbed on his way to open parliament ; tumultuarymeetings were held in the metropolis ; whilst the mostinflammatory publications were actively disseminated.Papers are dispersed against property. Prints ofguillotining the King and others." 3 In this crisis hedeemed it needful to arm the executive governmentwith extraordinary powers ; and when upon the 10thof November, Mr. Pitt proposed to bring in a bill forpreventing seditious assemblies, he at once expressedhis approbation of the step. " Got up after Fox," butnot being called on by the Speaker, it was late beforehe addressed the House. This speech, which satisfiedhimself, was highly commended by the supporters ofDiary, Oct. 29. Ib. Nov. 18.114 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1795.the measure, though he expressly stipulated for maintainingunimpaired the full right of petitioning. " Ido not," he said, " willingly support these Bills, 3 butI look on them as a temporary sacrifice, by which theblessings of liberty may be transmitted to our childrenunimpaired." They were fiercely attacked bythe opposition. " All my party," said a leading manamongst the Yorkshire Whigs, " opposed the Bills, andan excellent weapon they were to employ against theministry ; but I, who had then taken no part inpolitics, and was living as a young man in London,saw enough to convince me that they were necessary."Being convinced of their necessity, Mr. Wilberforcelaboured to perfect their details. On the 1 th, hewent to Pitt's, to look over the Sedition Bill alteredit much for the better by enlarging." Upon the 12thhe again maintained in the House of Commons, inopposition to his colleague Mr. Duncombe, that theBills did in truth " raise new bastions to defend thebulwarks of British liberty." He was still engagedwith the details of the measures. "A meeting atPitt's about the Sedition Bill, after which supped withhim and Warrington my advice Pitt's language,'My head would be off in six months, were I toresign.' I see that he expects a civil broil. Neverwas a time when so loudly called on to prepare for theworst." 4 " How vain now appears all successfulambition ! Poor Pitt ! I too am much an object ofThe " Treason" and " Seditious Assembly " Bills.Diary, Nov. 16.1795. BILLS UNPOPULAR IN LONDON. 115popular odium. Riot is expected from the Westminstermeeting. The people I hear are much exasperatedagainst me. The printers are all angry at the SeditionBills. How fleeting is public favour ! I greatly fearsomecivil war or embroilment ; and with my weakhealth and bodily infirmities, my heart shrinks fromits difficulties and dangers." 5Yet thoughts like these could not move himfrom the path of duty, upon which he had enteredin the fear of God. " Let me look before me," hehad said, at the commencement of the session, 6 " andsolemnly implore the aid of God, to guide, quicken,and preserve me. Let me endeavour to soar abovethe turmoil of this tempestuous world, and to experiencejoy and peace in believing. Let me considerwhat in former years have proved my chief occasionsof falling, and provide against them. Let me rememberthe peculiar character of a Christian ; gravity inthe House, cheerfulness, kindness, and placability,with a secret guard and hidden seriousness. Let mepreserve a sense of the vanity of earthly greatness andhonour." This was the secret of his strength, andwhen the prospect before him was gloomy, " Put," hecontinues, " thy trust in God, O my soul. If thouprayer earnestly to Him, confessing thy sins, imploringpardon, and labouring for amendment, thou wilt beaccepted, and then all things shall work together forthy good. God protected me from Norris, Kimber,and innumerable other dangers. He is still able toJournal, Nov. 22. c Ib. Oct. 25.116 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1795.protect me, and will, if it be for my good." Popularodium could not shake this confidence, and to the twoBills he gave, in spite of all its threats, his undisguisedsupport.Upon the second reading, (Nov. 17th,) " House,"he says, " very late. Will. Smith struck by theextracts read by Warrington. Poor Warringtonnervous, and Sheridan brutal. Up to speak, but prevented."Shortly afterwards he declared his sentimentswith singular effect, in the debate upon the TreasonBill, which had now passed the Lords. Mr. Fox haddeclared, with more than usual violence, that if theseBills became law, submission would be no more aquestion of duty, but of prudence. This called up Mr.Pitt, who in few, but weighty words, declared his confidence,that " there would not be wanting thosewho would risk all for their country, and enforce thelaws against which the people were excited to rebel."The measure," says an eye-witness, " had all alongbeen hotly combatted ; but after Fox's intemperateassertion, the cheers on each side of the House werepositively deafening. At this time Mr. Wilberforcerose ; and after pointing out the strange contrastwhich there was between the inflammatory languageof the opposition, and their pretended zeal for peace ; heexclaimed with an energy, which I remember well, afteran interval of forty years, ' Peace indeed ! what havethey to do with peace ? even now they are unsheathingthe sword of civil discord, to plunge it in the bosom oftheir country.' " He continued his support until the1795. OPINION OF YORKSHIRE DOUBTFUL. 117Bills were carried ; displaying at the same time theindependence of his conduct, by objecting to whathe deemed an unnecessary infliction of capital punishment,7 and speaking strongly, on the 26th, in condemnationof a pamphlet on his own side, which hethought a libel on the House.The contest was now spreading from the Houseof Commons to the country, and various placeswere beginning, by petition and remonstrance, toexpress their judgment upon these coercive measures.The sentiments of Yorkshire were supposedto be hostile to the Bills. Already were itsfreeholders multiplied beyond all precedent by theincreased numbers of the domestic clothiers: upontheir support the opposition calculated largely ;whilst the friends of peace looked with some alarm tothe discontent which a partial scarcity could not butexcite amongst them. " The Bills," wrote Dr.Burgh, 8 " are obnoxious in this part of the world toan extreme degree." " The partisans of opposition,"he adds, " have called upon the high sheriff to convenea public meeting. These things prognosticate abreach of that tranquil acquiescence, which for sometimehas subsisted in Yorkshire ; and if in Yorkshire,so hard to be set in motion, the public mind be onceexpressed, we well know the sequel through all therest of the kingdom." " The dissenters," addsanother correspondent announcing the intended meeting,9 " have never forgiven you for opposing the7 Nov. 27. 8 Nov. 19.9 Letter from John Naylor, Nov. 12.118 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE.repeal of the Test Act, and I am informed that theyare expected to be there in support of opposition."In these expectations the high sheriff 10 so far coincidedthat he deemed it inexpedient to convene themeeting. " The assembling of so large and unwieldya body," he replied to the requisition, " would onlytend to raise riot and discontent." This decisionMr. Wilberforce regretted greatly : and when it wasquoted with some triumph in the House of Commonsas " a strong argument against the Bills," he declaredat once that " he lamented the high sheriff's conduct,because it had prevented a full, fair, and free discussionof the subject." 11 In spite of the triumphanthopes of his opponents and the gloomy apprehensionsof his friends, he trusted in the good sense of theYorkshire freeholders. He had not learned in vainthe lesson which he had been taught in 1784 ; andhe longed to plead again before the assembled countythe cause of liberty and right. To Mr. Hey hewrites :London, Nov. 28.My dear Sir,I regret very much that the high sheriff hasrefused to call a county meeting, when I had takensteps to secure a full attendance from the East Riding,and have no doubt that by throwing the weightof the county of York into the scale of good order,we should have operated powerfully upon the publicoMr. (afterwards Sir) Mark Sykes.11 Debate of November 27.1795. MEETING CALLED SECRETLY AT YORK. 119mind. I must conclude. My dear sir, my views arevery gloomy, and what prevents their brightening ismy seeing daily proofs of the entire forgetfulness ofGod and of His providence, which prevails in thehigher orders. I speak especially of the leadingpolitical characters on both sides. In prosperity wewere not grateful, in adversity we are not humbled.If you learn any thing concerning a county meetinglet me know. I hear the opposition intends to call ameeting, but I am told by every one that it would bein the highest degree dangerous for me to attend it,lest I should find myself amongst enemies only, andgive countenance to their proceedings. I shall rideat single anchor, ready to set sail at a moment'swarning.Yours ever,WILLIAM WILBERFORCE."This has been a most trying week, but I thankGod I bear it well."Upon the refusal of the high sheriff to convene thecounty, the opponents of ministry had privately resolvedto call a meeting, which they hoped to findwholly subservient to their views. To secure thisend they waited four days, and then, upon Friday,November 27th, issued circulars, requesting " thefreeholders to assemble at the Castle Yard of York,if the sheriff will permit it to be used ; and if not, atthe Guildhall, upon the Tuesday following." By this120 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1795.manoeuvre they deemed themselves secure of theexclusive presence of their partisans. For as nonewspaper was then published in the town of Yorkupon Friday, the announcement would only reachthose persons in the county whom they chose tosummon. No post left York that afternoon forLondon, so that they were safe from any unwelcomeintrusion from the capital ; while the day named forthe meeting being that on which the mercantiletransactions of the six preceding months were settledboth at Leeds and Huddersfield, the presence of themerchants and master-manufacturers would be effectuallyprevented. Together with the announcement ofthe meeting was circulated amongst the lower classof freeholders, a stirring appeal bearing Mr. Wyvill'ssignature : " Come forth then from your looms," washis summons, " ye honest and industrious clothiers ;quit the labours of your fields for one day, ye stoutand independent yeomen : come forth in the spirit ofyour ancestors, and show you deserve to be free."The attempt would doubtless have succeeded, ifthe friends of order had not roused themselves with apromptitude which those who have reason on theirside are not always willing to exert. An intimationof what had passed at York was received at Leeds inthe course of Friday evening ; and a few active meninstantly met together, and resolved that the intelligenceshould be dispersed throughout the West Riding.On the Saturday accordingly the freeholdersof various districts were assembled ; and it was at1795. RAPID GATHERING OF LOYALISTS. 121once agreed to postpone all other business, and torespond to Mr. Wyvill's call, though not in the spiritwhich he had contemplated.Yet even after these exertions, many were ignorantof what was passing. " I knew nothing ofit," says a leading inhabitant of the East Riding,until the afternoon of Monday, and only got intimeto York by riding straight there from thedinner party of a friend." In London of coursethe state of things was utterly unknown. " Whenundressing at twelve o'clock on Saturday," saysMr. Wilberforce, 12 " I received a note from SirWilliam Milner, saying that the York meeting was tobe held upon Tuesday next ; but I had given up allidea of going." . He thought it quite impossible that ageneral meeting could be gathered on so short a summons; and to attend a party council of his enemieswould have been manifestly foolish. " You couldnot have conceived," wrote Mr. Hey, 13 after the event,that so large a number of your constituents couldhave been collected in the short space of three days."Yet his suspicions were perhaps aroused by the communicationof a friend, who came to tell him thatsomething extraordinary is certainly designed inYorkshire, since was seen to set out on thenorth road this morning in a chaise and four."Enough, however, was not known to show that hispresence would be useful, still less that it was so farnecessary as to justify his travelling upon the dayl Diary. Dec. 5.VOL. II. G122 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1795.which it was his chiefs privilege to give up toreligious employments, until he was in his carriage onhis way to church on Sunday morning. Just as hehad got into it, an express arrived from Mr. Hey andMr. Cooksonon, informing him of all that had beendone, and urging him at all costs to be present at themeeting. " I sent immediately to Eliot, and thenwent there. He and I, on consideration, determinedthat it would be right for me to go ; the country'speace might be much benefited by it." HSending back therefore his carriage to be fitted forthe journey, he went himself to the neighbouringchurch of St. Margaret's ." Sir George Shuck-burghthere talking sad sermon," l5 . . . and thencalled on Mr. Pitt. " I saw Pitt he clear muchdisquieted." 16 Whilst they were still together, hisservant brought word that his carriage could notbe got ready so soon as was required. " Mine,"said Mr. Pitt, " is ready, set off in that." " Ifthey find out whose carriage you have got," saidone amongst the group, " you will run the risk ofbeing murdered." So fierce had been the spirit ofthe populace in London, that the fear was not entirelygroundless ; and an appearance of the same spirit inthe great cities of the north had led some amongsthis friends to write to him, that "if he ventureddown it would be at the hazard of his life." But itwas not such apprehensions which had " disquieted "his thoughts ; and when once satisfied that duty11 Diary. lb. * Ib.1795. FORCED MARCH TO YORK. 123called him, he cheerfully began the journey. " Byhalf-past two," he says, 17 I was " off in Pitt's carriage,and travelled to Alconbury Hill, four horses all theway," two outriders preceding him ; a provision thenessential to a speedy journey, even on the great northroad. After a few hours rest, " I was off early on theMonday morning, and got at night to P'errybridge.Employed myself all the way in preparing for themeeting." 18 He had been supplied by Mr. Pitt withsamples of the various works by which the fomentersof sedition were poisoning the public mind ; and ofsuch importance was his mission deemed, that anexpress was sent after him to Ferrybridge with furtherspecimens. " Almost the whole of Monday,"says his secretary, " was spent in dictating ; andbetween his own manuscripts and the pamphletswhich had followed him, we were almost up to theknees in papers." He reached Doncaster by night,and thence sent an express across to Leeds, to announcehis arrival to his friend William Hey.Doncaster, Monday night, near 9.Nov. 30, 1795.My dear Sir,You and Mr. Cooksonon together, loosened myholdings yesterday morning, and forced me out ofLondon in the afternoon. I have made a forced\march, which after a hard week is an effort, and, Ithank God, have arrived thus far tolerably well. I>7 Diary. w Ib.G 2124 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1795.am going forward, and my present intention is to beatYork about an hour before the meeting, unless mymotions should be accelerated in consequence of intelligenceI may receive as I advance. I trust youwill come over, and if you do early in the morning,we may meet at Lancaster. I am deeply impressedwith a sense of the necessity of bold and decided conduct,but wish I had had more time to prepare forso trying a day as tomorrow. Pray that I may besupported. I hope and believe I am engaged in acause pleasing to God. But I must stop. If any ofmy friends now absenting themselves would go toYork, knowing of my intention to be there, send tothem betimes.I will make no apology for desiring you may beknocked up. You who submit to it so often forpersonal interests, will not, I am sure, complain of itin a single instance pro bono publico. Kind remembrances.Yours affectionately,W. WILBERFORCE.P. S. I fear the high sheriff's not calling themeeting is likely to produce a thin attendance, andto operate against us."The day had not been idly spent by the supportersof the constitution. The West Riding had beenraised ; " The towns of Leeds, Halifax, Wakefield,Huddersfield, and Bradford," writes Dr. Coulthurst, 199 Dec. 10.1795. BILLY-MEN. 125after the event, " have gained singular credit by theirattendance. But the town of Leeds deserves best ofthe public, for it stood in the front of the battle."The whole county seemed pouring into York. " OnMonday," says a private letter of the day, 20 " therewent through Salton turnpike above three thousandhorsemen." These were principally clothiers, (Billy-men,as they were long called from the event of thenext day,) riding on the ponies which carried commonlytheir cloths to the adjoining markets. Manycame from Saddleworth, a distance of near sixtymiles, spending a great part of the night upon theirjourney; and stormy as was the next morning,(Dec. 1,) they still crowded the road from Lancasterto York. " It was an alarming moment," says aneye-witness, " when these immense numbers began topour in, while as yet we knew not what part theywould take." But by Monday evening the supportersof the government began to feel their strength.When we arrived at York," says Mr. Atkinson,we were told that our adversaries were collected atthe great inn in Kendal, and that our friends were tomeet at seven, at the George in Coney Street.Thither we repaired without delay, and found a respectablebody of gentlemen already assembled. Theenemy, through the friendship of the corporation, hadpreviously secured the Guildhall, where they couldlay their plans at leisure. We sent a deputation tooffer to meet them the next morning in the Castleso From Ile. Miles Atkinson of Leeds to his son at Cambridge.126 LIFE OF .Wilberforce. 1795.Yard, according to their first announcement, whereboth parties could act freely, hut they refused. Theythen proposed to admit our men and theirs intothe Guildhall by forties ; but this we declined,knowing that the hustings would be filled with themere dregs of York, hired to drown with noise whatthey could not overcome by argument ; but we offeredto meet them on any fair and open ground theychose. In the morning we assembled at the YorkTavern, which was about as near to the Guildhall asthe tavern at which they met ; and at half past ninewe spread our forces even to its gates. They sent outto reconnoitre, and found our strength treble theirs.We were in high spirits, and the enemy were exceedinglydiscouraged. As soon as the gates of theGuildhall were opened, our men rushed in with theirs ;but by entering through the Mansion House theyhad previously possessed the hustings, and had chairedSir Thomas Gascoigne. This unfairness stirred upthe Leeds' spirit ; our men pushed up to the hustings,and lifted several of their number into the midst oftheir opponents' crowd. These immediately calledupon Sir Thomas to quit the chair, and wait till thefreeholders had voted in a chairman. He refused toleave it, and they hoisted him out, and voted Mr.Bacon Frank into his place. Our party then proposedand carried by a majority of three to one anadjournment to the Castle Yard, the usual place ofmeeting, and where numbers had already gathered."At this period of the business, the want of any1795. HIS UNEXPECTED ARRIVAL. 127leader of acknowledged power was deeply felt amongstthe supporters of the constitution. The plans of theopposite party had been long matured, and theirbands were marshalled under their appointed chiefs ;but the friends of order had come suddenly together,and there was none to take the lead in their movements,or engage their general love of order in supportof these necessary though obnoxious Bills. Justwhen this want was most acutely felt, Mr. Wilberforce'scarriage turned the corner into Coney Street.His approach was not generally known. " Youmay conceive our sensations," says a Leeds gentleman," when he dashed by our party in his chariotand four a little before we reached York." He wasreceived with the same exultation by the assembledconcourse. " He arrived," says Mr. Atkinson, " atabout a quarter to eleven, amidst the acclamations ofthousands. The city resounded with shouts, andhats filled the air." " What a row," he said to hisson, when quietly entering the city thirty-two yearslater by the same road, " what a row did I make whenI turned this corner in 1795; it seemed as if thewhole place must come down together."Leaving his carriage he pushed through the tumultof the Guildhall, and soon appeared upon the hustings.Here he vainly attempted to prevail on Mr.Wyvill and his friends to concur in the adjournmentto the Castle Yard. " He hoped," he said, " to havemet his opponents that day face to face, and convincedthem of the groundlessness of their prejudices,128 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1795.if they were not prepared to shut up all the avenuesto the understanding, and all the passages to theheart." But fair discussion was not their desire, andthey refused to quit the Hall. He proceeded thereforewithout them to the Castle Yard. " And now,"said Mr. Bacon Frank, taking his place upon thegreat stone steps which supplied the place of a temporaryhustings, " now at least we are upon countyground." " It was perhaps the largest assemblageof gentlemen and freeholders which ever met inYorkshire." 21 " Here," writes Mr. Atkinson, " wehad three good speeches from Colonel Creyke, Mr.Spencer Stanhope, and Mr. Wilberforce. The last,I think, and so I believe think all that heard him,was never exceeded. A most incomparable speechindeed. All went on quietly, till that mad fellowColonel Thornton stood up in his regimentals, andwould speak in favour of the Jacobins. Thorntonwas heard a little, and some of the York rabble collectedto support him." "He told them, that manyof the soldiers were ready to join them whenever theyshould rise." 2S " In consequence of this interruption,the chairman ordered the freeholders to take theright hand of the court. We did so, and were bythis time about four thousand. The address andpetition against seditious meetings, and in favour ofthe King and constitution, were carried almost unanimously; and Thornton, after throwing off his regisYork Paper of the day.Letter of Bacon Frank Esq., Dec. 9.1795. COMPLETE TRIUMPH OF LOYALISTS. 129mental to the rabble, was carried in a chair to theGuildhall. The conclusion was highly favourable, andwe were all in the highest spirits. Whilst congratulatingone another by thousands in the streets, we did'not see one adversary appear." 23Up betimes," is his own brief entry of this busyday, 24 " and off to Lancaster. There found all the WestRiding was in motion. Got to York at eleven. Kindlyreceived. Guildhall Castle Yard spoke interviewwith Wyvill his sad paper. Thornton giving awayhis regimentals to the mob. In speech, foolishly didnot go more into length." " I should have said muchmore," he tells Mr. Hey, 25 " if we had got into debate,for I really had not natural elasticity enough to expand,without opponents, to such a size as I should haveswelled to, if I had been as large as I was preparedto be." Yet his speech, though shorter than he haddesigned, proved signally effective. Mr. Wyvill didnot hesitate to attribute the decision of the county tohis personal efforts and influence. " It rejoiced myheart," wrote Dr. Coulthurst, " to see you at York,and much more to hear you. Your appearance, butmost of all your very eloquent philippic, was wonderfullybeneficial to the cause, the country, and yourself.Many who, to my personal knowledge, camedecidedly hostile to the Bills, were induced, on hearingyour speech, to sign the addresses and petition.You have gained over almost every man in the five*> Letter from Mr. Atkinson. ** Diary.Letter, Dec. 7.G 3130 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1795.great commercial towns of the West Riding. Ournew sheriff Godfrey Wentworth declared, afterhe had heard you, that the greatest pleasure hecould enjoy in possessing an extensive influence inYorkshire, would he in coming forward with a largebody of freeholders to support your election." 26From an influential merchant in the town of Leedshe heard :Leeds, Dec. 3, 1795.Dear Sir,I earnestly hope that this will find your bodyrecruited from its fatigues ; and I think your mindwill find cause for exultation, now, and so long as thepartnership continues, in contemplating your Yorkexpedition. The burst of applause spontaneouslyflowing from constituents brought there by no influencewhatever, save that of disinterested independenceand purest civic principle . . applause from suchhearts, and so uprightly earned . . will ever sound inyour ears ; and you may rest fully satisfied, that thisevent has seated you firmly in the place you haveso ably filled. It has confirmed the staunch, fixedthe neutral, and deterred the speculative. The unitedWest Riding is not easily to be overmatched.You will have petitions from this division up tonight,though the shortness of time renders the signaturescomparatively few. The bells were ringing tillmidnight on Tuesday from the first moment of Feb. 11, 179S.179.5. THE GLORIOUS FIRST OF DECEMBER. 131licence. Twenty King's men to one Jacobin was thecry, and the glorious first of December to be an era.I am always,Your most obliged humble servant,W. Cooks."The issue of this effort is well worthy of remark.His success had been complete ; and it was the manifestreward of an unflinching obedience to the dictatesof his conscience. When he left London, hewas entirely ignorant of the temper of the greattowns in the West Riding : his friends had warnedhim to expect their opposition ; and this would certainlyhave cost him his seat at the approaching election.But he was determined to discharge his duty;and he returned beyond all expectation at the veryhighest wave of popular applause, and safe fromall possibility of rivalry. " I never saw you butonce," wrote a constituent long afterwards, " andthat day you won my heart, and every honest heartin the county. It was at the York meeting. I neverfelt the power of eloquence until that day. You mademy blood tingle with delight. The contrast of youraddress, and the mellow tone of your voice, of whichnot one single word was lost to the hearers, with thebellowing, screaming attempts at speaking in someothers, was most wonderful. You breathed energyand vigour into the desponding souls of timid loyalists,and sent us home with joy and delight." 27 Not lessFrom Colonel Cocked, Sept. 10, 1810.132 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1795.worthy of remark is the quiet thankfulness whichthrew a grace over his triumph. " With him," hetold Mr. Hey, 28 " it was matter of thankfulness toGod that the enemies of peace and public order hadbeen so discomfited. For myself, I should be thankfulto have been so far honoured as to have beenmade in any measure the instrument of the goodnessof Heaven."The successful issue of the meeting he had communicatedto Mr. Pitt the same evening by express ;and on the following morning he set off himself forLondon. " On Thursday," he says, 29 " I travelledon to Biggleswade, and on Friday got to the Housewith the petitions. I told my tale with effect. I wasreceived with great gratitude and cordiality. Thisteaches a practical lesson." " Great, doubtless, wasthe effect of his reappearance in the House of Commons; backed, as he now was, by the evident approbationof his county. He was able to tender to theHouse his solemn declaration that the north approvedof the measures of the ministers. Every day confirmedhis statements in the unanimous petitionswhich followed him from Yorkshire. " The influenceof those who called the meeting might be expectedto be great in this neighbourhood," says a letter fromRotherham, 30 " nevertheless the number of those whohave not signed our petition is extremely small."We have got the signatures of every freeholder but49 Dec. 7. Diary.30 From Richard Holden Esq.1795. GENERAL PETITIONS FOR THE BILLS. 133two in Pocklington, Leighton, &c." 31 " Everychurchman in this parish 32 save one has cordially concurredin it." " Here it has been signed by almostevery individual freeholder." 33Such were the accounts from the different parts ofYorkshire. " Our petition was not well supportedin the Lords," complained the chairman of the CastleYard meeting, 34 " however 'defended numerus.' Itspoke for itself, and was so decidedly the sense ofthe county, that it could not be doubted. I findby a printed list sent me from Leeds that our opponentsmustered no more than 309 ; if it had beengenerally known that names might be sent after theTuesday evening, I am convinced that our 7000might have been greatly increased." Mr. Pitt feltdeeply the importance of his efforts. Other countiesfollowed in the wake of Yorkshire, " proving the justiceof what Fox would often say, 'Yorkshire andMiddlesex between them make all England.' " MHis use of this success is a good illustration of thatsingleness of aim which enabled him to effect so much.Instead of seeking to reap from it any personal advantage,he employed it in the cause of his Africanclients. Recent events in the West Indies had revivedthe old charge that the friends of the negrorace were Jacobins at heart. The government ofFrance, finding it impossible to resist the naval forceLetter from Robert Venison Esq. Single.33 Mr. Whitacre from Huddersfield. ** Bacon Frank, Esq.Con. Mem.134 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1795.of England, attempted in despair to raise against it thewhole black population. For this purpose she enfranchisedher own negroes ; and sent the ferocious VictorFugues to proclaim freedom and enforce rebellionamongst the English colonies. The flame was soonkindled in Grenada, Dominica, and St. Vincent's ;to them the opponents of the Abolition pointed withno little triumph ; and quoted, as the fulfilment oftheir worst prophecies, the outrages which herewalked hand in hand with negro liberation. Itwas undoubtedly a fearful sight which was presentedby these miserable islands ; and there were not wantingthose amongst the honest friends of Abolitionwho thought that the question should be let to resttill some more peaceful season. Nothing short of hisindisputable attachment to the constitution could atthis moment have enabled Mr. Wilberforce to persevere.And there never was a happier moment forrenewing his exertions, than in his present hour ofcivic triumph. " Your giving notice at this time"writes Dr. Burgh, " that you intend to bring theSlave Trade again before the House, and doing it tooin rather a marked manner, will be of service to thequestion, and snatch it, in the estimation of the country,from that odious connexion in which those whocontend for the trade have endeavoured to place itbefore the public eye. They who make sale of theirbrethren, will hardly stick at falsehood; and accordinglydiligence has been used to associate Jacobinism,equality, and the abolition of a trade that preserved1795. HIS USE OF VICTORY. 135the gradations of society. At this time .you stand inasituation peculiarly favourable to the refutation ofall this unchristian stuff. Last year you had not halfthe advantages you now possess. To what nonsensewere my ears then a frequent witness. Your desireto terminate the war was a result, forsooth, of dissentingprinciples, principles hostile to all good government,and your zeal to abolish the Slave Tradewas of course included in the same silly charge. Butas yet nothing has faded upon the memory of thosewho heard you here ; and this, therefore, is the momentto bring your question under the protection ofyour renewed reputation while in its bloom, with allits honours hanging thick upon it." 36Upon the 15th of December, he gave notice thatearly in the following session he would propose hismotion, reminding the House at the same time thatthe first day of the approaching year had been theperiod named in 1792, for the termination of thetrade. " And now," he added, " when we are checkingthe progress of licentiousness, now is the verytime to show our true principles, by stopping a practicewhich violates all the real rights of humannature."Meanwhile the Christmas recess brought him ashort season of repose. " The last fortnight or threeweeks," he says on the day of the adjournment'' 7have been severe trials to a man weakly like me ; andLetter from Dr. Burgh, Dec. 12.37 Diary, Dec. 19.136 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1795.I have lost ground in health which I must recover. Ihave kept rather bad hours. In my religious frame,I hope, better than sometimes; more reading theScripture. Much occupied in writing oppressedwith letters about the petitions. I have given up myidea of an address to my constituents ; Warringtonpromising to write a pamphlet, though without hisname. Pitt very friendly just now."Battersea Rise was his head-quarters during thisrecess. "Thursday. Dined at Jeremy Bentham'sLord St. Helen's, Abbot, and Reilly there. Dinedearly, and sat late, discussing very pleasantly aboutLord St. Helen's travels, &c." " Wednesday.Dined with old Newton, where met Henry Thorntonand Macaulay. Newton very calm and pleasingowned that Romaine had made many antinomians.Christmas day. Up early for prayer, and discussed toservants on the sacrament. Macaulay came at breakfastwith Sierra Leone news. I averse almost tohear it wrong it requiring immediate attention.Talked with a Scotch Presbyterian, thought of forSierra Leone, but objecting to terms of ordination." 39Sunday. Battersea Rise all day Henry and I uprather early for prayer, which answered through God'sgrace. I hope a profitable, and I am sure a happy,Sunday. Venn came at night, and told us his griefthat a new chapel talked of because he did not preachthe gospel. We discussed, and told Venn his faults ;but he acknowledged, and we too, who much agree38 Diary. *> Ib.1796. DIARY. 137with him, that he does not agree with any of thegospel preachers. They swell one part to the lesseningof another ; strain and pervert Scripture." *Dr. and Mrs. A. and others dined this meant fordoing two first good ; but I doubt if it has at all answered,except that family prayer, &c. may havestruck them. Winter evenings not so well as summer(this practical) when one can walk and split intoparties." " Dined Morton Pitt's Pitt, Glasse, Rumford,Bentham, General Bentham, Rose, and othersconversation not edifying. Poor Bentham ! dying ofsickness of hope deferred, which forced to stifle." 41Dined te'te-a-te'te with Pitt long discussion aboutpolitics and people he very open, and fair, and patrioticno idea of peace before another campaign."To town levee with Lord F.'s yeomanry cavalryaddress. King talked to me of my friend Gisborne'sanswer to Paley. Then to Pitt's he accostedme very affectionately. After some doubt,to Battersea Rise, where quiet all the evening." 49th.To Navestock found Bishop of Gloucesterthere his opinion about Johnson's irreligious respectablecompanions." " Sunday. Walked long afterchurch with Lady Waldegrave. 43 Her deep interestfor Lord Cornwallis and Thurlow. 44 Thurlow's kindnessand generosity to her. Lord Cornwallis says heis an unhappy, mortified man, but Lady Waldegrave4 Diary, Dec. 27. ' Ib.Ib. Jan. 6, 1796. Ib. Jan. 10.44 The guardians to her son the late Lord Waldegrave.138 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1796.does not think him so. Lady Waldegrave told methat when a girl she was conscious of the unprotectedand dangerous state of herself and her sisters, andprayed to be kept from evil."The following Friday he resolved "to set apartchiefly for religious exercises ; fasting in my way, i. e.being very moderate in food, which only does with me.I cannot employ it so entirely, because I have somebusiness about the poor which will not bear any delay.My chief reasons for a day of secret prayer are, 1st,That the state of public affairs is very critical, andcalls for earnest deprecation of the Divine displeasure.2ndly, My station in life is a very difficult one, whereinI am at a loss to know how to act. Direction thereforeshould be specially sought from time to time.Sadly, I have been graciously supported in difficultsituations of a public nature. I have gone out andreturned home in safety : my health has not sufferedfrom fatigue : and favour and a kind reception haveattended me. I would humbly hope too, that what Iam now doing is a proof that God has not withdrawnHis Holy Spirit from me. 43 I am covered with mercies.Return then unto thy rest, O my soul, for theLord hath dealt bountifully with thee. 16th. Morningfelt the fragrant impression of yesterday."Towards the conclusion of the recess he spent " aday at Holwood. Morning walked with Pitt. Heardpart of Warrington's first number on Seditious Assemblies'and the other Bill. Next morning to townJournal. Friday, Jan. 15.1796. ANNUAL MOTION FOR ABOLITION. 139tete-astute with Pitt he very kind, open and fairabout peace, and I think wise too." 46Parliament met upon the 2nd of February, and onthe 18th, he moved for leave to bring in a Bill toabolish the Slave Trade in a time to be limited, fixedafterwards to March 1st, 1797. He "opened thebusiness," he says, " coldly and indifferently," butwas roused by the debate which was unusually animated,and in his reply spoke "warmly and well." 47The brunt of the contest was borne by the ordinaryWest Indian opposition, General Tarleton, Mr. Dent,and Sir William Young ; but some who professed tojoin in his condemnation of the trade, were in truthits most efficient supporters. Nothing, he urged,would so much check Victor Fugues, and retard theprogress of French principles, as to suspend the importationof fresh slaves, and thereby withhold theraw material of sedition. Yet with indefatigableperseverance Mr. Jenkins declared, " I anxiouslywish that the question were postponed at least tillthe return of peace." "There is something," he replied," not a little provoking in the dry, calm way inwhich gentlemen are apt to speak of the sufferingsof others. The question suspended ! Is the desolationof wretched Africa suspended? Are all thecomplicated miseries of this atrocious trade is thework of death suspended ? No, sir, I will not delaythis motion, and I call upon the House not to insultthe forbearance of Heaven by delaying this tardy act6 Diary, Jan. 22. ? Ib. Feb. 18.140 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1796.of justice." " What !" he said to the West Indianswho had boasted in the course of the debate thattheir slaves were well fed, clothed, and lodged;what ! are these the only claims of a rationalbeing ? Are the feelings of the heart nothing ? Whereare social intercourse and family endearment ? wherethe consciousness of independence, the prospect oftenrealized of affluence and honour ? where are willingservices and grateful returns? where, above all, thelight of religious truth, and the hope full of immortality? So far from thanking the honourable gentlemanfor the feeding, clothing, and lodging, of whichhe boasts, I protest against the way in which he hasmentioned them, as degrading men to the level ofthe brutes, and insulting all the higher qualities ofour common nature."General Tarleton's motion for an adjournment wasnegatived by a majority of 26. " Surprise," he says, 48and joy in carrying my question. Speaker askedme and Pitt together to come and sup thought itwould be unkind to Pitt to refuse. He delightedwith having carried it very kind, and seemed vexedwhen I mentioned our little heat. I staid too late,and in my feelings too little of sacred joy and humblegratitude."He was now occupied in perfecting his Bill, andfrequently enters in his Diary, " Morning at Pitt'sabout the Slave measure." " I expect," writes hisfriend James Gordon, " that it will be somethingDiary.1796. ABOLITION BILL. 141wonderful. The production of four such heads, andI believe I may say four such hearts, for Fox shouldbe better than he is, his natural disposition is good.Politics are said to harden the heart, and pervert theunderstanding. In this instance it seems not. SerjeantAdair's speech I like the best of all comprehensive,strong, clear." " On Monday, Feb. 22,"says the Diary, "crossed from dinner, and findingthe House in a good state brought in Slave Billwithout opposition, and recrossed." He did not longcontinue unopposed. The 3rd of March was fixedfor the second reading, and after a morning spentupon the Bill at Mr. Pitt's, he was dining in PalaceYard with a party of his House of Commons friends,when early in the evening a supporter of theSlave Trade moved the second reading of his Bill,hoping by this manoeuvre to prevent its further progress.His watchfulness defeated the attempt. " Hurriedfrom dinner at home over to House, to the secondreading of the Slave Bill. Spoke against time tillmany came. Carried it 63 to 31." 49On the 7th the Bill was committed. " Breakfast,M Stephen as before, and Adair. Afterwards,William Smith about Slave Bill. Long busy. Afew friends dined before House. Got Bill throughcommittee." 5l But at the third reading these freshhopes were again disappointed. " Dined beforeHouse. Slave Bill thrown out by 74 to 70, ten oroDiary, March 3. * Ib.4 ' By a majority of 76 to 31.142 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1796.twelve of those who had supported me absent in thecountry, or on pleasure. Enough at the Opera 52 tohave carried it. Very much vexed and incensed atouropponents." 53 "Such wretches as T. and D."writes Dr. Burgh 54 with considerable heat, " may beconsigned to mere contempt. Sir William Young byhis insincerity entitles himself to as much attentionas may frustrate a shallow trick, but against DundasI recommend, and will cultivate in myself, a propensityto direct hostilities. Reared as he has beenin the small metaphysics of Scotland, and crampedby his country's imitative adoption of French philosophy,I can only see in the influence of such aman the approaches of French morals, French politics,French atheism."His own heart was sickened at seeing this greatcause thus sacrificed to the carelessness of lukewarmfriends, and the intrigues of interested enemies. " Iam permanently hurt," he says, " about the SlaveTrade." His own attention to the cause was ofanother character. "The Slave Trade is comingon," he wrote at this time to a friend M whom he hadengaged to visit, " and every thing must give placeto the House of Commons." " Asked," he says the** " A new comic Opera was brought forward last night, under thename of 'I Dui Gobi,' (the Two Hunchbacks,) the music of which wascomposed by Portugal. Avignon, well known ten years ago, appearedlast night, &c. There was a large and splendid audience." TrueBriton, March 16.M Diary, March 15. M March 19.Admiral Gambier.1796. EMIGRANT CLERGY. 143day before, 36 " to a small musical party of the Duchessof Gordon's. To my surprise found a very largefashionable party. People greatly surprised to seeme.Lady A. regretting that having so long livedregularly, now she was obliged to go out and keeplate hours on account of her daughters, who are comeout, and going to such places as these every night.Lady Salisbury and others expecting me to come tothem. Kept up too late, though came away attwelve, when fashionables only entering." " Refusedtwo assemblies, and Lady Salisbury's, to whichpressed." 57 ' .For useful objects he could still find time. " March5th. Received a letter stating the distress of the Frenchemigrant clergy. Kept awake at night. Thoughtmuch of them, and formed a plan." x The next dayafter church, saw the Bishop of St. Pol de Leon,and several other persons, on emigrant business.Then with Henry Thornton, by appointment at mydesire, to Lady Buckinghamshire's. She and MissMacnamara earnest about the poor emigrants." 59 OnWednesday, the public fast day " Explained to myservants the nature of fasting, and pressed on themits importance, then did some necessary businessabout the emigrants." ^ "I propose to read at least*a hundred lines of Virgil daily often more."Before the conclusion of the session an attempt wasDiary. Ib. March 14.Ib. March 5. Ib. Sunday, March 6.Ib. March 9.144 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1796.made by Mr. Francis 61 to improve the condition ofthe negroes. " Francis," writes Dr. Burgh 2 " whosejudgment does not seem to be equal to his laudablezeal on this subject, has uttered a sentence which Ihope, if true, is not materially so : he says that youare not well, and ascribes your absence from theHouse of Commons to this cause. I beg as a favourthat you will let me have a particular account ofyourself. I had intended to have inquired into yourintentions with regard to this immense question, andeven to have urged the necessity of giving no respiteto your murderous opponents, but keeping the wholeof Abolition forward in whatever form you can contriveto shape it, in this mortal hour, and thereforemolle tempus ' of the present parliament. But I cantrust you when you are well, without either my goador prudence."There was too much truth in the announcementwhich had startled Dr. Burgh. He was confinedentirely to the house by a very serious illness. " Ihave been indisposed," he says, 63 " for ten days,and have had my head a good deal weakened.My mind has, I thank God, been in an easy, tranquilstate, reposing on the promises with a consciousnessof deep demerit, yet trusting in God'smercy through Christ. I trust He will not spurnsuch a one from Him. I have lately felt and nowfeel a sort of terror on reentering the world."61 April 11. * April 14.63 Journal, April 17.1796. ILLNESS. 145I have not," he adds, w after a partial restoration,enough considered God's late call of illness, nor am Inow desirous enough of health and strength, that I maybemore active, but rather secretly glad that I havea privilege to be idle. This is base ! What should Ithink of it in any one else, who should be glad thathe was compelled to live quiet, and indulge at home,instead of going about in the service of some greatbenefactor." This indisposition to all action wasitself a part of his complaint ; for his natural temperdisposed him to exertion. He describes himself afew days later, as being, " according to the Easternproverb, at least according to the spirit of it, (betterto sit than to walk, to sleep than to wake, &c.) in amost enviable state, for I suffer little or no pain, andcan eat, drink, and sleep ; but a life of more activitybetter suits my depraved, oriental taste, and I shallbe very glad to be given up again to the toils of myordinary habits. Yet, to be serious, I hope I feelthankful for all the conveniences and blessings whichsurround me, the comfort of which is never so markedas in a state of sickness." 65His friends looked forward with great apprehensionto the fatigue of the approaching election;and he had already written word to Yorkshire thathis state of health must be his apology for notcanvassing." Yet though "unable to stay throughthe night," and suffering from even occasional64 Journal, April 24.& To Right Honourable Henry Addington.VOL. II. H146 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1796.attendance, he could not be persuaded to give uphis labours in the House of Commons. " 13th. Inbed, under Pitcairnee's advice. 15th. Getting better,but still not capable of applying so do notattempt it. 16th. Got out for the first time in themiddle of the day. 18th. Saw Adair about Quakers'business. He (at length) to move and I tosecond. 25th. Lay down in the morning very faintand weak. Pitt and Dundas called, but could notsee them. Got Adair to put off his motion. 26th.House Adair's Bill about Quakers." To thissubject his attention had been called by one of hisconstituents " When you have abolished the SlaveTrade, pray think of the poor Friends in York Castlefor the non-payment of their tithes." The reliefgiven by the present Bill consisted of two parts ; firstproviding for the summary recovery of tithes withoutthe vexation of the present law ; and secondly allowingtheir simple affirmation to be received as evidencein criminal as well as civil causes. It passed theHouse of Commons upon the 10th of May.Another measure in which he took an active partwas the Bill for regulating curates' stipends. " Feltgreatly for them, but durst not say much of what Ifelt on its true grounds." His correspondence at thistime shows the care which he had taken to learn theactual merits of the case, and in committee he proposedthat one sixth of the income of all beneficesexceeding 450 per annum, where the rector was nonresident,should be added to the curate's' stipend.1796. SLAVE-CARRYING 'BILL. 147This provision, which would have checked the greatestevils of non-residence, was lost on a division. 66But his main business in the House until the closeof the session was the Slave-carrying Bill; intowhich he endeavoured to insert such additional restrictionsas should raise the price, and so promotethe better treatment, of the traders' miserable cargo.When the question came before the House ofCommons, many of his ordinary opponents declaredtheir approbation of the measure. " Slave-carry ingBill Sir William Young, Barham, Washington, Rose,and Ellis with us. General Tarleton forced to opposeus." 67 "There," said the General, pointing to someof his Liverpool constituents in the gallery, " thereare my masters." "Counted out 36, with Pitt bythe West Indians." The same tactics were twiceafterwards successful. " Counted out. Sadly disturbedboth to-night and last night. I find it toolate to do any thing before the dissolution." ^ " Thisweek I have occasionally felt a sinful anger about theSlave-carrying Bill, and the scandalous neglect of itsfriends." 69 The success of our West Indian expeditionshad disposed Mr. Pitt to adopt Dundas's systemof colonial acquisition. This fatal policy Mr. wilberforcelaboured to oppose ; and he gladly thereforeseized an opportunity of confidential intercourse affordedby the termination of the session. On the dayafter the prorogation they went together " tete-astuteAyes 14, Noes 33. & Diary, May 1 1.Ib. May 13. Journal, May 15.H 2148 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1796.to Cambridge. Dined at Chesterfield much talkhe patriotic Prince of Wales talked over Thurlow,&c. Supped at R.'s what a bishop in embryo ! " 7Pitt's conversation determined me to go off to attendto Beverley and Hull."His influence in his native town might, it washoped, if he were on the spot, secure the return oftwo of Mr. Pitt's supporters. On Saturday thewrits were out, and he therefore " set off for Hull,and having four horses, got at half past one toBring. Stanhope at Spinal. Gamaliel Lloyd toldme that he thought the war was now going ongloriously ; that we were likely to be surrounded withconstitutions founded upon popular rights, and shouldhave a just and real representation. Lunacy !" 71 AtBring he complains that there was "no service onthe Sunday morning, and the people sadly loungingabout. Stanhope filling my head with election matters."72 " I was in hopes of a day of religious retirementbefore my bustle, but God has ordered it otherwise.I fear I have been too ready to enter intoelection matters ; yet I feel the emptiness of worldlythings, and am, I trust, this day in some degreethirsting after the water of life." 73 " Alas, whatearnestness do I see around me to secure a transitoryinterest ! what carelessness when eternity is in question!" 74 " Let me pray earnestly for grace to standfirm within, amidst all the turmoil into which I7o Diary, May 20. ?i Ib. May 21. Journal.73 Ib. 74 TO William Hey Esq.1796. HULL ELECTION. 149am about to enter. How much vanity have Ifelt in myself from the situation in which Istand m the county ? It is all the unmerited mercyof God can I be vain ? I go to earnest prayer, andwould endeavour after dedication of myself to God inChrist through the Holy Spirit." 75Early on Monday morning he arrived at Hull.To the Bench with Sam. Thornton. He sure, andall sure for him. Canvassing quietly, forbiddingshow, flags, &c. Discontent scarce began to showitself. Saw Sykes's. Agreed to support Stanhope.Dined at home, and after dinner to Sir SamuelStanding's ship people, wrights, &c. there. T.friendly and vain. Blades and Bateman had sentoff to Pitt to dispatch a man. I sent off a messengerto him to stop any one, and desire all possiblesupport for Stanhope." " The next morning canvassingwith Thornton and Stanhope. The formersure, the latter successful in canvassing. Somegathering discontents. Wednesday. Doubtful howto act about my own election, and half inclined todash into the North Riding. Wrote many letters.Great discontent now against Sam. Thornton. ColonelBurton came with pomp to Hull, which made hiseconomy more unpopular. Thursday. Sir CharlesTurner came to Hull. I going to Wilderness, butput it off till afternoon. All the ribands bought uppeople delighted a great row, &c. Dined at homeafter writing much, and into Wilderness. Called on7* Journal.150 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1796.Bethel and Constable ; he very frank about RomanCatholics not enjoying political rights, and would takeno part, &c. Got back late. People riotous ; butThornton having to-night 800 promises, deemed byall perfectly safe. Stanhope also. Friday. 76 Electionday. Thornton led off the poll, but Sir CharlesTurner soon passed him, and he last. Thornton'scolours torn out, and not suffered to appear peopleabusive Sir Charles idolized. At night numberswere, Turner 661, Stanhope 547, Thornton 478.Sykes's extremely distressed at the idea of throwingout Thornton. Saturday. Thornton brought in withdifficulty Turner 884, Thornton 734, Stanhope715."It was now time that he should attend to his ownelection, and he set " off" accordingly " for Yorkthrough Beverley saw Bernard, found all friendly,and he told me that he had not seen one single freeholderwho was against me. Got into Philip Langdale'schaise to Leighton dined in the carriage, and on toYork." " I hold your seat," Dr. Burgh had writtento him, 77 " to be as secure as if the county were yourown private borough, yet cross accidents may involveyou in expense; so keep your eyes about you, andmark events." His colleague had for some monthsdetermined to retire. " After what has passed,"Mr. Duncombe had told him in the winter, 78 " havingdiffered from my constituents, and differing fromthem still upon a great constitutional question, youT May 27. " May 16. Jan. 7.1796. EXPECTED CONTEST FOR YORKSHIRE. 151will naturally think that it will not be agreeable tothem that I should offer myself at the ensuingelection, and certainly, according to the principles Ihold, it would not be so to myself." The increasinginfirmities of age enforced this determination, andMr. Duncombe now retired from public life. Threecandidates 79 came forward to contest the seat whichhe had vacated, all men of wealth and influence ;and though none of them opposed Mr. Wilberforce,yet their struggle would of course involve himin the trouble and expense of a contested election.He was received at York with the most heartygreeting ; and assurances of universal support pouredin from every quarter. "rare you for Wilberforce ?' isthe first question generally asked at Leeds ; and hewould have a sorry life of it hereabouts, who wouldundertake to canvass without making you a sine quanon." m " Dined at tavern Withers the recorder,very kind Preston, Stanhope, others came droppingin gradually evening, much talk." 8lOn Sunday, May the 29th, after having attendedpublic worship in the Minster, he withdrew histhoughts from the bustling scene around him, tocommune with himself. " This last has been a veryhurrying week, little time for devotion and Scriptureneglected, for which I ought to have found time.But I thank God that I hope I have desired andw Charles Duncombe Esq. Walter Fawkes Esq. and the Hon. HenryLascelles.80 Letter from W. Cooksonon Esq. May 27. si Diary.152 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1796.wished for a quiet opportunity of communing withHim and my own heart, and to-day I adore with somedegree of gratitude that gracious Providence whichhas led me all my days in ways that I knew not, andhas given me so much favour with men. It is Hiswork. His be the glory. I hope I really feel howentirely it is His doing ; that I have nothing of whichI can boast or be proud ; that it is what I could neverhave effected by my own counsels or might. Oh mayI be enabled to be grateful, (duly I cannot be,) and todevote myself first to God's glory, and then diligentlyto the service of those constituents who are so kindto me." 82The nomination for the county followed uponMonday morning. " Day windy and rainy I spokebut moderately Milnes very civil high eulogiumimmense majority for me. Most, even of opposition,spoke favourably of me. Meeting over in two hours.Opposition for Fawkes most active. Tavern, andtalked with many till dinner. All candidates wishingto bear me harmless, and conference for the purpose,which adjourned till seven o'clock ; previous meetingof friends. Evening most distressing all the 'WestRiding men wishing me to join Lascelles. Inconsistentwith my declaration, thought Robert Broadley,T. Williamson, Creyke, Stanhope, Sir Robert Hildyard,and myself. Wharton highly complimentary to me.Much distressed to resist the importunity of friendsto join. Lloyd declared that a motion about to be84 Journal.1796. CONTEST PREVENTED. 153made that they should leave me. I more cool, thankGod, than usual. What a mercy I did not yield ! mycharacter would have had a lasting blot. At lengthat eleven o'clock, when all conference vain, Fawkes sentword by Sir George Armytage that he would spendno more of Lascelles's money than necessary, anddeclined. Duncombe had resigned before dinner. Itold room of friends ; they roared, &c. and stillroaring till very late. I called at Lascelles's, and thenFawkes's he civil and composed. Sat to a cool chatwith Williamson, Creyke, &c. Bacon Frank had anticipatedFawkes's resigning." " Next day," he says,people going away. Drew up Chas. Duncombe'sadvertisement, and told him he must come to election.Dined Archbishop's Sir George Armytage told methe anecdote was true of Brandling's receiving letterpromising Duke of Norfolk's, Devonshire's, and LordFitzwilliam's support to Fawkes, and not opening ittill next day ; it would have changed their resolution.Sir George said it was Firewood's long purse." 83The election was to follow in a week, and he gladlywithdrew himself from York to the quiet of thecountry. " Travelled to Creyke's, who had been verykind, and pressed me. Felt excessively comfortable,from calm after fortnight's turbulence and bustle.Much pleased with Creyke's family peace andrationality." w "I have had hurried devotions lately,and scarce any Scripture reading, yet in general mymind in better frame than sometimes. Much fatigueM Diary, May 31. M Ib. June 1.H 3154 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1796.little or no anxiety about these things grateful,I trust, to God."Upon the 7th of June he was " earlyish at YorkCastle, about half past ten. All, except five or six,West Riding people. Colonel Lloyd's horse nearlythrown down by the people's tearing off ribands.Strickland earnest to know if I had joined Lascelles,and angry at sheriff's putting up names jointly.Bacon Frank moved, Strickland seconded me. Ispoke about twenty minutes very well, and peoplepleased. Dr. Trip's ' God bless you, Wilberforce.' " ^I have heard so much of your speech," wrote LordCarrington, 86 " that I would not have missed seeing itfor a great deal. It is a proof how much the effect ofa speech depends upon the opinion entertained by thehearer of the sincerity and character of the speaker.Such a speech from Sheridan, if he had been memberfor the county of York, would have been ridiculous."It was in a very different tone from the ordinaryeloquence of a county hustings. " I should," hetold them, " but feebly execute my task if I were toattempt to give expression to the various emotionsof my heart. I trust that I may say they are virtuousemotions ; they are grateful ; they are humble.I feel deeply impressed with your kindness ; butabove all, I recognise with thankfulness the hand ofthat gracious Providence which has caused my cup tooverflow with blessings ; which first raised me to anelevation I could never hope to have attained, hasDiarv. <* July 10.1796. SPEECH AT YORK. 155enabled me in some tolerable measure to dischargethe duties of that, important station, and disposedyour minds to reward my services with so disproportionatea share of favour. You will not wonder atmy being serious ; even gratitude like mine is necessarilyserious."After sketching the principles and plan of hispast public conduct, he pointed out to them thegreat importance of their forming, as a county, aright and sober judgment upon the great publicquestions which from time to time arose. " It isyour part," he told them, " to keep a watchful eyeon the course of public affairs ; not to interfere atall in ordinary cases, but only when weighty andsolemn occasions call for such an intervention ; andthen to deliberate with caution, to determine withgravity, to act with decision. If such be your conduct,the effect can hardly be overstated. I say notthis to flatter you by an exaggerated representationof your political importance ; it is mere matter offact, the very language of sober history. Can I forgetthat glorious day, when not many months ago I metyou in this place. Then you assumed your propercharacter and what was the result ? A spirit of delusionseemed to have gone forth through the metropolisand its vicinity, and there was no foreseeingwhat might be the consequences of the growing evil.In this state of things you were called together. Iknew that I might justly rely on you in such a crisis ;nor was my expectation disappointed : from that LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1796.ment the storm was hushed ; from one end of thekingdom to the other your voice was heard, andwherever it came the friends of order and the constitutiontook courage. The enemies of civil peacehung their heads confounded." His speech was followedby the chairing, always a tumultuous scene atYork. " People whilst half down Coney Street toreoff the ribands from my chair, and almost threw medown safely out. Dined tavern about sixty-fiveor seventy. Mr. G.'s coarse, indecent toast I wouldnot give it. Sheriff well behaved." The secret ofhis hidden strength is simply recorded in the followingline : " Home about seven and prayed. Muchaffected, and shed many tears."After some doubts " where to fix " himself " for theinterval until the meeting of parliament, in which time "he " hoped to resume " his " book," he determined uponBuxton, where he resolved " when pretty well, to applyvigorously to business." 87 Before fixing here, he madea hasty progress through various parts of Yorkshire.His first visit was to his mother's house at Hull.She seems to olden even now, but better than whenat Scarborough last summer. Thomas Thompson dinedwith us. Too loose and free in morals about Heronvoters and election management ; but people here byno means shy of election subject, which shows theyhave not done what they think wrong." 88 " Milnerpreached very practical and good. Joseph Milnerdined with us simple and pleasant. At night myw Diary. & Ib. June 9.1796. BUXTON. 157mother affected at parting, and whispered ' Rememberme in your prayers.' Milner thinks her weaker." 89Early the next morning he started for the WestRiding; where in the middle of the week he says,All this dining publicly and incessant company issad work. Oh that I might really feel a deep desireof something better ! I don't know that I could wellhave avoided it, after the kind conduct of my friendstowards me ; yet I almost think I would if it werenow to do over again. I seem to be gaining crediton false pretences." 90 " I have done less good thanusual this time in the way of religious conversationand giving books. Yet to do so is really hard." giOn the 26th of June he was established for a timeat Buxton, whence he writes a few days later to Mr.Macaulay, then Governor at Sierra Leone.TO ZACHARY MACAULAY ESQ.Buxton, July 3, 1796.My dear Sir,Whilst I was taking a contemplative walk thismorning, I rambled in thought to Sierra Leone, andmy mind was naturally led to consider the providentialdispensations of that Almighty Being, whose infinitelycomplicated plan embraces all His creatures,and who especially leads, and directs, and supports allthose who in their different walks through this multifariousmaze of life, are pursuing in His faith and fear66 Diary, Sunday, ]2.90 Journal, Wednesday night. Wakefield, June 15.91 Journal, June 19. Halifax.158 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1796.the objects which He has respectively assigned them.Here they often know little of each other, but they areall members of the same community, and at length theyshall be all collected into one family ; and peace, andlove, and joy, and perfect unalloyed friendship, shallreign without intermission or abatement. Perhapsyou will then introduce me to some of your sablesubjects, whom I never shall see in this world ; andI may bring you personally acquainted with others,to whom I have talked of your labours and sufferingsin our common cause. ' The holy church throughoutall the world doth acknowledge Thee.' It alwayspresents to my mind a most august idea the praisesof God arising from every nation, and kindred, andpeople, where His name is known, .and blending, asthey rise, into one note and body of harmony. Howmuch ought this to stimulate us to enlarge the boundsof our Redeemer's kingdom !Monday evening, July 4th. I reproach myself fornot having written to you sooner, but you mayguess how I have been employed for some timepast. I have great reason to be thankful to God,for having disposed the hearts of almost all myconstituents to receive me with favour. It wasthe more pleasing, because I have been ratherdeficient in personal attentions, and of course havenever attended any of their races, or indeed of theirother public meetings. Even those who differed fromme on political grounds, did me the honour to say, thatby my diligent discharge of the business of the1796. LETTER TO MACAULAY. 159county, I deserved to be re-elected. My colleague havingresigned on account of his declining health, therewas the prospect of a contest for the vacant succession,which, if it had gone forward, could hardly have failedto involve me in much trouble and expense. Happily(I may be justly allowed to say happily, on public, noless than personal grounds) two of the three candidatesresigned, and I regained my seat quietly. I have sincebeen paying my compliments and thanks through apart of the West Riding, and by Mr. Key's advice Iam now drinking the waters of this place. I believethat every one likes to hear what absent friends aredoing, and therefore I enter into detail, trusting that Ido not flatter myself in persuading myself that youesteem me one amongst that number.You will have heard from Tom Babington thatMatthew at length has * fallen asleep.' I sincerelybelieve that a purer spirit scarce ever (Ihad nearly said never) winged its flight to heaven.Your intelligence concerning the Foulahmission is highly illustrative of the character ofMethodism, and seems to me to teem with practicalconsequences. I have as yet only seen the accountcontained in your letter to me. Yet we must not bediscouraged. But this event confirms me in the wishto set up an institution for educating and maintainingmissionaries, of which a few of ourselves should be themanagers. Your communications are always acceptableto me, but knowing how much you are occupied,I beg you will not over work yourself in writing to me.160 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1796.You are aware of my complaint in my eyes, whichcompels me to be a bad correspondent, and will do methe justice to believe, that but for that impedimentyou would hear from me much more frequently. AnySlave Trade intelligence is of course particularlyacceptable. Our affairs in the West Indies now wearsomewhat of a less gloomy aspect, but I expect nogood from that quarter whilst our empire is foundedin blood. Farewell, my dear sir. Believe me always,with cordial esteem and affection,Yours very sincerely,W. WILBERFORCE."His life at Buxton was, as far as possible, that of astudent. " Wednesday. Delightful weather. thorntonwent to Bashaw's. I declined causa waste oftime. Resumed tract." 92 And again, " On my tractin the morning with some spirit." 93 " Talking overmy tract with some friends, but do not find muchhelp from them." 94 " I have this week read Scripture(the Acts) constantly and seriously, and have hadmuch new light thrown on them. I have felt at times,when walking, &c. a sense of the presence of God ;but in company have been vain and gay, and I fear notduly attentive to the edification of friends. Oh howdifferent am I from what I advise others to be, andhow much like the lukewarm Christians I am condemning!" 95 " I have great reason," he wrote at this92 Diary, June 29. & Ib. July 9.91 Ib. July 2. ss Journal, July 3.1796. TO HANNAH MORE. 161time 96 to Hannah More, " to be thankful for gettingthrough all the bustle of my election so well. It wore,so far as trouble and expense went, a much more unpromisingaspect at one period. As it was, I do notsuppose it will turn out to have cost me so much as100 ; so you may draw on me the more freely.For the last month I have been drinking the watersof this place, and have received benefit. I have hereresumed my pen, which had laid quiet near two years,and hope, if it please God to spare my health, that Ishall finish my. work (I hate the term, but don'tknow what to style it) this recess. Seriously andhonestly, you expect too much from it. I do not likeit so well as I did. However, if God pleases, He cangive the increase. I rejoice to hear of your going onprosperously in'your reforming operations. You haveindeed cause for thankfulness at being so much blessedin your endeavours. What a delightful idea is that,which I trust will be realized, of your meeting fromtime to time in a better world, those whom you havebeen the means of enlightening with the knowledge ofa Saviour, and the descendants, from generation togeneration, of those whose" hereditary piety originatedunder your ministry, ' Ride on prosperously.' It isthe contemplation of a scene like this, which refreshesthe mind, when wearied by Archduke Charles andGeneral Moreau. Alas ! no signs of humiliation.God scourges, but we feel it not."July 25.CHAPTER XIII.JULY 1796 TO OCTOBER 1797.Buxton War becomes unpopular Return to London to seePitt Jeremy Bentham Letter to Macaulay Plans for theEast Indies St. Bartholomew's Hospital Sunday drillingBath Work on Christianity Bank stops paymentEllis's motion on Slave Trade Work on Christianity publishedIts great effect Burke Sir Charles MiddletonReturn to Bath Mutiny " Wicked Williams " Motionfor Abolition again lost Wilberforce's marriage Death ofhis brother-in-law Correspondence on the Slave TradeDeath of Hon. E. J. Eliot.THE advice of Mr. Hey had now fixed him for someweeks at Buxton, amidst a crowd of other visitors.The weather delightful for Buxton began thewaters yesterday." 1 He dined commonly at thepublic table, and mixed much with the (miscellaneousgroup around him. " I hope," replies his mother toone of his descriptions, " that you have improved intaste and politeness by your elegant companions. Yoursister wishes for a view of the group." He had nowlearned to mingle with his natural gaiety a " hiddenseriousness" of spirit, and his private memoranda show1 Diary, July 1.1796. TABLE TALK. 163the care he took in mixed society to observe his ruleof always " leading people to talk upon the subjectswith which they are best acquainted."State of Ireland. The Irish gentry (sensible, coolmen) entertain very serious apprehensions of the RomanCatholics ; say they keep a register of the forfeitedlands ; that their priests have little influence over them ;the menial servants commonly Roman Catholics ;masters cannot depend on them ; if the French were toland10,000 men, they would infallibly rise. Thehatred and bad opinion which the lower RomanCatholics entertain against the Protestants, and particularlythe English, is very great. It seems impossibleto end quietly unless an union 4fr es place.As wealth is diffused, the lower orders will learn thesecret of their strength."Manchester. All the places of worship inManchester taken together would not contain, ifbrim full, 20,000 people. The place contains 70,000souls; so that calculating twice as many go sometimes,it leaves 30,000 quite unfrequented. Churchattendance of better kind of people much diminishedof late, particularly in afternoon. (From Mr. Clowes.)Sabbath. I observe that Sunday is a morefrequent travelling day than any other with themerchants. They confess that religion has declined.Public morals. Dr. Percival thinks moralitylowered at Manchester within the lasttwenty or thirty years. The manners of Leeds remarkablyfrugal, sober, and commercial. None of164 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1796.the merchants spend money, and it would be discreditableto attend public places. An increasingevil at Sheffield is, that the apprentices used to livewith the master and be of the family ; now the wivesare grown too fine ladies to like it ; they lodge outand are much less orderly.Heard Miss Seward repeat and read Corner,Translations from Horace. Called upon her severaltimes Erskine much with her his free conversationwith Milner about religion." 2 " He tells me he hashad sixty-six retainers off his circuit at three hundredguineas each." " Here is Miss D Vultus nimiumrubrics, misery quibus, &c. Will she turn out well ?but eighteen, poor lass ! "Miss Seward went on Friday. Erskine, Milner,and I too much with her flattering her, &c. Icalled once to get serious talk, but in vain. Shecommended the preacher at the rooms. I said I likedsermons better which made people uneasy." 3 " To thedisgrace of the Duke of Devonshire," he writes, " andI must say of several others, there is still no churchhere, but there is at length some inchoate rumour ofan intention of building one."Greater retirement would have been his choice.The chief inconvenience of this place, is thatone cannot have a short uninterrupted walkpeople join one." He wanted leisure to completehis long-projected work. " Sorry," he says 4Diary, Aug. 22. 3 jb. Aug. 28.4 Journal, July 31.1796. "NOTABLES" IN HIS LIFE. 165when called to Hull by the indisposition of hismother, " to quit my tract, which I wished tofinish this recess." The sight of the open infidelityof France, and dissatisfaction with the state of thingsat home, made him more earnest to deliver speedilyhis solemn protest against the prevailing standard ofreligious principle and practice. " Public affairs lookworse and worse. In circumstances like ours I feel adiffidence in our rulers, and a contempt for their wisdomand resources, which language cannot express.Our national sins force themselves into my mind.Would to God I could see any symptoms of nationalhumiliation; I should then begin to take courage.Till then I scarce dare hope for better tidings. Thisplace is so full of acquaintance, that though I paymyself the compliment of declaring that I managemy time pretty well, I am unavoidably more takenoff from my writing-table than I wish. I believe youknow my infirmity, that I cannot compose with anyvigour in the evening, so that my season for solidwork, like a winter's day in the Orkneys, is verymuch contracted. However, I crawl forward. Ourfriend the Dean 5 is tolerable, and much amused, andnot a little amusing." 6His Sundays were spent in comparative retirement ;and before he quitted Buxton, more than one wasspecially devoted to a thoughtful review of " thenotables in my life, for which I should return thanks,or be otherwise suitably affected." 7 " The singularDr. Milner. 6 "Letter to William Hey Esq. Aug. 27.7 Journal, Sept. 4.166 LIFE OF Wilberforce. 1796.accident, as it seemed to me, of my asking Milner togo abroad with me in 1784. How much it dependedon contingencies ! his coming to Hull with hisbrother ; being known to my grandfather ; distinguishinghimself, &c. If he had been as ill as he wasafterwards, or if I had known his character, we shouldnot have gone together. Doddridge's ' Rise andProgress ' having fallen in my way so providentiallywhilst abroad, given by Unwin to Mrs. Smith, thencecoming to Bess, and by her taken abroad. My beingraised to my present situation just before I becameacquainted with the truth, and one year and a halfbefore I in any degree experienced its power. This,humanly speaking, would not have taken place afterwards.What a mercy to have been born an Englishman,in the eighteenth century, of decently religiousparents, with a fortune, talents, &c. Even Gibbonfelt thankful for this ; and shalt not thou praise theLord, O my soul ? My being providentially engaged inthe Slave Trade business. I remember well how itwas what an honourable service. How often protectedfrom evil and danger ! kept from Norris's hand, andKimber's . . furious West Indians . . two whole seasonstogether. Wollaston and my coming away from Bathso providentially the challenge never cleared up. Myillness in the spring, which might have been fatal, wellrecovered from. My going into Yorkshire in the winter.My election over with little trouble and expense."This enumeration is succeeded by a catalogue ofvarious causes for humiliation, collected by a carefulscrutiny of his past life. " And now," he ends, " I1796. TO LORD MUNCASTER. 167can only throw myself upon the infinite compassionof Christ, and rely on His effectual grace. I am inmyself most weak and vile. But do not I owe all tothe goodness of God ? It is Thou, O Lord, that hastgiven the very small increase there has been, and thatmust give all if there be more."Indeed, my dear Lancaster," he replies at thistime to a friendly expostulation on his silence, " I dopartly reproach myself for not occasionally droppingyou a few lines, though I have had more writing onmy hands, than my eyes, notwithstanding their beingbetter than usual, have been equal to. Your letterof the 13th, received to-day, rouses me from mysilence. Yet I have nothing comfortable to say.You know that it is my custom during the summer tobanish politics, and not to resume the consideration ofthem till about a month before the meeting of parliament.But I am now forced from my philosophicalarrangement, and compelled to look a little to thestate of public affairs. Seldom have they offered amore gloomy spectacle. To me, I own, they wear astill darker aspect ; because I see nothing of thatproper temper of mind in our great men, which Ishould hail as the dawning of the day after a night ofdarkness and horror. No humiliation, no recognitionof the providence of God. The same unweariedround of diversions, as in seasons of the most uninter- \rusted prosperity. What is this but practical atheism ? VAnd coupled with the Slave Trade., and with the wallof brass by which we bar out the entrance of light168 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1796.and civilization into India, does it not composesuch an account, when estimated by the Scripturestandard, as may well strike terror into the heart ofevery serious man ? Blessed be God, who offers us apeace beyond the reach of human accidents. Never,never was there a time when we were more clamorouslycalled on to secure it.But whither am I running on ? Let me pause ; forI could pour out of the fulness of my heart in thisway, till I had exhausted your patience and my owneyesight. Honest Duncombe ! I am glad he waswith you, because I am sure he would enjoy himself;and your benevolent mind would rejoice inseeing and making him happy. If Burghs be stillwith you, remember me most kindly to him. Is ithis first fit of the gout ? I went for a fortnight toHull to attend my mother. She is very muchbroken indeed in body and nerves, (not at all in intellects,)but I think in no present danger ; and her stateof mind is such as to afford me real pleasure. Itdoes not often happen in a person of her age, but Iverily think she has materially improved in more waysthan one (particularly in self-government) within thelast three or four years. Milner I have brought backwith me from Hull. My kind respects to Lady Lancasterand farewell. I begin to have very querulousletters from the West Riding, impatient for peace.Yours ever affectionately,W. WILBERFORCE.Buxton, August 18.1796. NEED OF PEACE. 169I understand it is not probable we shall meet inSeptember, but very likely in October. Surely youmust come up. Erskine is here."The war was now becoming universally unpopular.Letters from the West Riding they begin to besadly dissatisfied about the war alas ! selfish fromthe short stagnation of trade." 8 " A year ago," sayshis correspondent, " trade was good, and we were allgood friends of government. We were content to letthe Austrians anal French cut each other's throats aslong as they pleased. The capture of Frankfort andLeghorn have quite opened our eyes. We now seethat war is a great evil." " My good Wilberforce,"wrote Mr. Henry Duncombe, 9 " pray make Pittconclude a peace, the country is quite tired of finespeeches." At this very moment a "letter from Pittabout a direct treaty with Paris, Spanish war, &c." 10cut short his stay at Buxton. " Off early (Sept.15th) for London, though grieved to pass YoxallLodge without a call. Prompted by the possiblehope of doing good in pressing Pitt to peace not tostipulate for islands perhaps include Slave Trade intreaty.17th. Hoped to see Pitt to-day. Got toPalace Yard by half-past five all well, and I homein safety. Praise the Lord, O my soul. A good dealmoved by serious ideas.18th. Sunday. Oh may I pray earnestly to God toproportion my strength to my trials, and to enable meDiary, Aug. 21. Oct. 15. 10 Diary, Sept. 9.VOL. II. I170 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1796.to grow continually in His faith, and fear, and love.I am plunging into a depth of trials, O help me. 11 19th.To Holwood, to have a full political discussion JoeSmith came there he, Pitt, and I full talk of all politicspleased with my interview on the whole. 20th.Pitt forced to go to town, so I did too. Dined inDowning Street Rose, Pitt, and I much politicstide of success is turned, and Archduke is all but Godforgotten. I have been resenting to Pitt the idea ofemploying Jackson to negociate with France everybodyfeels it, but few dare tell Pitt any such thing.People will not so much believe him in earnest in thetreaty as if he sent a more important character. TheSpeaker agrees with me that some important manshould go ; and even offered to go himself." Theseremonstrances at last proved effectual : " Jacksonwas quite held a proper man for this embassy, andPitt would scarce hear it questioned, but now it isthought ridiculous to hold him fit, and Lord Salisburyis to go." 12On his road from Buxton, he had been amusedby a characteristic letter, in which Jeremy Benthamurged him to volunteer his services as chiefnegociator, offering his own assistance in qualityof secretary. He was at this time as intimate withMr. Bentham as the disagreement of their tastesrendered possible. "Bentham," he says, 13 " (interalia,) professes to have no liking for poetry." " Oddenough were the parties I then met once or twice11 Journal. 12 Diary, October. > 3 Ib. Sept. 6,1796. JEREMY BENTHAM. 171every winter at Bentham's house, at which his brotherGeneral Bentham, Lord St. Helen's, Abbot,Reilly, old Professor Christian, and myself werethe ordinary guests." 14This intimacy had grown out of his attempts to assistMr. Bentham when the failure of his " adoption "had involved him in pecuniary losses. The plan ofthis penitentiary greatly pleased Mr. Dundas, andhe obtained Mr. Pitt's sanction for the experiment.Thus encouraged, Mr. Bentham had entered into contractsfor the erection of the building, when LordSpencer complained loudly, and successfully, of itsvicinity to his estate. It proved no easy matter tofind another site, whilst the delay involved Mr. Benthamin serious responsibilities. Mr. Wilberforcetook up his cause with zeal ; and applied, amongstothers, to the Chapter of St. Peter's, Westminster,in furtherance of his design. " I shall never forgetHorsley's 15 keen glance, when in the course of ourdiscussion he asked me, ' Mr. Wilberforce, do youthink that Mr. Pitt is in earnest in the business ? 'Never was any one worse used than Bentham. Ihave seen the tears run down the cheeks of thatstrong-minded man through vexation at the pressingimportunity of creditors and the insolence ofofficial underlings, when day after day he was beggingat the Treasury for what was indeed a merematter of right. How indignant did I often feel,when I saW him thus treated by men infinitely his14 Con. Mem. 15 Bishop Horsey, then Dean of Westminster.i 2172 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1796.inferiors ! I could have extinguished them. He wasquite soured by it, and I have no doubt that many ofhis harsh opinions afterwards were the fruit of thisill treatment." 16 "A fit site' at last wrote theweary man, 17 " obtainable for my purpose, without asingle dissentient voice, is that of the golden tree,and the singing water, and after a three years' considerationI beg to be excused searching for it."Bentham's hard measure" " Bentham cruellyused " " Jeremy Bentham, suo more " are Mr. Wilberforce'spocketing upon the letters which at thistime passed frequently between them. Some of themare not a little singular. " Kind sir," he writes 18 inone, " the next time you happen on Mr. Attorney-general19 in the House or elsewhere, be pleased totake a spike, the longer and sharper the better, andapply it to him by way of memento that the PenisBill has, for I know not whatlength of time, been sticking in his hands ; and youwill much oblige,your humble servant to command,JEREMY BENTHAM.N. B. A corking pin was yesterday applied byMr. Abbot."At the close of September Mr. Wilberforce communicatesto his friend Mr. Macaulay, the governorof Sierra Leone, the aspect of affairs at home.16 Con. Mem. v Aug. 18, to W. Wilberforce Esq.18 Feb. 28, 1797. . l9 Sir John Scott, now Earl of Eldoti.1796. LETTER TO MACAULAY. 173London, Sept. 29, 1796.My dear Sir,Though I have'nothing particular to communicateto you, I am unwilling to suffer the vessel tosail without a few lines assuring you of my friendlyremembrance. We are called to town earlier thanusual to attend parliament, and for one I come upmostreluctantly. The political horizon wears atruly gloomy aspect ; not perhaps that any greatmaterial mischief is to be apprehended immediately,but there are a number of black clouds gatheringaround us. Yet I should not feel dejected if I couldhope that we might expect to be favoured by thegood providence of God ; but that I dare not hope,forming my judgments of the future from what appearsin Scripture to have been the course of theDivine proceedings with regard to other nations.Above all, we do not recognise the hand of God,though so plainly lifted up. A neighbouring countryhas been severely punished for its infidelity andwickedness ; (for to these it would not be difficult totrace the misfortunes of France ;) this we see, but wediscover no sign of the emotions it ought to excite inus. There is nothing like humiliation, nothing likean acknowledgment of the government of God. Wespeak in lofty and vaunting terms of our fleets andarmies, and profess to rely on them for the success ofour endeavours ; when defeated or frustrated in ourdesigns, we talk of ill fortune, of the uncertainty of174 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1796.military operations, of the misconduct of commanders,but not of the chastising arm of Providence. Inall the higher circles there is even increasing dissipationand profusion.But I will leave this topic, and not lower yourspirits by my gloomy speculations. Our governmenthas been for some time desirous of negociatingfor peace ; they have made repeated efforts in vain,and really, according to the common principles ofworldly conduct, they might almost have been excused,if they had in disgust desisted from any furtherefforts ; but they have not, and on the contrarythey are trying again at this very moment. It isdifficult to account for the insolent demeanour of theexecutive Directory towards us ; perhaps it may arisefrom their conceiving that unless they were to bluster,the Councils might charge them with sacrificingthe national honour, and they may (and not withoutreason) apprehend that their heads might pay theforfeit of any true or false charge of this nature.Spain, you will learn from'the public prints, has insubstancedeclared war against us. The real causedoubtless is, that the Duke d'Alcunha (created Princeof the Peace) is afraid that if France should breakwith Spain he would immediately be displaced, andprobably punished; whereas the going to war with uswill only be attended with bad effects to his country.In fact it is not unlikely, if this war goes on, that erelongthere will be an end of the Spanish monarchy.I shall, undoubtedly, in the course of the present1796. LETTER TO MACAULAY. 175session, renew my motion for Abolition, but ifthe war continues I fear it will be in vain. But Iam strongly of opinion that the expense both ofblood and treasure which government has incurredfrom its West India establishments is so monstrous,that when stated and properly pressed onthe public attention, it will produce a rooted disgustof those possessions ; and if the West Indiansoppose us as determinedly as they have done heretofore,I am disposed to endeavour to create this impression.I have another idea about the Slave Trade,which I dare not here put down, not being sure ofthe safe arrival of my letter.I have been scribbling in great haste, and amidstmany interruptions and much conversation ; but Itrust you will excuse all this, and that my service,such as it is, will be acceptable. I beg you will neverthink it necessary to write to me ; I know how extremelyyou are occupied, and your communications toMr. H. Thornton I may consider as made to myself;besides, I am not in a situation which so much wantsto be sustained by the kind attentions of absent friends.Farewell, my dear sir, may God bless and preserveyou. I am ever, with cordial esteem and regard,yours sincerely,W. Wilberforce."His design he states soon after more distinctly, whenwriting to Lord Lancaster. 20 " I have an idea, about80 Letter to Lord Lancaster, Oct. 8.176 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1796.which I am very busy, of availing ourselves of the circumstancethat all the slave trading powers (except oneof no consideration) will be brought together, for tryingat a general convention to abolish. Dundas is favourableto it, and I am very sanguine of its success, if proposed.Less sanguine, however, in my hopes of peace now."Very busy seeing Pitt and Dundas about Abolitionconvention plan, and East India missionspleased with Dundas's candour." 21 Having failedthree years before in his endeavours to obtain a nationalprovision for christianizing India, he waseager to forward those individual efforts which,though a poor substitute for his proposal, were allthat could at present be attempted. Mr. Haldaneand some other Scotch gentlemen were at this timedesirous of engaging in such a mission, and he exertedhimself to obtain Mr. Dundas's assent to the undertaking.In this he would probably have succeeded,if their extreme political opinions had not alarmedthe government. " I am sorry to find them all perfectdemocrats, believing that a new order of thingsis dawning, &c. Haldane very open. I told him Ithought that he by imprudence had injured the causewith Dundas." " Much as he disliked their views,and earnestly as he " argued against their revolutionaryprinciples, in a long talk about governments,"he " yet, on every ground, regretted the decision ofMr. Dundas." " I could not persuade him ; though,as I told him, it is on your own grounds the best*< Diary, Oct. 8. ** Ib. Oct. 4.1796. TABLE TALK. 177thing you can do. In Scotland such a man is sure tocreate a ferment. Send him therefore to the backsettlements to let off his pistol in vacuo." 23Though he was full of business all this autumn, yethe mixed as much as usual in society ; and his privatememoranda of this date record some heads ofinteresting conversations. " Disengaged myself fromLord St. Helen's to dine with Pitt. A note tomeet Speaker ; but, to my surprise, found a granddinner sixteen or seventeen people. Late therean unprofitable day." 24 " Friday. Lord St. Helen'sdined with me te"te-a-tete pleasant" day free conversationmuch politics and information." 25Franklin signed the Peace of Paris in his oldspotted velvet coat (it being the time of a court mourning,which rendered it more particular). What, saidmy friend the negociator, 26 is the meaning of that harlequincoat? It is that in which he was abused byWedderburne." " He showed much rancour andpersonal enmity to this country would not grant thecommon passports for trade, which however easilygot from Jay or Adams."In the Nootka sound business," 27 says the personwho dined with me to-day, " we were by much tooready to go to war a word and a blow, or rather aword without a blow. The Spanish minister said,Con. Mem. Diary, Sept. 28. * Ib. Sept. 30.86 David Hartley, his colleague for Hull, signed the treaty of peacewith America, Sept. 3, 1783.*> Lord St. Helen's was ambassador in Spain at the time of this dispute,A. D. 1790.i 3178 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1796.Surely you wish to pick a quarrel with us, you mustwish to go to war.' " " Yet I remember all theHouse, except Pulteney, were clear for the strong language,(I doubtful then, but felt unsupported,) andnobody thought that the conduct or language ofGreat Britain was liable to that interpretation."Windham was speaking at St. James's last winterof the bad precedent of leaving all the lands of Francein possession of the usurpers. ' Why,' said Lord Palmerston,' surely you can never expect to restore them.'Yes you might, if you could set up a king there."The Empress of Russia extremely fond of scribbling.In the Know and Crimea journey, which lastedseven months, she was for ever producing, earlyish inthe morning, something she had scribbled after theyhad separated late the night before, concerning theevents of the preceding day. The pieces were alwaysburned. One day, when a play of her own writingin Russian was performing, St. Helen's and Potemkintalking near the Empress, the latter said, ' Whatmiserable stuff!' The Empress insisted on knowingwhat had passed. She was told, and took it in a verygood-humoured way : ' I write to entertain myself,and if that end is produced, it is all I want.' St.Helen's travelled in the same carriage with her,"The next day, being engaged to dine with theSolicitor-general, 28 " I felt," says the Diary, 29 " butmoderate, and from regard to tomorrow, when I28 Sir John Mitford, afterwards Lord Pedestal.Saturday, Oct. 1.1796. TABLE TALK. 179wished to be in a good state for God's service, I sentan excuse." On Sunday, " I was asked to dine atLord Hood's ; how much more pleasant is a day ofChristian solitude ! " 30Saw G. who full of Italian victory. I not muchinterested about it to-day (Sunday). Yesterday'slarge party at the Speaker's was but irrational allthe general talk boisterous. Why did I not try totalk with my next neighbour ? My own fault." 31Johnson, Langton told us, did not get up till someonecalled to rouse him, whether it was ten, eleven,twelve, or one o'clock. Johnson said, ( I am a verywell-bred, well-mannered man'" 32On Wednesday, King the American minister,Eliot, Montagu, and Henry Thornton dined withme. Rational day." 33 "There are two ways, saidEliot, of telling a story. Gibbon was charged withhaving said, a fortnight before he took a place underLord North, that the nation's affairs would nevergo on well till the minister's head was on the tableof the House of Commons. Gibbon himself toldthe story, that he had said, till both North's andFox's heads were on the table. Franklin seems,from King, not to be in good estimation in America.Thought a dishonest, tricking, hypocritical character;a free-thinker really, yet pretending to believein the authority of Scripture. Witherspoon's memoryis not held in high respect thought turbulent,*> Journal. Diary, Sunday, Oct. IG.Diary. w Ib.180 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE, 1796.and to have rather left his proper functions." " OnThursday, M. at dinner. His loose religious notions.Thought all sects equally acceptable to God thaterror was innocent, sincerity all, &c. Alas ! " 34He was at this time engaging in a new cause ofcharity. Private information led him to believe thatgreat abuses secretly existed in some of our hospitals.To St. Bartholomew's with Carrington and Sargent.Saw the treasurer and secretary, who like ManuelOrdonnez, (Gil Bias,) Director of Hospitals. Learnedmode of applying for general meeting." 35 " Dr.breakfasted with me, on the subject of St. Bartholomew's.Much shocked at his account." Beforetaking further steps he communicated the charges toa leading physician of the day. " I can well believethem," was Dr. Pitcairnee's answer, " for it was anAugean stable in my time." His suspicions beingthus confirmed, he gave up much time this winter tothe business, with eminent success. Of such employmentshe would often say, in later life, that they wereamong the most useful to which a young man of independentfortune could devote himself. " A meetingat St. Bartholomew's in the morning. We find itwill be easy to have new rules, but that it would behard to punish delinquents." xParliament met upon the 6th of October, and wassoon the scene of acrimonious controversy. The newovertures for peace met of course with Mr. Fox'sapprobation, but the Bills for putting the countryDiarv. 35 ib. Oct. 19. * Ib. Nov. 3.1796. FACTIOUS OPPOSITION. 181into a proper state for resisting an expected Frenchinvasion were contested hotly. Against one of theirproposed provisions Mr. Wilberforce protested in hisprivate intercourse with Mr. Pitt. " It is intendedI observe," he heard from Mr. Stillingfleet, ** " thatthe supplemental corps of militia shall be trained onSunday afternoon ; this comes rather to remind thanto solicit you to use all your influence to prevent theintended evil. When a like proposal was madeby Lord Shelburne many years ago, I wrote tothe present Bishop of London to beg him to interferewith the other bishops to prevent it, and receiveda most proper answer, that the obnoxious clause wouldbe omitted." " Dundas," Mr. Wilberforce records, 38is now clear that it would shock the general moralsof Scotland, to exercise their volunteers on Sunday ;but I can scarce persuade Pitt, that in England itwould, even in serious people, excite any disgust."The Bills themselves he supported strongly, and wasmore than once called up by the factious temper ofthe opposition. " I will not charge them," he said,Nov. 2nd, " with desiring an invasion, but I cannothelp thinking that they would rejoice to see just somuch mischief befall their country, as would bringthemselves into office." The words were resentedfiercely; and he "feared that" he "had gone toofar against opposition, but Fox very good-natured." 3What you said," writes Dr. Cooksonon, 40 " is whaty Rev. J. Stillingfleet Rector of Gotham. M Diary.Ib, Nov. 3. 40 Letter to W. Wilberforce Esq. Nov. 7.182 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1796.every body thinks, but what no one else had thecourage to speak out." In the midst of these harshcontentions, he writes to Mrs. Hannah More.House of Commons, Nov. 9. 1796.My dear Madam,I have heard of the severe illness, with whichit has pleased God to visit you, and I have receivedpleasure from hearing of your recovery. I trust youwill still be spared to us, though I scarce know howto wish it, so far as you are yourself concerned, beingpersuaded that whenever you are called hence, it willbe to the enjoyment of those pleasures, which eyehath not seen, nor ear heard. My dear madam, Ithink of you, and feel for you, with lively interest.How I respect your exertions, I would say to any onerather than to you ; but to your feeling heart it willafford a cordial, to be assured that a friend looksthrough the bustling crowd with which he is hemmedin, and fixes his eye on you with complacency andapprobation. God knows that I wish to imitate yourexample, and to learn from you to seize the shortintervals of tolerable ease and possible action, foracting for the suppression of vice and the alleviationof misery. May we each tread in our separate paths,and at length, having been graciously guided to ou*home through the mercy of our great Shepherd, maywe meet in a better world, free from pain, and sickness,and sorrow, and live for ever in the exercise ofall those kindly affections, which are now the balm of1796. TO HANNAH MORE. 183life, though so often alloyed by the irritations to whichwe are here subject. I scribble amidst much interruption,but my heart is full of kindness to you, and Iwould not restrain my feelings.May God bless, and support, and strengthen you,is the hearty prayer ofyours sincerely,W. Wilberforce.P. S. Kind remembrances."It was by " seizing short intervals of possibleaction," that with an infirm body he himself accomplishedso much. During the hurry of his presentLondon life, he had not wholly laid aside the preparationof his work on Christianity. " I wish it wasdone. My time has been exceedingly frittered awayin general talk, which yet was right. My bad healthreally renders it requisite for me to have much sleep ;but with God's help I will lessen the time spent indiscussion, and thus redeem what I can for solid work.Meant to go out of town for a few days that my tractmay go on ; but from the time of getting up till nearfour o'clock never quiet or free from people on businesschiefly Bentham's affairs." 41 " Dined at Pitt's totalk over finance plan Steele, Ryder, Warrington,Speaker, &c. many minds no determination," 48Walked two hours with St. Helen's. Dined LordChancellor's Loughborough, Windham, Pitt, Lord41 Journal, Nov. 14. Diary.184 LIFE OP WILBERFORCE. 1796.Chatham, Westmoreland, &c. talk rather loose. Ifear I not guarded and grave enough. Much talkabout 'The Monk a novel by Lewis's son." " Longdiscussion after breakfast about finance this useful,but no time for tract, which I wish to get on with.Eliot presses me much to go to the Bishop of Lincoln'sfor a few days, thinking it will answer many goodpurposes that my tract may go on, &c."Upon the 17th he set out for Burden, and spent aweek there, engaged chiefly upon his tract, " hospitablyreceived, and spending a rational life." 43 But businesssoon brought him back to London and its multipliedengagements. "26th. Busy morning about finance,and tract. I hope to finish it for the press by the endof the Christmas recess ; and mean as much as possibleto redeem time for it in London : help me, OGod ! 28th. Town (after tract a little, morning,)dined Bankes's quietly Pitt had asked me on finance.To Pitt's, evening, where staid late talked muchpolitics, and found him very fair and honest. 29th.Staid in town for evening meeting at Pitcairnee's. 44Dined Pitt's to see Ellis from Paris Lord Chatham,Spencer, Chancellor, Dundas, &c. Much intelligencefrom Ellis. 30th. St. Bartholomew's meeting, morningthen Chancellor's and Battersea Rise.Dec. 1st. To town to meet Lascelles on a most absurdapplication from D. to ask Fox the name of the writerof a false account of Leeds' meeting. Whole morninglost in this. Dined Pitt's on finance, to consult, but all43 Diary. ** About St. Bartholomew's.179G. LA FAYETTE. 185our consultation anticipated by success of altered plan.All in spirits, but no thanks to God. A greatcountry this, &c." " 8th. Dined before HouseEliot and De Lageard. Sudden attack on Pittfor Austrian money spoke on the sudden anddid good service Fox severe. 9th. Busy, proclamationcommittee, Battersea Rise, and busy allevening. 10th. To Grant's to meet Haldane andFrewen much free and warm talk I too sharp withHaldane. 14th. St. Bartholomew's, morning. Dinnerto several before House. House on Austrian advancetill very late. 16th. Morning committees Houseon La Fayette. I doubtful, amended the motionstrengthened by Henry Thornton's advice and concur-recentquite clear either." He charged it upon theHouse as " the duty of a great assembly such as this, tolook abroad into the world, and attend to the claimsof misery wherever it be found." 45 He thought thecase one of peculiar hardship, and was the more readyto interfere from La Fayette's past exertions on theSlave Trade question. But he took this part unwillingly." Never did I rise to speak with more reluctance,I expected all the ridicule which followed ; andwhen Dundas with a happy peculiarity o expressiontalked of my Amendment as designed to catch thestrangling humanity' of the House, there was a perfectroar of laughter. However, I felt sure that we werebound to use our influence with our allies to mitigateas far as it was possible the miseries of war." 46 It wasDebate. Con. Mem.186 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1796.some reward for this determined disregard of ridiculeto receive long afterwards a special assurance of La Fayette'sgratitude. " Tell him," was the message, " thatin my life I never can forget the feeling with which Iread that speech in the dreary dungeon of Olmutz."22nd. Busy this week about Militia and CavalryBills. House went home with Dundas and Pitt,and staid awhile discussing Mission business inhand. 23rd. Breakfasted early with Dundas andEliot on Mission business ; Dundas complying, and appointingus to dinner again, where Grant and DavidScott also sat long. Then Pitt's, with whom Bishop ofLincoln ; having just heard of Lord Malmesbury foiling,and being ordered back staid late, talking aboutit. 24th. Kept in town all morning, expecting House.Dined Bankes's quietly, then Pitt's, where withWarrington, Speaker, &c. read despatches. Wenthome heavy. 26th. Grant, Eliot, and Babington atdinner consultation on East Indian missions, anddiscussing all evening. 27th. To town on businessArmy and Navy Bills. Saw Pitt, and home to BatterseaRise employed all evening. 28th. Thought ofand read politics for tomorrow. 29th. PoliticsBattersea Rise all day talking politics with HenryThornton. 30th. To town after political preparation.Dined Bankes's, and talked with him on the state ofthings very doubtful address on Lord Salisbury'snegociation kept late in House. Pitt veryearnest with me not to speak.The business of the House of Commons closed with1797. JANUARY 1ST. 187this debate. " The recess for six weeks is commencing.I once meant to try to finish my tract, butI now rather think that, the time being too little forso very serious a work, I shall devote it to preparationfor the House of Commons improvement in speaking,which sadly neglected, and in knowledge. MayGod preserve me the while from vanity, and enableme to continue humble, and to devote all my faculties,powers, and studies to His service." 47 His plans wereinterrupted by a violent attack of sickness. " Sunday,Jan. 1st. Cecil's, morning good sermon fromBean very serious. Staid in town to be quiet and recollectmatters." 48 " I have felt much comfort andsome humiliation ; what cause have I for it! My life,alas, has been sadly unprofitable, when my opportunitiesare considered. I would now humbly resolve toamend, and through God's grace live soberly, righteously,humbly, and godly. This year I have beenpreserved from many evils. What a black aspect dopublic affairs present ! and what a lesson to us to makesure of a better inheritance!" 49 Monday, Jan. 2nd. Sleptill, and very indifferent feared I was about to be asbad as the famous time," (1788,) "and suffered muchsent to Pitcairnee. Had death, as probable, in view,and felt I hope resigned, but no ardour or warmthconfined for a few days."By the middle of the following week he wassufficiently recovered to bear a journey, and at the*> Journal, Jan. 1.Diary, Jan. 1. * Journal.188 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1797.desire of his physicians set out for Bath. " It haspleased God of His great mercy to raise me upagain from this attack, which threatened much ;I then thought death probably near. Oh thatI might now better employ the time it has pleasedGod to allow me ! May I be enlightened, and purified,and quickened ; and having sadly wasted my preciousfaculties even since my thinking more seriously, mayI now more constantly act as an accountable creature,who may be called away suddenly to his reckoning." 50This thought appears to have altered his intention ofputting off his tract " for a season of greater leisure,and he begins his stay at Bath with the determinationof giving to it all the time which health and societyallowed. " May I be enabled to engage in this busyscene with benefit to others, and without harm tomyself. Oh that I may feel the power of Divinegrace in my heart to fill me with love of God and ofmy fellow-creatures. Oh how much do I want ! whatunnumbered blessings do I receive at the hands ofGod, and how unequal is my return ! Yet let meremember He has encouraged us to apply to Him forHis Holy Spirit. Let him that is athirst come. Createthen in me this sacred thirst, and satisfy it withthat peace of God, which Thou only canst supply." 41He reached Bath upon the 14th of January, and dinedthat day with the " Miss Mores, who are all kindness,and have provided me excellent lodgings. Lord Gallowayand his son. Lord Galloway talked incessantlyJournal, Jan. 8. Ib. Jan. 15.1797. BATH. 189two or three hours useful and active, and how muchbetter disposed than most of his rank fond ofJeremy Taylor. Mrs. H. More gave his son Dod-bridge's' Evidences and strongly recommended ' Riseand Progress of Religion.' Staid till night, andhome to lodgings. Sunday. To Pump-room andchurch. Dr. Randolph sensible sermon and gooddelivery. Dined alone. Jay's, evening. Monday.Rather interrupted by visitors but water agreesadmirably, thank God though ' amici fares temporis,'I may well say. Dined at Lord Kenyon's.Evening, called at Hannah More's. She gave me a longaccount of her being hurt at N.'s coldness grievouspity that he should have such a manner, though shetakes it too much as if a man of tender and promptfeelings had done so. Alas, hpw, on earth, are eventhe best liable to misconstrue, and be misconstrued !Tuesday. Busy enough. Dined Gordon's. He andMrs. Gordon rational much talk about poor. Wednesday.As usual, dined York House. Chancellor.Queen's birth-day. Dr. 13. queer, and slyly says ill-naturedthings. I thought he seemed unhappy." 52Sunday. " I have this week been dining out everyday.To-day, to which I looked forward as a religiousseason with hope and pleasure, my heart is littlewarm I fear, though my judgment is fixed. Yet letme earnestly pray to God to give me His grace, toguide me, to preserve me, to render me useful here,and in the end a partaker of His glory." 53Diary. w Journal, Jan. 22.190 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1797.His life varied little during his stay at Bath. " Feb.2nd. Dined at Anstey's large miscellaneous party, androut afterwards. Mr. Francisco went from talking ofthe discipline of the Calvinist church, to dance acotillon. Sunday, 5th. Randolph's. Sacrament,which received afterwards serious talk with Acklom.Heard at Pump-room of Austrian defeats. PoorBurke come down quite emaciated. 9th. Eliot called,and a very pleasant day. Evening, called on Burke,and sat an hour no serious talk."I find little time here," he complained, " for study,not above two or three hours in a morning hitherto, attract.Calls, of which I make about sixty, and receive asmany water-drinking dining out with people, whoexpect me to stay many letters to write ; all thisleaves me, though hurrying much, and I hope notidling, very little time." 54 " I should like to bewith you," wrote Dr. Milner, whom he had pressedto join him, " but not to dine with a gang of fellowson the Queen's birth-day." But towards the end ofhis stay, though he still speaks of " daily dining out,and between sixty or seventy people to visit," hemanaged to be pretty diligent in the mornings on "his " tract, chiefly revising ; " and by the time of hisreturn to London it was ready for the printer.** Journal, Jan. 29.1797. TO LORD MUNCASTER. 191Bath, Feb. 10, 1797.My dear Lancaster,This is indeed a sad place for having anythingto do in, which you know has been my case :with difficulty have I cut out of the morning two orthree hours for solid work, in revising my tract, andI have not yet got through the task ; but I believe Ishall have done it in a few days, and I think when Ireturn to town again of committing it to the press.You will I am sure be glad to hear that certainlythe waters never agreed so well with me as thistime ; so well, that I conceive I shall often applyto them, if we should henceforth be at liberty toattend in peace to our several ailments ; for, this Idoubt. Truly my gloomy views of the state ofthings amongst us are more and more verified. Indeedyours have been of the same hue. I have but onesatisfaction, and that is in knowing that all humanevents are under the direction of a Being of infinitewisdom and goodness, who, though by ways to us inscrutable,is carrying on the purposes of His own will.My dear friend, how strongly does the precariousnessof all human prospects and possessions inculcate thelesson of pursuing something more stable than thisworld contains. Let not this lesson be preached tousin vain.I hear from London that the day for Lawrence'smotion, concerning which you asked me, is not yetfixed ; only a general notice that it should be192 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1797.soon after the recess. Also Ellis's about the SlaveTrade exactly the same ; and my own, which I shalldefer most likely till after his. Fox's motion is forthe 24th. Pitt's Poor Bill unfixed. You had betterhowever be up by the beginning or middle of theweek after next. You would be sorry to be absent onEllis's motion, and I should be sorry to have you so.Burke is come here but very poorly, and Windham isvisiting him. His faculties are as fresh as ever ; heabstains from talking politics. Kindest remembrances.Yours ever affectionately,W. WILBERFORCE."On the 14th of February he " reached London byfive o'clock, and dined at Pitt's ; but Grenville beingthere could not get out much, though I had given upgoing to Breathed's for suggesting about Eliot succeedingLord Cornwallis." 55 This appointment heearnestly desired, as he knew that Mr. Eliot's officialinfluence in India would have been made subservientto the extension of Christianity ; an object for whichat this very moment he was devising fresh expedients.There is considerable probability," he told Mr.Hey, 56 " of our being permitted to send to the EastIndies a certain number of persons, I presume weshall want ten or twelve, for the purpose of instructingthe natives in the English language, and in the principlesof Christianity. But the plan will need much deliberation.I really dare not plunge into such a depth55 Diary. * Jan. 4, and 21.1797. BANK STOPS PAYMENT. 193as is required without previous sounding ; lest insteadof pearls and corals, I should come up with my headcovered only with sea weed, and become a fair laughingstockto the listless and unenterprising. WhenI return to town we will hold a Cabinet council onthe business. Henry Thornton, Grant, and myself,are the junto." When Mr. Eliot's appointmentseemed to be secure, both " Mr. Dundas and LordCornwallis preferring him to any other person," 57a dangerous attack of illness forced him to refuse thesituation.Parliament reassembled upon the 14th of February,amidst a state of things " which appeared " most unpromising."The prospect soon became still moregloomy. " I have been trying," he says on the 26th,for several days to see Pitt. This evening Eliotcame in and told me of the Bank going to stop paymenttomorrow. We talked much about it, and itdisturbed my sleep at night."TO LORD MUNCASTER.My dear Lancaster,Eliot has just been with me to inform me thatthe Bank is to stop payment by command of Governmenttomorrow morning. I have not been party tothis counsel, but have of course suggested what hasoccurred to me to prevent riots, and secure a supply ofprovisions for the capital. I like to tell you bad aswell as good tidings. O my dear friend, how thisw Letter from Charles Grant Esq. to W. Wilberforce Esq. Feb. 4.VOL. II. - K194 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1797.tumultuous state endears to one that heavenly peace,which, flowing from a source which worldly disturbancescannot reach, may remain entire though allaround us be in confusion.Yours ever affectionately,W. WILBERFORCE.11 o'clock, Sunday night."Monday 27th. Anxious about great event. Wentto General 38 found him, Rose, Long, Eliot, LordAuckland. Letter from Lord Carrington stating thatall going on well, and stocks rising. They seemedcheerful, and gay. When I got back I called uponBankes and told him so. He was surprised, becauseLord Auckland came in where Mrs. Bankes and LadyAuckland were, and had said this was the beginning ofthe throat-cutting measures. Samuel Thornton saysthat the Cabinet very averse to take on themselves theresponsibility of the measure. They were walkingabout, &c. ' No,' said the Chancellor, ' this willnever do.' At last Pitt said, * My Lords, shall Idraw up the minute ? ' General really afraid thatunless the cash stopped, there would not be enough topay the army, navy, and ordnance. General disposedto make large personal sacrifices : not sanguine in ideasthat much can be saved in public expenditure, orthinking that any material abuses exist. Fearfullest we should so far let down the spirits of men, thatthey should be ready to patch up any kind of compromisewith Jacobin principles." 59i8 Mr. Pitt. i9 Diarv.1797. BANK COMMITTEE. 195Two days afterwards he was chosen one of a ParliamentaryCommittee which took possession of theBank, and examined into its solvency. " Saturday.Committee as usual. Examined Pitt wanted to sitthe next day, but I repelled." 60 After a morning thusoccupied, he spent his evenings in the House, wherehe was frequently called up by the bitterness of partyspirit in defence of Mr. Pitt, upon whom he was stillurging privately the necessity of making peace.Dined at Pitt's quietly he, R. and I. R. more unmanageablethan Pitt. I counsel for peace." 6 ' " Calledat Pitt's a most earnest conversation about peace, anddegree in which I may fairly differ from ministry aboutit. Pitt exceedingly moved." 62To his other business was soon added the renewedagitation of the Abolition question. His partial successin the preceding session had taught the WestIndians the value of Mr. Dundas's policy ; and theynow turned aside his efforts by seeming but unsubstantialconcession.I send you," writes Mr. Wilberforce, 63 " theabominable motion that Ellis means to make onMonday next. Lucubrate, and send me a sheet full ofhints." Mr. Ellis moved an address to the Crownpraying for the issue of directions to the several islandgovernors, with the professed intention of preparingfor the Abolition. The direct effect of such a stepwas to leave the matter in the hands of the colonialMarch 4. 6| Diary, March 28. * Ib. March 31.63 Letter to Thomas Babington Esq. Feb.K 2196 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1797.assemblies, whose hatred to the work was proof againstthe most earnest representation of their friends athome 4 " that they must at least appear to act, if theywould be safe from the interference of the Britishparliament." Such a measure could not of coursesatisfy any who heartily opposed the trade. " Calledat the Speaker's," says the Diary of the 1st of April,"where Warrington. Discussed about Ellis's motion.Ellis's motion till very late much hurt Pitt wantedme to close with it modified, but when I would not,stood stiffly by me." In this debate the Abolitionparty found in Mr. Bryan Edwards a new and powerfulopponent, while they lost a useful friend in Mr.Windham. The dread of French politics still oppressedthe House, and the delusive measure wascarried by a majority of 30. 65The resolutions with which he had begun thisbusy season, were, " to redeem time more ; to keepGod more in view, and Christ, and all He has sufferedfor us ; and the unseen world, where Christ is nowsitting at the right hand of God interceding for Hispeople. I would grow in love and tender solicitudefor my fellow creatures' happiness, in preparednessfor any events which may befall me in this uncertainstate. I may be called to sharp trials, but Christ isable to strengthen me for the event, be it what itmay." 66 These resolutions he soon had to act upon inbearing a series of calumnious charges which were64 Vid. Wilberforce on the Slave Trade, p. 226.65 93 to 63. 66 Journal, March 8. Fast day.1797. NEWSPAPER ABUSE. 197heaped upon him in a Cambridge newspaper. " I amabused for the grossest hypocrisy in Flower's paper,which states as a fact that I always had a prayer bookin the Pump-room, and said my prayers there."There seems," says Dr. Milner, 67 " to be somethingsystematic meant against you. It really appears toamount to downright hatred and persecution, nor haveI the least doubt that the person who writes in thismanner would do you personal injury if he could withimpunity. I have no question that he is some violentdemocratic dissenter, and perhaps if you could unkennelhim, some private anecdotes between you andhim would turn up. The true way however is notto notice such a writer. He can do you no harm inany way. No man who does not hate you and yourcause beforehand, will be induced to do so by such anintemperate account ; and as to your book, they cannothurt it, though its contents will provoke them.God preserve you."My being moved by this falsehood," he says, 68 " isa proof that I am too much interested about worldlyfavour. Yet I endeavour I hope to fight against thebad tempers of revenge and pride which it is generating,by thinking of all our Saviour suffered in theway of calumny. St. Stephen also and St. Paul werefalsely accused. Let me humbly watch myself, so faras this false charge may suggest matter of amendment ;and also I ought to be very thankful that with the manyfaults of which I am conscious, it has pleased God thatLetter to W. Wilberforce Esq. March 30. Journal, March 26.198 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1797.I have never been charged justly, or where I could notvindicate myself. How good is God ! The business ofC. off so well ; I left it more to Him than I have oftendone in such cases. Be this remembered for futurepractice. The real truth is that at Bath I carried sometimesa New Testament, a Horace, or a Shakespearein my pocket, and got by heart or recapitulated inwalking or staying by myself in the Pump-room. Ihad got a Testament which had not the common dressof one on purpose. I cannot recollect having had anymovement of spiritual pride on this ground, but rememberI thought it a profitable way. I got two or three ofSt. Paul's epistles by heart when otherwise quite idle,and had resolved to learn much Scripture in this way,remembering Venn's comfort from it. Thou, Lord,knowest my integrity, and it will finally appear ; meanwhilelet my usefulness not be prevented by this report,or that of my book thwarted. What a blessedinstitution is the Sunday ! "He had been engaged about " his book" ever sincehis return from Bath. Immediately upon coming totown, he " had seen Cell and agreed to beginprinting;" and throughout the session its revisionoccupied his spare time. He corrected the press whenbusiness flagged in the committee room ; 69 and theindex and errata were the work of midnight hours,when the debate was over. " I am sitting all day,"he tells Mrs. Hannah More upon the 6th of March,69 On the' Bank Restrictions. An immense mass of notes attests thediligence with which he attended this committee.1797. ' PRACTICAL CHRISTIANITY ' PUBLISHED. 199in the committee on the late order in council, and Itake up my pen to acquaint you that the book is aboutone third printed, and to say that it has given mepleasure to receive even the moderate account whichyou have sent of yourself. I am not of opinion thatyou should consider your health as a sacred deposit tobe locked up like the gold now in the Bank, but yetthat you should reserve it for the most pressing emergencies."Upon the 12th of April his work was publishedMy book out to-day." 7 Many were those whoanxiously watched the issue. Dr. Milner had stronglydissuaded his attempt. " A person who stands so highfor talent," wrote David Scott, " must risk much inpoint of fame at least, by publishing upon a subjecton which there have been the greatest exertions of thegreatest genius." His publisher was not devoid ofapprehensions as to the safety of his own speculation.There was then little demand for religious publications,and " he evidently regarded me an amiable enthusiast."71 " You mean to put your name to the work ?Then I think we may venture upon 500 copies," wasMr. Cell's conclusion. Within a few days it was outof print, and within half a year-five editions (7500copies) had been called for. His friends weredelighted with the execution of the work, as well aswith its reception. " I heartily thank you for yourbook," wrote Lord Lancaster. " As a friend I thankyou for it ; as a man I doubly thank you ; but as a70 Diary. 71 Con. Mem.200 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1797.member of the Christian world, I render you all gratitudeand acknowledgment. I thought I knew youwell, but I know you better now, my dearest excellentWilder." " I see no reason," said his friendJames Gordon, 72 " why you should wish to have givenit another year's consideration ; the world would onlyhave been so much the worse by one year." " I sendyou herewith," Mr. Henry Thornton writes to Mr.Macaulay, " the book on religion lately published byMr. Wilberforce ; it excites even more attention thanyou would have supposed, amongst all the graver andbetter disposed people. The bishops in general muchapprove of it, though some more warmly, some morecoolly. Many of his gay and political friends admireand approve of it ; though some do but dip into it.- Several have recognised the likeness of themselves.The better part of the religious world, and more especiallythe Church of England, prize it most highly, andconsider it as producing an era in the history of thechurch. The Dissenters, many of them, call it legal, 73and point at particular parts. Gilbert Wakefield hasalready scribbled something against it. I myself amamongst those who contemplate it as a most importantwork."This was the universal feeling amongst thosewho looked seriously around them on the face ofthings. <f 1 am truly thankful to Providence," wrote?* Letter from J. Gordon Esq.73 In the year 1818, he was assailed in the "Scotsman" by an exactlyopposite insinuation. "Mr. Wilberforce is a man of rigid Calvinisticprinciples," &c. In the margin of the paper he wrote, " False."1797. HIS BOOK WELL TIMED. 201Bishop Porters, 74 "that a work of this nature hasmade its appearance at this tremendous moment. Ishall offer up my fervent prayers to God, that it mayhave a powerful and extensive influence on the heartsof men, and in the first place on my own, which isalready humbled, and will I trust in time be sufficientlyawakened by it." "I deem it," Mr. Newtontold him, 75 " the most valuable and importantpublication of the present age, especially as it isyours : " and to Mr. Grant he wrote, " What aphenomenon has Mr. Wilberforce sent abroad !Such a book by such a man, and at such a time !A book which must and will be read by personsin the higher circles, who are quite inaccessible to us-, little folk, who will neither hear what we can say, norread what we may write. I am filled with wonder andwith hope. I accept it as a token for good ; yea, asthe brightest token I can discern in this dark andperilous day. Yes, I trust that the Lord, by raisingup such an incontestable witness to the truth andpower of the gospel, has a gracious purpose to honourhim as an instrument of reviving and strengtheningthe sense of real religion where it already is, and ofcommunicating it where it is not."The aspect of the times, in which, says Mr. Hey, 76hell seems broke loose in the most pestiferous doctrinesand abominable practices, which set theAlmighty at defiance, and break the bonds of civil7< To W. Wilberforce Esq. May 10.7^ April 21. 76 To W. Wilberforce Esq. April 29.K 3202 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1797.society," led even the less thoughtful to look to itseffect with some anxiety. " I sincerely hope," wrotethe Lord Chancellor, (Loughborough,) 77 "that yourbook will be read by many, with that just and propertemper which the awful circumstances in which westand ought to produce." Its tone was well calculatedto create these hopes. There was an air of entirereality pervading its addresses, which brought themclosely home to the heart and conscience of thereader. It was not the fine-spun theory of somespeculative declaimer, but the plain address of onewho had lived amongst and watched those to whomhe spoke. " Let me recommend you to open on thelast section of the fourth chapter," was his advice toMr. Pitt ; 78 " you will see wherein the religion whichI espouse differs practically from the common system.Also the sixth chapter has almost a right to aperusal, being the basis of all politics, and particularlyaddressed to such as you." " I desired my bookseller,"he tells Mr. Newton, 79 " to leave at your housea copy of my publication ; and though I scarcelysuppose that your leisure will be sufficient to enableyou to fight through the whole of it, you may perhapslook into it occasionally. If so, let me advise you todip into the third or fourth chapters, and perhaps theconcluding one. I cannot help saying it is a greatrelief to my mind to have published what I may callmy manifesto ; to have plainly told my worldly Letter to W. Wilberforce Esq. May 5.To the Right Hon. William Pitt, April 16. * April 19.1797. ITS CHARACTER. 203acquaintance what I think of their system and conduct,-and where it must end. I own I shall act in my parliamentarysituation with more comfort and satisfactionthan hitherto. You will perceive that I havelaboured to make my book as acceptable to men of- the world as it could be made without a derelictionof principle ; and I hope I have reason to believe notwithout effect. I hope also that it may be useful toyoung persons who with general dispositions to seriousnessare very ignorant about religion, and know notwhere to apply for instruction. It is the grace ofGod, however, only that can teach, and I shall at least-feel a solid satisfaction from having openly declared~-myself as it were on the side of Christ, and havingavowed on what my hopes for the well-being of thecountry bottom."But whilst thus addressed in the first instance tohis personal acquaintance, it reasoned on the commonprinciples of human nature. It was devotional, notcontroversial. It spoke the language of no sect orparty, but brought out clearly and forcibly the greatoutlines of the revealed gospel, contrasting themkeenly but soberly with the ordinary practice of theday. It was therefore well fitted, like the Manual ofa Kempis, to spread throughout the whole church,and call on every side into practical efficiency admitted,though long dormant, principles. Its compositionwould naturally increase its influence. As a literarywork it might be judged to need greater condensation ;but its style was the best suited to produce effect. " I204 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1797.was purposely," he has said, " more diffuse than stricttaste prescribed, because my object was to make anX impression upon men in general." " Do not curtailtoo much," he once said to a friend, " portable soupmust be diluted before it can be used." There is intruth throughout the volume a rich and naturaleloquence, which wins its way easily with every reader.Its illustrations are happy; its insight into motivesclear ; and above all, its tone is every where affectionateand earnest. It was seen to be " the produce of hisheart as well as of his understanding."He addressed his fellow-countrymen moreover froman eminence on which he could be heard ; as a laymansafe from the imputation of professional bias ; and asone who lived in the public eye, and was seen to practisewhat he taught. He raised indeed a strict, buthis own example proved that it was a practicable,standard. His life had long been a puzzle to observers"*Some had even thought him mad, because they couldnot comprehend the strange exhibition of his alteredhabits ; but his work supplied the rationale of hisconduct, whilst his conduct enforced the precepts ofhis work. Any one might now examine the staff of theWizard and learn the secrets of his charmed book.How careful ought I to be," was his own reflection, 80that I may not disgust men by an inconsistency betweenthe picture of a Christian which I draw, andwhich I exhibit ! How else can I expect the blessingof God on my book ? May His grace quicken me."80 Journal, April 9.1797. ITS EFFECT. 205That he acted up," is the judgment of a shrewdobserver, " to his opinions as nearly as is consistentwith the inevitable weakness of our nature, is a praiseso high that it seems like exaggeration ; yet in myconscience I believe it, and I knew him well for atleast forty years." 81The effect of this work can scarcely be overrated.Its circulation was at that time altogether without precedent.In 1826 fifteen editions (and some very largeimpressions) had issued from the press in England.In India," says Henry Martin in 1807, " Wilberforceis eagerly read." In America the work was immediatelyreprinted, and within the same period twenty-fiveeditions had been sold. It has been translated intothe French, Italian, Spanish, Dutch, and German languages.Its influence was proportionate to its diffusion.It may be affirmed beyond all question, that it gave thefirst general impulse to that warmer and more earnestspring of piety which, amongst all its many evils, hashappily distinguished the last half century.As soon as his book was published he set off forBath, where he was followed by the congratulationsof many of his friends. " My book," he says, 82 " is universallywell received, especially by the Archbishop ofCanterbury, and the Bishops of London, Durham, Rochester,and Llandaff, the Duchess of Gloucester, SirJ. Scott. Much pleased by a letter from Lord St.81 Entry on a blank page of the " Practical View," by J. B. S.Morris Esq.8* Diary, May 28.206 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1797.Helen's, most highly commending it as adapted tothe good of worldly men." From Mr. Newton heheard again :TO W. WILBERFORCE ESQ.My very dear Sir,I can converse with you as often as I please byyour late publication, which I have now read throughwith increasing satisfaction a third time. I meannot to praise you, but I must and will praise the Lordfor your book, which I cannot doubt will be accompaniedby a Divine blessing and productive of happyeffects. I hope it will be useful to me, and of courseto those who attend on my ministry. I have beennear fifty years in the Lord's school : during this spaceHe has graciously taught me many things of whichI was once no less ignorant than the beasts of thefield. He has made me a debtor to many ministers,and to many books, but still I had something tolearn from your book. You have not only confirmedbut enlarged my views of several important points.One thing strikes me much, and excites my praise tothe Lord on your behalf, that a gentleman in yourline of life, harassed with a multiplicity of businessand surrounded on all sides with snares, could ventureto publish such a book, without fearing a retort eitherfrom the many friends or the many enemies amongstwhom you have moved so many years. The powerof the Lord in your favour seems to be little less remarkablethan in the three young men who lived1797. FROM REV. JOHN NEWTON. 207unhurt and unhinged in the midst of the fire, or ofDaniel, who sat in peace in the den when surroundedby lions. It plainly shows that His grace is all-sufficientto keep us in any situation which His providenceappoints us.I believe I must in future alter the tone of myquarterly M payments, if I continue to make them.Though I have long been well satisfied that the Lordhad in mercy set you apart for Himself, yet I thoughtan occasional hint of the dangers to which you wereexposed might not be unseasonable. But now I shallbe glad to look to you (at least to your book) for cautionsagainst the evils that beset my own path, andfor considerations to strengthen my motives for runningthe uncertain remainder of my race with alacrity.May the wisdom and power of the Most High guide,strengthen, and protect you.I am, with the most sincere regard,My dear Sir,Your much obliged and affectionateJOHN NEWTON.Reading, June 7, 1797."There were other letters which gave him evengreater and more enduring satisfaction. Not a yearpassed throughout his after-life, in which he did notreceive fresh testimonies to the blessed effects which itpleased God to produce through his publication. In83 Mr. Newton was accustomed to write to him four times at leastevery year.208 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1797.acknowledging this goodness of his God, the outpouringsof his heart are warm and frequent ; though theparticular occasions are too sacred to he publiclydivulged :Latona taciturn protestant garcia pectus."Men of the first rank and highest intellect, clergyand laity, traced to it their serious impressions of religion;and tendered their several acknowledgmentsin various ways ; from the anonymous correspondentwho had purchased a small freehold in Yorkshire,that hy his vote he might offer him a slight tribute ofrespect," down to the grateful message of the expiringBurke. That great man was said by Mr. Windhamin the House of Commons, when he had arranged hisworldly matters, to have amused his dying hours withthe writings of Addison. He might have added whatserious minds would have gladly heard : " have youbeen told," Mr. Henry Thornton asks Mrs. HannahMore, " that Burke spent much of the two last daysof his life in reading Wilberforce's book, and said thathe derived much comfort from it, and that if he livedhe should thank Wilberforce for having sent such abook into the world ? so says Mrs. Crewe, who waswith Burke at the time." Before his death Mr.Burke summoned Dr. Laurence to his side, andcommitted specially to him the expression of thesethanks.Amidst these circumstances his sobriety of mind remainedunshaken. " I was much struck," says a friendwho was with him whilst at Bath, " with his entire simsGOOD FRIDAY. 209felicity of manners. The place was very full ; the sensationwhich his work produced drew upon him muchobservation, but he seemed neither flattered nor embarrassedby the interest he excited." The secret ofthis easy self-possession may be read in the entries ofhis private Journal. " Bath, April 14th, three o'clock,Good Friday. I thank God that I now do feel insome degree as I ought this day. I trust that I feeltrue humiliation of soul from a sense of my own extremeunworthiness ; a humble hope in the favour ofGod in Christ ; some emotion from the contemplationof Him who at this very moment was hanging onthe cross; some shame at the multiplied mercies Ienjoy ; some desire to devote myself to Him who hasso dearly bought me ; some degree of that universallove and good-will, which the sight of Christ crucifiedis calculated to inspire. Oh if the contemplation herecan produce these effects on my hard heart, what willthe vision of Christ in glory produce hereafter ! Ifeel something of pity too for a thoughtless world;and oh what gratitude is justly due from me (thevilest of sinners, when compared with the mercies Ihave received) who have been brought from darknessinto light, and I trust from the pursuit ofearthly things to the prime love of things above ! Ohpurify my heart still more by Thy grace. Quickenmy dead soul, and purify me by Thy Spirit, that Imay be changed from glory to glory, and be madeeven here in some degree to resemble my heavenlyFather.210 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1797.I would now in prayer (which I set down for myown memory) lament the chief sins of all my life,and carefully examine myself with penitence. GoodFriday employment Look back on the mercies ofGod through life. Oh how numerous, and how freelybestowed ! Try Quintilian's plan (Phantasies) as toChrist's crucifixion. Pray for pardon, acceptance,holiness, peace ; for courage, humility, and all that Ichiefly want ; for love and heavenly-mindedness.Pray to be guided aright respecting my domesticchoice, &c. Pray for my country both in temporaland spiritual things. Pray for political wisdom ; forthe success of my book just come out ; for the poorslaves ; for the Abolition ; for Sierra Leone ; for thesuccess of missions. Think over my enemies with forgivenessand love, over my friends and acquaintances,and pray for both. In the evening make launches, 84and think how I may do good to my acquaintancesand friends, and pray for wisdom here." " I humbly"bless God that I have enjoyed this morning a verylarge degree of internal comfort, and that my hearthas been tender; but I fear animal transport andemotion. But what a solid satisfaction is it to reflectthat our ascended Lord views us with a pitying andsympathetic eye ; that He knows what it is to have afeeling of our infirmities, that He promises, and He istruth as well as love, that they who wait on Him shallrenew their strength ! What a blessed Sunday have Ibeen permitted to spend ! " 8584 Vid. p. 104. Journal. Easter Sunday, April 16.1797. LAST INTERVIEW WITH Bl)RKE. 211On the day following, Monday, April 17th,"Heard," he says, 86 "of Portsmouth mutiny consultationwith Burke." " The only letter which reachedBath that day hy the cross post from Portsmouth wasone from Captain Bedford of the Royal Sovereign toPatty More. She brought it me, and I took it at onceto Burke. He could not then see me, but at his desireI called again at two o'clock. The whole scene is nowbefore me. Burke was lying on a sofa much emaciated; and Windham, Laurence, and some otherfriends were round him. The attention shown toBurke by all that party was just like the treatment ofAhithophel of old. ( It was as if one went to inquireof the oracle of the Lord.' I reported to them theaccount I had received, and Burke being satisfied ofits authority, we held a consultation on the propercourse for Government to follow. Windham set offfor London the same night with the result of ourdeliberations. Burke's advice was very much thesame as Sir Charles Middleton's had been on asimilar occasion, which Pitt often mentioned as aninstance of Sir Charles's promptitude and resolution.Pitt and Lord Chatham, then first Lord of the Admiralty,had sent for Middleton, and met him with theinformation, ' Bad news, Sir Charles, from the fleet, aship has mutinied ; what are we to do ? ' Sir Charles,who had always been an enemy to pressing, and whoactually resigned his office of Comptroller of the Navybecause he could not carry some reforms, which would96 Diary.212 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1797.have prevented the breaking out of the great mutiny,immediately replied, * You know how ill I think thesepoor fellows have been used, but now that it hascome to a mutiny, there is but one thing to be done,you must show them that you have the superiority ;you must order a ninety-gun ship on each side of her,and sink her on the spot if she does not at once submit.'They were staggered, and said doubtfully,That is a strong measure, what if they should refuseto obey ? ' ' Then indeed all would be over : but theywill not refuse to obey if you give the order resolutely,and it is the only thing which can be done.' He leftthem still undetermined, and in a few minutes cameback with the despatch drawn up ; and seeing stillsome hesitation, said, ' Pray sign it instantly, thereis much to be done in the office, and we shall scarcelybe ready in time to save the post.' ' Sir Charles,'said Pitt, * is the best man of business I know, but hewill do any thing for a methodist? ' He has thegood sense,' was my reply, * to know that he cannotbe secure of the due execution of his measures, unlesshe can depend upon his instruments.' ' J86The mutiny which now broke out, and for monthskept the nation in alarm, had already gained too muchhead to be so easily suppressed. The time of its continuancewas ever esteemed by Mr. Wilberforce themost critical within his recollection.86 Con. Mem.1797. SUMMONS FROM PITT. 213TO W. HEY ESQ.Bath, April 19, 1797.My dear Sir,* * I came here on Thursday night,and unless I should be forced up again by the call ofbusiness, I mean to remain here a fortnight longer.A mutiny in our grand fleet ! Do you remember thefirst piece in the first volume of Cowper ? How doesthis tend to confound the insolence, and strike terrorto the hearts of our rulers, who vainly imagined thatthey might in this line defy almost the power ofProvidence itself ! God will humble the lofty : and Ican truly declare that, for several years Mr. Pitt'sswaggering speeches in opening the budget, and theswelling acclamations with which they were received,have chilled my heart at the very moment, and mademe augur some future abasement. *I am ever, my dear Sir,yours, very sincerely,W. Wilberforce."Before the fortnight expired his return was earnestlydesired by Mr. Pitt. " I do not," he wrote, 87 " easilybring myself to propose to you to exchange any oneof the days you would pass at Bath, for such as youwill find in the House of Commons. But it seemsvery important not to delay for a moment more thanis necessary the decision on the Austrian loan. Thev April 28.214 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1797.sending the result to Vienna may be of infinite importance.I have therefore been obliged to fix it forMonday, and trust to seeing you in the course of thatday."The summons was peculiarly unwelcome. " Idoubt," he had written to a friend six months before,if I shall ever change my situation ; the state ofpublic affairs concurs with other causes in makingme believe f I must finish my journey alone.' Imuch differ from you in thinking that a man such asI am has no reason to apprehend some violent deathor other. I do assure you that in my own case Ithink it highly probable. Then consider how extremelyI am occupied. What should I have donehad I been a family-man for the last three weeks,worried from morning to night ? But I must notthink of such matters now, it makes me feel my solitarystate too sensibly. Yet this state has someadvantages ; it makes me feel I am not at home, andimpresses on me the duty of looking for and hasteningto a better country." But his sentiments had now undergonea considerable change. At Bath he had formedthe acquaintance of one whom he judged well fittedto be his companion through life, and towards whomhe contracted a strong attachment. " Jacta est ale,"he says upon receiving her favourable answer, 87 " Ibelieve indeed she is admirably suited to me, andthere are many circumstances which seem to advisethe step. I .trust God will bless me ; I go to pray to97 Journal. Tuesday, April 23.1797. NEW TIES.Him. I believe her to be a real Christian, affectionate,sensible, rational in habits, moderate in desiresand pursuits; capable of bearing prosperity withoutintoxication, and adversity without repining. If Ihave been precipitate, forgive me, O God ! But if asI trust we shall both love and fear and serve Thee, Thouwilt bless us according to Thy sure word of promise."A sudden call from Bath was, under these circumstances,what he would have gladly escaped. On thatvery day also he was expecting three of his most valuedfriends who were coming to him from a distance ; butit was a call of duty, and he at once " resolved toobey it." By Monday evening he was in town.The next morning's post brought news which dispelledMr. Pitt's hopes as to the loan to Austria. Ithad been remarked by those who knew him best, asan instance of his confidence in God, that at such atime of general apprehension he should have resolvedto marry. The prospect was now gloomy at homeand hopeless on the continent ; and with the strongesttrust in that merciful Father who had hitherto protectedhim, he looked forward to approaching troubleas an altered man. He found already that he hadgiven hostages to fortune. " Lancaster told me ofthe Emperor's separate peace. Much affected by itfor her sake. Wrote to her and told her that I wouldnot hold her to engagement against her will." 88 " Theintelligence we have received," he wrote, 89 "of the Emperor'shaving made a separate peace affects me with*> Diary, May 3. May 3.^16 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1797.emotions hitherto unknown ; it is doubtful what theeffects of the event may be on our internal situation.I seem to have drawn you into a participation of myfortunes at a most unseasonable time, and I am distressedby the idea of involving you in trouble andmisfortune by the part it may be my duty to take inso perilous a conjuncture."Yet this was but a passing cloud which shadedhis habitual cheerfulness. " You have heard mesay," he writes again a few days later, 90 " that Iam no predestinarian, and it is certainly true ; yetwhen I review the incidents of my past life, andobserve how God * has led me by a way which Iknew not,' has supported me when weak, has raisedme when fallen, has brought me out of darknessinto light, has kept me from forming a connexionwhere it would have proved too surely a clog anda restraint to me, and has at length disposed ourhearts mutually to each other ; when I see these andten thousand other such things, (many of them youwill like to hear,) I can only lift up my hands andeyes in silent adoration, and recognise the providenceof God disposing all things according to the counselof His own will ; and graciously recompensing thevery feeblest endeavours to please and serve Him."On looking back to my past life I see many instances,some greater, some smaller, of God's providentialcare and kindness. These infuse into me ahumble hope that, though public affairs wear a most*> May 5.1797. " WICKED WILLIAMS." 217gloomy aspect, yet I shall be rescued from futureevils, and shall be a specimen of His undeserved graceand kindness to those that humbly look up to Him.It would to some seem superstitious to note how goodGod has been to me in a variety of little instances(preserving me from evil, from discredit, &c.) as wellas in more important cases." 90Those troubled times needed such a ground of confidence.Whilst the naval mutiny was yet unappeased,discontents broke out amongst the military in theneighbourhood of London. At this moment it wasbuzzed about that Mr. Wilberforce had written to thesoldiers to express his sympathy, and promise tobring their complaints before the House of Commons.So wide-spread was the rumour, that on the 13th ofMay he says, " Pitt sent to me about the soldiers," andWindham" (Secretary at War) " called " on the sameerrand " in the course of the day." " I have no intention,"was his answer, " of making any motion on thesubject, but to do so at this time, and in such a manner,I should deem little short of positive insanity."Still it was asserted that an agent from himself hadbrought the message to the barracks, read aloud hisletter, and actually shown to them his signature.Further inquiry brought out a solution of the imputation,highly characteristic of its object. OneWilliams, a needy, and as he thought penitent man,had been recommended by Mr. Scott to the charity ofMr. Wilberforce. He was a clergyman of the church90 Journal.VOL. II. L218 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1797.of England, and had reduced himself to abject wantby unprincipled excess : on his apparent penitence hefound in Mr. Wilberforce a generous supporter, whohad continued privately to relieve his necessity, evenafter he had spit in his benefactor's face and had beenkept by a Bow Street warrant from further acts ofviolence. Finding him at last irreclaimable, Mr.Wilberforce had written to refuse him any furtheraid; and with this letter " wicked Williams" . . .such was his usual appellation . . . had visited thebarracks, pretended to read the feigned message, andthen exhibited the signature.Upon the 15th of May, his motion on the SlaveTrade was again before the House ; but the WestIndians maintained the ground which they had gainedat the commencement of the session. They opposedthe motion with a bolder front than usual. Mr.Wilberforce was ridiculed by Bryan Edwards fordeclaring that by the gloomy aspect of affairs he wasreminded of the slumbering wrath of Heaven, whichthe Slave Trade must provoke ; he was taunted withthe humanity of the Liverpool merchants, and thedistresses of the chimney-sweepers. A majority of82 to 74 against the measure was only what had beenanticipated from the existing House of Commons.I wrote last night," he says the next day playfullyin a letter to Bath, " whilst a very slow and heavyspeaker was railing at me, to my lawyer about oursettlements ; so I did not want Christian love to keepme from falling out of temper, and I have been too1797. LEAVES TOWN. 219long used to it to feel much disappointment on losingmy motion."Every day was now fully occupied. "23rd. Breakfastat Sir Charles Middleton's. Proclamation committee.Carrington's to read settlements. Dined beforeHouse: friends Muncaster,Carrington,&c. HouseFox on repeal of the two Bills till late. 25th. Morningto city to breakfast on business very unfit to gonearly fainted afterwards from the heat. Home anddined Lord Hawke sitting by me and discussing.Pitt's about turnpike tax. House Sir William Pulsesmotion about the Bank put off, so House upearly. Lock Hospital about its funds nearly ruined.Weather all this time most oppressively hot couldnot sleep at night. 26th. Lord St. Helen's with meon politics. Parliamentary Reform day. Dinedbefore House Lancaster, Smyth, and Lascelles.Extremely exhausted by the heat of the House.Nearly embarking in a long speech, but could notturn my mind to political business. Fox, &c. chargedall our evils on want of Parliamentary Reform ; andthought it would cure them. Very sorry for nothaving spoken neglect of duty. Grey moderatedeclared as well as Fox a secession something solemn.I find that business will not prevent my leavingtown for Bath. Pitt awaked by Woolwich artilleryriot, and went out to Cabinet." " Pitt met us nextmorning declaring, ' Lord Harrington (a noblemanof the * vieille cour,' then commanding the forces inLondon) is, after all, the greatest man in England.L 2220 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1797.When I saw him in the hurry and alarm last night,he was just as slow, and made as many bows, as if hehad been loitering at the levee'" 91May 27th. Off after dinner, calling at Pitt'sand strongly urging him to make a liberal offerat first to France; he convinced at length, thatrequisite to make immediate effort. I travelled ontoSalt Hill. 28th, Sunday. Salt Hill. For sometimepast extremely hurried in London but verypoorly in health never recovered since the influenza.Not able to sleep. Heat excessive, and Isuffered from it more than I ever remember. Dailyreports of the soldiery risen g, and certainly some progressmade. Pitt and the others now convinced thatthings in extremis, yet no apparent sense of God. Inow feel exceedingly hunted and shattered' ^ On thefollowing day he reached Bath, and upon the 30th, wasmarried to Barbara Ann, eldest daughter of IsaacSpooner Esq. of Eldon Hall in the county of Warwick." You will perhaps judge my way of thinkingold-fashioned and queer," was the congratulationof his late colleague Henry Duncombe, 93 " but I amgreatly pleased that you have not chosen your partnerfrom among the titled fair ones of the land. Donot however tell Lady C. so."His first visit with his bride was to Mrs. HannahMore's. " Received at Cowslip Green with great kindnessdelightful day and sweet ride. Sunday morning,9i Con. Mem.94 Diary. 93 TO W. Wilberforce Esq., May 10.1797. BRINGS MRS. WILBERFORCE TO TOWN. 221as early as able, tour of the schools Shipham, Ax-bridge,and Cheddar. Delighted with all we saw,Cheddar in particular a delightful scene, whenold people collected together at afternoon reading.Home at night, after a pleasant drive." 94 Already, atthe expiration of the first week from his marriage, hecondemns himself " for not having been duly diligent,"95 and on the next day he set out again forLondon. His head-quarters were now in PalaceYard, and for an occasional retreat he rented of hisfriend Mr. Eliot his house on Clapham Common.Let me now," he says 96 on his return to London,commence a new era, guarding cautiously against allinfirmities to which I am personally, or from circumstances,liable; and endeavouring to cultivate allopportunities, I go to prayer ; may the grace of Godgive me repentance. Fix, O Lord, my natural volatility; let not Satan destroy or impair these impressions.I fall down before the cross of Christ, andwould there implore pardon and find grace to helpin this time of need. Let me use diligently andprudently to Thy glory all the powers and facultiesThou hast given me. Let me exhibit a bright specimenof the Christian character, and adorn the doctrineof God my Saviour in all things. Let me goforth remembering the vows of God which are uponme ; remembering that all eyes will be surveying mefrom my book, my marriage, &c. ; that my politicalstation is most important, my means of doing good** Diary, June 3. Journal. > lb.222 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1797.numerous and great; my cup full of blessings,spiritual above all. The times how critical ! Deathperhaps at hand. May God be with me for Christ'ssake."Society had now new claims upon him. " Dined,"he says, " at N.'s. with all the H.'s grand dinner,very dull, as grand relations' dinners always are." " Tothe drawing-room with my wife." He was soon fullof work of all sorts. " Was to meet Pitcairnee andSargent about St. Bartholomew's ; but Pitcairnee toolate. Wanted St. Margaret's and St. John's parishesto associate. Vestry meeting. People would notcome in to it. To Pitt's about provisional CavalryAct. Then House on Ship Owners' Bill." 9r " Nextmorning, 98 by ourselves at Broomfield happy day.Read Scripture." " Pitt told me yesterday aboutnegociation. My Skipper friends saw him, and hewith them. Business put off." 99He had carried a Bill through the Commons to enableRomanists to serve in the Militia. 100 In his owncounty they were strictly loyal men, who ought not, hethought, to be excluded from joining in the nationaldefence. " I thank you," writes Sir John Lawson, " forobtaining the erasure of the words, ' I am a Protestant,'from the oath required of every man balloted into thesupplemental Militia. I then hoped that every obstacleto my standing forward in the cause of my countryDiary, July 7. " July 8. Diary, July 11.100 He had proposed the Bill May 22. It had been read the thirdtime July 4.1797. TO LORD MUNCASTER. 223was done away, and in that conviction I took the veryfirst occasion to offer my personal services." ThisBill Mr. Pitt sanctioned, but it was supported feebly byhis colleagues in the Upper House, where it was contestedhotly because, at the motion of another member,Protestant Dissenters had been included in its provisions." House of Lords about Roman CatholicBill. Bishop of Rochester's violent speech. Bishopof Bristol. Bill thrown out. I too much incensed.Grenville and Pitt very like breaking friendship." 101TO LORD MUNCASTER.June 19, 1797.My dear Lancaster,One word to say vivo et vale. I mean, henceforth,/ to be the English dual, and vivite et valet.Thanks for all your kindness. We begin to settle into thecalm complacencies of mutual affection and confidence.I am sorry to say the prospect of peace is a littleclouded by the terms of the Directory's answer to ourrejoinder demanding a passport. This has producedfrom us (and really from necessity) not the negociator'sjourney, but a letter of remark and askingexplanations. I do not like Lord Malmesbury's beingthe man. What cause have we to be grateful toProvidence, which after showing us that our vauntedstrength could be made our most formidable weakness,and even worse than this, has rescued us fromthe impending evil. 102oi Diary, July 12. * The mutiny of the fleet.224 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1797.Kindest remembrances. I would we could leavethis town.Ever yours,W. WILBERFORCE."The negociations which were soon after opened,furnished him with new employment. " A powerfulWest Indian party in France," he heard from Mr.Stephen, 103 " are labouring in concert with our government,to reverse the so-called ' pernicious colonialsystem,' the evils of which have already passed away,whilst its future blessings are incalculable. When Isay f in concert with our government,' I allude tothe shameful article in Lord Malmesbury's propositions,and his oral explication of it to De la Croix ; anattempt which will no doubt be renewed in the presentnegociations. That ' administration did it' stopsthe mouth of one party, and that ( Mr. Fox omitted toreprobate it,' has the same effect on the other; somuch are the interests of party in this country anover-match for those of mercy and justice. I knowyou too well to suspect that your strong private aswell as public attachment to one part of the administration,can outweigh your zeal in that gloriouscause in which you have so long laboured ; andtherefore I am confident, that your private influencewill be exerted against the revival of this wickedand invidious proposition. Whether your oppositionto it will succeed I doubt, because I suspect it ia not103 Letter from James Stephen Esq.1797. SESSION ENDS. 225with your side of the Cabinet it originated ; and becauseMr. Pitt unhappily for himself his countryand mankind, is not zealous enough in the cause ofthe negroes, to contend for them as decisively as heought, in the Cabinet any more than in parliament."He deemed the subject of such importance, thatthough " parliamentary business being nearly over " hewas just about to leave London, 1(M he " resolved to stay,in order to be useful about the treaty for Abolition,and prevent mischief in stipulations respecting WestIndia slaves. Peace I believe there will be." Thehope of peace was but short-lived. On the 18th, amessenger arrived with sad account of the negociation,and Pitt" (he says soon after) " now but diffidentabout its success." A longer stay seemed therefore tobe useless, and he prepared to leave the neighbourhoodof London. During the few days he remained atBroomfield he says, " Monday, 105 Last night a dreadfulthunder-storm. Poor Lord St. Helen's house burntdown. To the Bishop of London's, Fulham to dinner.Pleasing, good-natured day, and charming walk bythe river's side. Home to Broomfield. Tuesday. St.Helen's came, poor fellow, and slept. Wednesday.Lounged with St. Helen's ; after breakfast, to town ;and Warrington being pressing, I went from Houseof Commons to dine at the London Tavern. EastIndia House sat next Jennie, geographer. Thursday.To town, and back to dine at Henry Thornton's,where Simeon and Grant to talk over Misc*Diary, July 16. July 17.L 3226 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1797.sion scheme. Parliamentary session ended to-day.Speaker's Address to the King, good. Carrington,.Pitt, and Speaker came down to us at Broomfield.Saturday. Simeon with us his heart glowing withlove of Christ." " How full he is of love, and ofdesire to promote the spiritual benefit of others. Ohthat I might copy him, as he Christ. My path isindeed difficult, and full of enemies. But God inChrist can and will strengthen and uphold us if wetrust in Him." 106On the 26th he set off towards the north, haltingfor a day at Burden. " I am to be," he tells Mr.Hey, " at York for the assizes. My objections to itare much done away by my having published my book,which I consider a sort of explanatory manifesto."But at Newark he was met by information of the suddendeath of Dr. Clarke. This changed his course toHull, where upon the Saturday he joined his motherand his sister. " You would hear from Henry Thornton,"he writes to Hannah More, August 2nd, " themelancholy account of Dr. Clarke's death. He was byno means of such a habit of body as to render usapprehensive of any seizure, and I rather feared apremature and a protracted old age. But in the midstof life we are in death. I look back to the time Ispent with him at Bath with no little pleasure.Being in the same house, I learned more than I couldotherwise have done of his habitual frame. He was aChristian of the true breed ; quiet, silent, unobtrusive.106 Journal, July 22.1797. VISIT TO HULL. 227I know your impatient solicitude must have madeyou hurry over all this, in order to learn the soonersome tidings about my dear sister. I bless God she ispretty well, and more composed than I could haveexpected. She desires particularly to be rememberedto you and Patty, and indeed to all the sisterhood.At any other time I should have had much to say inreturn to your last letter. If it were in my 'power, Iwould transport myself to you often on a Saturdayevening, and accompany you on Sunday in yourperegrinations. You are I fear wearing yourself out,and Patty also, but you cannot be spent in a bettercause, and I do not know how to wish you to slackenyour exertions. Rather I must cry out, * Work whileit is day, for the night cometh.' I wish you wouldlet me quarter a few apprentices on you."He now spent three weeks at Hull, cheering hisaged mother and sorrowing sister. Here he watchedfrom a distance the progress of events. " I amanxious about this negociation," he writes to Mr.Pitt ; 107 " on the whole I augur well from its going on:"send me a line or two," he asks the Speaker, " in pityto my unenlightened situation ; you know how difficult,I may say next to impossible, it is to extort a linefrom Pitt."Meanwhile he was busily engaged in doing whatpresent good he could. The vicarage of the HolyTrinity church, now vacant by the death of Dr. Clarke,was in the gift of the corporation of the town ; and>w To Rt. Hon. William Pitt, Aug 10.228 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1797.Joseph Milner was a candidate for the appointment.Went about' he says, July 31st, " to canvass forMilner no promises, but hopeful. I have reason tobelieve that my being here is highly useful to Milnerthey came from Carlisle on Wednesday." " Milnerappointed vicar," August 22nd, " by the corporation.My being here probably got him elected."To Archdeacon Corbett he wrote at this time ;Hull, Aug. 26, 1797.My dear Sir,Many thanks for your kind letter. Your intelligencehowever respecting the Slave Trade hasreally moved me so much that I can scarcely turn toany other subject with proper composure. SurelyProvidence will not suffer such wickedness and crueltyto go on unavenged. One is strongly tempted towish not merely that the sufferings of the Africansmay cease, but that some signal mark of the Divinedispleasure may desolate those abhorred islands.However, we are to bear in mind that ' the wrath ofman worketh not the righteousness of God,' and striveto retain that spirit of love which should bleed forthe offender while it prevents or punishes the offence.You would hear from Lancaster of my situation ;and from the kindness with which you are disposedto sympathize in whatever concerns me, you will Iam sure be happy to learn that my mother and sisterare bearing the severe stroke Providence has inflictedon them with composure.1797. TO JAMES STEPHEN ESQ. 229Your intelligence concerning Clarkson amusesme. My time is here so much occupied that I canscarcely get a vacant half hour for the most pressingbusiness. But for this impediment I would gladlydiscuss with you for at least a sheet or two; but Imust lay down my pen not however without thankingyou for your friendly congratulations on my marriage.I hope sometime to have the pleasure ofintroducing Mrs. Wilberforce to your family circle.I remain, my dear Sir, with verysincere regard, yours always,W. WILBERFORCE."To Rev. J. J. Plymley (now Archdeacon Corbett."Just before he quitted Hull he wrote to Mr.Stephen ;My dear Sir,I wish we could make our orbits coincide forawhile, either at Mr. Babington's where I go for fouror five days, or at Bath ; it would give me real pleasureto have the opportunity of a little more quietintercourse than we can expect to obtain in London.My plan of life is every where the same. The morningI spend in some sort of reading and writing, takingMrs. Wilberforce along with me as much as I can inmy studies and employments. We carry our businessout of doors, and muse or read whilst taking the airand exercise. Dinner and supper are the seasonswhen I enjoy the company of my friends : and though230 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1797.I do not push about the bottle, I can willingly prolongthe dinner conversation, till it sometimes almost meetsthe beginning of our supper conversazione. Whenwith me, you would be as free as to the disposal ofyour time as myself. So now I have told you mysystem, I will only repeat that I should give you acordial welcome, if either at the Temple or at Baththe servant should announce ' Mr. Stephen.'Since I begun, your last letter has reached me,and I must not leave my reply to the chance of ourmeeting. I will be quite honest with you. I wish youhad not told me of your being the author of theMorning Chronicle Strictures,' because my knowledgeof this fact may expose me to the risk of somesimulation or dissimulation, both which, in spite ofLord Bacon's distinction, are a little at variance withplain truth and real simplicity. But with your feelingsand opinions I think you have acted quite rightin not leaving it to the effect of a private representationto government, but enforcing this by any othermeans in your judgment likely to promote the desiredend. I ought to add, I am not clear as to the realtendency of these means, Had you not better putyour argument, to prove the impracticability of oursucceeding in so wicked an attempt as that of bringingback the emancipated negroes into slavery, intoa pamphlet, rather than let it be scattered throughthe columns of a newspaper. If your object be torouse the attention of opposition well ; the MorningChronicle would be the best. But if you wish .FARQUHAR'S COMEDY. 231ministration, I had almost said to read, much moreto consider your statements, I should certainly greatlyprefer the pamphlet plan. I fear they are all by fartoo much governed by prejudice and passion (alas,how generally do these operate on mankind in politicalmatters) to listen to any thing which comes in soquestionable, or rather so hostile, a shape, as a letterto Mr. Editor of the Morning Chronicle. I doubtwhether your assuming this form might not even disposemany of the hot-headed friends of ministryto defend the whole plan. I remember in one ofFarquhar's pert, low comedies, a pleasant incident ofa father who has been represented as enraged at anextravagant son, and as venting his indignation againsthim in the grossest terms. An old uncle comes inwho had always hated the son, and with whom thefather had been used to quarrel on this subject.' Uncle. Well, brother, you know him at length ;you see he has ruined himself, disgraced you,' &c.* Father. Well, brother, he is a good lad, I likethat he should ruin himself, disgrace me &c.This is human nature. I really fear that bystirring up opposition you will do nothing, whereasif you can interest some of the less prejudiced supportersof government you do much. I am sure youwill think I have done well in sending you thesesurmises. In extreme haste,Yours always,W. Wilberforce."232 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1797.Though the circumstances of his family saved himfrom the necessity of paying Visits, yet he had littleleisure whilst he remained at Hull. " Late morninghours and early dining, many calls, a vast many letters,and attention to my mother, prevent my getting anythingdone. Reading the Bible with my wife." " Iwish I could have a recluse, devotional, thinking birthday,but that is impossible. On its return I have theutmost cause for self-humiliation, for gratitude, forgrateful confidence, for earnest breathing after usefulness.I have no time to write, but let me use thefew minutes I have in praying to God in Christ, theAuthor of my mercies, beseeching him to hear me, tofill me with spiritual blessings, and enable me to liveto His glory. My marriage and the publication of mybook are the great events of the past year. In bothI see much to humble me, and to fill my mouth withpraises. Let me resign myself to God, who has hithertoled me by ways that I knew not, and implore Him yetto bless me." 108A rope-yard behind his mother's house was almostthe only place where he could here take hisquiet musing walks ; and the pleasure he hadfound in it he would mention long afterwards withgratitude. " It is hardly in human nature, I fear,"wrote Dr. Milner the day after his departure, 109 " tocontinue long as happy as you are at present." " Mycup was before teeming with mercies," he himself tellsMr. Macaulay, 110 " and it has at length pleased God108 Journal, Aug. 24. <* Aug. 30. Sept, 20.1797. TO ZACHARY MACAULAY ESQ. 233to add the only ingredient almost which was wantingto its fulness. In this instance, as in many others,His goodness has exceeded my utmost expectations,and I ought with renewed alacrity and increased gratitudeto devote myself to the service of my munificentBenefactor. I am half ready to blame myself forthus descanting on the topic I have chosen, hut it isthe strongest proof I can give you of my friendship,that I have opened myself to you on a subject, onwhich, in speaking to a mere acquaintance, I shouldhave been the least likely to dwell. If I were sure ofmy letters reaching you in safety, I might open myselfwithout reserve on some other topics ; but as I knownot but that this sheet may light the pipe, or singe thefowl, (if poulards are now singed,) of some Dutch orFrench captain, I am loth to venture too much in onebottom, or to say any thing which it would be disagreeableor mischievous to have miscarry. ThereforeI will now bid you farewell, and write again toyou before any long time elapses. Even this hastyscrawl will I doubt not be acceptable now you are sofarremoved from us. I imagine you see the publicprints, and they keep you informed of all public events.We lately spent a week with our excellent friendsthe Barrington, who, to the blessing of their neighbourhood,are now returned to the Temple. I own I amobliged to bite my cheek and set my teeth hard, whenI quit such an enviable retirement to plunge into thebustle and wickedness of political life. But slave orfree, every one is to remain and do his Lord's work in234 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1797.that state in which he was called ; and so I fall towork again, though, I own, mine is one of the lasttrades which I should have selected. But life willsoon be over, and we are assured that no situationpresents temptations which the grace of God cannotand will not enable us to resist, if we diligently seekit. Once more, my dear sir, farewell, and in the assuranceof every friendly wish,Believe me always sincerely yours,W. WILBERFORCE."He was now upon his road to Bath, spending a fewdays in passing at Milford, 111 and at Rothley Temple.Called at W.'s and found fifteen or sixteen personsin a small hot room at cards on a fine summer's eveningin a beautiful country ! Breakfasted at Bathurst'sthey very kind declined staying and off for Bath,where got afternoon. Quiet evening. Friday andSaturday quiet pleasant days by ourselves notunbarred yet reading, &c. rational. Sunday.Randolph's, morning evening, Jay's comfortable,happy Sunday. Monday. Reading, writing, &c. byourselves." 112But this quiet life was soon interrupted by an sorrow. Thursday. 113 " Heard of Eliot's deathfrom Pitt ; and from Rose saying how much Pitt wasaffected. Deeply hurt by Eliot's death-kept awake atnight by it. Heard yesterday too of Lord Malmesbury' s111 Mr. Samuel Smith's. > Diary, Sept 18.3 Diary, Sept. 21.1797. DEATH OF HONOURABLE E. J. ELIOT. 235return, re infecta. Much affected by this too, and regretmy plan of open dealing had not been adopted."Great as was his grief for the loss of Mr. Eliot, he lookedwith Christian thankfulness upon the gathering in torest of one so ripe for his removal. In him sorrow hadaccomplished a blessed work and to the very lastletter he had written, Mr. Wilberforce now turnedagain with deepened interest. " Your sister's resignedand composed state of mind," he had written 114 on thedeath of Dr. Clarke, " must be a real consolation toyou ; her well-founded religious principles and habitsmust stand her in great stead. When a similar calamitybefell me, I now think I was little better than aninfidel ; but it pleased God to sanctify His visitation,and gradually to draw me by it to a better mind. Mypresent infirmity, I am well-nigh convinced, is sentupon the same errand : the necessity for it I sincerelysubmit to His wisdom, but the effects I certainly feeland willingly acknowledge to have been spirituallybeneficial. My thoughts have been much moresettled, less disposed to wander and to dwell uponthe world or the enjoyments of sense, and myimagination much less uncontrollable than heretofore.For all this I am truly thankful, and thoughnot quite free from the remains of my complaint, I donot pray to God to relieve me from them, if it is tobe at the expense of these more substantial blessings.In the mean while, by His goodness I am free fromany very considerable uneasiness ; and if my serviceTo W. Wilberforce Esq., Hang. 30.236 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1797.be to e stand and wait it is hitherto without pain, andI trust without impatience : after all, however, I donot mean to state myself as despairing of being restoredto more exertion."TO LORD MUNCASTER."Bath, Sept 27, 1797.My dear Lancaster,I cannot but touch on the topic, which youwill conceive engages much of my thoughts, the deathof my excellent friend Eliot. You knew his exterior,and pleasing indeed it was, and in one particular expressiveof his character; but perhaps no one butmyself knew him thoroughly. He was so modest,retiring, and unassuming, that neither in point ofunderstanding, nor of religious and moral character,did he generally possess his proper estimation. Ican truly say, that I scarcely know any one whoseloss I have so much cause to regret. But I have thesolid satisfaction of knowing that his mind was justinthe state I should have wished, had I been awareof the awful change which awaited him. Peace bewith him. May my last end be like his ! You willnot be sorry to hear, that as Rose who was an eyewitnessinformed me, the effect produced on Mr.Pitt by the news, which came in a letter from LordEliot by the common post with his others, exceededconception. Rose says he never saw, and never expectsto see, any thing like it. To Pitt, the loss ofEliot is a loss indeed and then his poor little girl.1797. TO LORD MUNCASTER. ' 237This event is not unconnected in my mind withthat of the rupture of the negociation ; but I havenot time to trace the bonds of connexion. Somewill occur to you. I look forward with awe, butwithout dismay. I cannot believe we shall be cutoff.Scourged, and severely too, we deserve tobe. Even yet there is no recognition of the providenceof God. I well remember your pointing out tomelast year, the first lesson for Sunday se'nnightlast. 113 It struck me forcibly this season. Blessed beGod, there is a secure and unchangeable portionreserved for those who diligently and humbly seekfor it. May we, my. dear friend, be incited to renewedalacrity in this most important of all pursuits, bythe stormy and turbulent state of worldly affairs.Kindest wishes for all your house from Mrs. W. (whoknows you by character,) as well as from,yours ever,W. Wilberforce."Did you see in the papers," he wrote to Mrs. HannahMore, " the account of poor Eliot's death ; yet whypoor Eliot ? He was I verily believe a real Christian,and it is a singular satisfaction to me, to have receiveda little before his departure a letter from him,breathing a spirit of the truest humility and resignation.I feel his loss deeply, and shall continue tofeel it ; for except Henry Thornton, there is no oneliving with whom I was so much in the habit of contFer. v. or xxii.238 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1797.suiting, and whose death so breaks in on all my plansin all directions. We were engaged in a multitudeof pursuits together, and he was a hand of connexion,which was sure never to fail, between me and Pitt ;because a bond not of political, nor merely of a personalquality, but formed by a consciousness of commonsentiments, interests, and feelings. Well he Itrust is happy, and he is not improbably taken awayfrom much suffering and sorrow. Pitt has almostbeen overwhelmed with it ; I believe he suffersmore from the very texture of his firm mind. Youwill observe that the blow comes just when he hasalso to bear up against what deeply shocks him, LordMalmesbury's return, re infecta. Poor fellow ! praythat the grace of God may yet visit him. He is thefirst of natural men, but * he that is least in the kingdomof heaven is greater than he.'I took up my pen to say to you that I wish muchto have a conference with you, and Lieut-Gen.Patty, before it be long. We must come over anddine with you, unless you could without inconveniencegive us the meeting some day at Bristol. I mean tovisit some schools there under an extraordinary man,who introduced himself to us the other evening, andquite stunned us. He had heard of Mrs. Wilberforce'swish (conceiving she is likely to be here once or twiceevery year) to devise some plan of turning her Bathvisits to good account, and we know of no better objectthan the education of the indigent and friendless.But it is on this subject that we wish to discuss with1797. LATITUDINARIAN SCHOOLS. 239you, so be ready, that we may profit from your experience.The School of Industry falls off sadly. Thenumbers have decreased within a year from one hundredand sixty to one hundred, and that number cannotbe continued. I have written to Phillott andSibley desiring to see them, and I mean to try whatI can .make of them ; meanwhile send me any hints."I have not till this moment got your very affectingletter," replies Mrs. Hannah More. 116 " Your verytouching account of Mr., Pitt's sorrow has gone to allour hearts. I had anticipated the strong grief of thatstrong mind. Though it is late, I will not lose amoment in answering the most pressing, though notthe most interesting part of your letter, because I amanxious to prevent your involving yourself. Theboasted liberality on which they value themselves inthe conduct of the Bristol schools is that relaxingtoleration, which enables them to combine Quakersand Presbyterians, ' the sprinkled and the dipped, 9by insisting on no peculiar form of worship orreligious instruction ; so that I fear in this accommodatingand comprehensive plan, Christianity slipsthrough their fingers. I hope and believe theyinculcate industry, but I never went to see themmyself, because I think they are carried on in a wayI could not commend, and which it might not beright to censure. The manager is a man who willtorment you to death, if you give him the entree. Heis as vain as Erskine in another way; absurd and6 Sept. 26.240 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1797.injudicious, and as fond of fame as Alexander. Withallthis, he is sober, temperate, laborious, andcharitable; but one with whom I never, and younever, could coalesce, with views and motives sodissimilar."A visit to Cowslip Green soon followed. " Receivedmost cordially the round Shipham, Abridge,Cheddar, all flourishing. 117 Monday. Blade ; butfew children there. On Tuesday, returned to Bath,bringing Mrs. More with us. Heard of LordLonsdale's reformation through my book. Went tothe School of Industry." " Asked to subscribe toJay's velvet cushion, but refused." " Dr. Fraserdined with us he says that Mackintosh is grownanti democratical. Saturday. At dinner had Dr. andMiss Madame, and Miss Powder. Rational spiritedconversation. B called, and talked about schools." 118No time at Bath for reading or composing. Letters,newspapers, and calls, consume so much time."In such pursuits 'passed the first recess after hismarriage.w Diary, Sunday, Oct. 1. Diary, Oct. 7.CHAPTER XIV.NOVEMBER 1797 TO JUNE 1798.New session Support of government Tripling the assessedtaxes Voluntary contributions for the public serviceSelf-control Origin of Church Missionary Society Correspondencewith Stephen and Pitt on the newly-acquiredWest Indian settlements Feelings towards ministry andopposition Letter to William Smith Engagement forobservance of Sunday Abolition again defeated Pitt'sduel with Tierney Letter on church preferment.UPON the 1st of November Mr. Wilberforce returnedto London, to be present at the opening of the session.The conduct of the French government during thenegociation of the summer months, convinced himthat it was his duty as a loyal subject to strengthenthe hands of administration ; and on the first night ofthe session he made an effective reply . . " moved byBryan Edwards, and suddenly up, too warm and unguarded,I fear" * . . to an extravagant eulogy upon thepolitical conduct of Mr. Fox. " Hurried," he writesa few days later, 2 " beyond all comfortable bearing,and having more to do than I can execute I amgoing to read the papers which give an account of theDiary, Nov. 2. * To Thomas Babington Esq. Nov. G.VOL. II. M242 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1797.negociation. I once was ready to give up all we haveconquered, either from France or her allies ; now, afterthe hostile mind she has discovered towards us, andour recent experience of the effrontery of her rulers, Iwould not make peace without reserving either Ceylonor the Cape ; not both. I rather think of declaringthis publicly. As for Trinidad, it is not worthhaving."Hitherto," he tells Lord Lancaster, 3 " youhave not lost much by not having come amongst us ;(I speak of you in your political, not your personalcapacity ;) whether we have lost much (still speakingof you politically) you can best tell us. We seem tometo be in a sad flat state. This at least is my owncondition ; entertaining daily worse and worse sentimentsof opposition, and not over-well pleased withministry. I should be glad to talk matters over withyou. I presume you have read the papers. On thewhole they read well for us. Yet I wish we had takena different course, and instead of sending over a manof diplomatic note, who considered his character as anegociator at stake, that w r e had employed some plainman of known firmness and simplicity both of mannersand conduct. I wish also that we had at once namedthe lowest terms on which we would treat, declaring thatwe had gone as far for the sake of peace as we could doconsistently with the honour and safety of the country,and making public too our offers. Even yet I thinkthere would have been a chance, though speakinga Nov. 10.1797. TO LORD MUNCASTER. 243impartially I fear not a great one, that we shouldhave got peace on the spot; and that even if theRevolution of the 4th of September had taken place,the new directory would not have dared to recommencethe war. But I am clear that these fellowsnow in power have been resolved ever since they cameinto authority, not to make peace with us at all. Well,there is then nothing left for us but to go on, waitingfor a moment of returning sanity in our enemies. ButI confess my apprehensions are great. Our expensesare the first cause of alarm, and though I trustreforms will be made, and even our establishmentcurtailed, yet all that can be saved that way will beinconsiderable in a practical view.The newspapers as usual on both sides misstatedme in what I said on the first day ^pf thesession ; and I suppose they will as little state mefairly in reporting a few words I found it necessaryto throw out to-night, in consequence of a verypugnacious speech of Dr. Lawrence. I have thoughtit right in the present emergency to avow myconviction that government have honestly sought forpeace ; and though I have rather hinted that I mightnot quite agree with them as to terms, yet I havelaid the blame of the failure of the negociation on ourenemies, where I really conceive it to be due. It is ofextreme importance that the nation should be convincedof this. Heavy burthens will be. necessary, andthis only will make people bear them with anytolerable patience. You hear of the projected newM 2244 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1797.imposition of a sum for every individual occupying anassessed house, equal to three times the amount of allhe now pays for assessed taxes. I fear this will presshard on some people. I am clear there must be anexception in favour of those with families above acertain number, and incomes below a certain sum.I thought, my dear Lancaster, you would like thisdish of politics, and yet it really has sickened me toserve it up to you ; so surfeited am I with this speciesof fare."Mr. Pitt's scheme for raising the supplies camebefore the House of Commons upon the 24th ofNovember. " House finance Pitt let off on triplingthe assessed taxes. Vexed that I could not get anopportunity of answering Tierney. Pitt foolish though,and wrong, to crush him." The debate was renewedupon the 4th of December. " It went off," he writeson the following day, 4 "well upon the whole, exceptthat Windham made a mischievous speech which Iin vain endeavoured to stop, about his retainingall his Turkish opinions, and its being of no consequencewhether government had been sincereor not in the negociations. Tierney, who wasmuch beyond his usual point in speaking, wastruly Rabbinical. The Speaker did himself greatcredit, both by the matter and manner of what heuttered. He intimated that he was willing to contributeto the public necessities, and did it so handsomelyas to smooth the way for government to follow ;4 To Lord Lancaster, Dec. 5.1797. MR. PITT'S PUBLIC CHARACTER. 245instead of appearing to shame them into it, andthereby rendering it more difficult."On this subject he was now exerting himselfgreatly. " Saw very little of Pitt this last week -vexed him by plain dealing. Talked with otherson economy." 5 " Fox's language at the Whigclub," he writes, Dec. 6th, "throws light, if anywere wanting, upon their secession. It is myfirm opinion, that a conviction of their weaknessalone prevents their taking up the sword againstgovernment. Now in such a state of things, it is inthe highest degree important that administrationshould conciliate the good-will, confirm the confidence,and animate the public spirit, of all who are reallyattached to the constitution. This can be done onlyby reforming any manifest abuse, by retrenching needlessexpenses, and by making personal sacrifices. Ithas long been my opinion, that next to the violence ofopposition, this country has most to dread from theunbounded acquiescence of those who support administration.I have been urging these considerations inprivate upon Mr. Pitt, but unless my hands arestrengthened, I doubt of my success. He is really Isay it solemnly, appealing to Heaven for the truth ofmy declaration in my judgment one of the most pub-inspiritedand upright, and the most desirous ofspending the nation's money economically, and ofmaking sacrifices for the general good, of all the menI ever knew : but I have met only with two or threeDiary, Nov. 26.246 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1797.(except truly religious men) who have been able to doobnoxious duties, and above all to act in opposition tothe feelings of false honour, by resisting the improvidenceand restraining the weakness of colleagues. Ihave not time to express my meaning clearly, but youmay perhaps perceive it. If the real friends of governmentcould make a united representation tothem of their solicitude for the public interests, oftheir attachment to the constitution, and to the administration,(the safety of which they believed intimatelyconnected with the public welfare,) of theirwillingness to bear burdens and make sacrifices, providedonly they should be enabled to refute the objectionsof those who urge official abuses, profuseexpenditure, &c. ; administration might be compelledby a kind violence, to consult their own welfare andhonour, and the national interest." ( " I have beenwriting to the Speaker and to Pitt, confirming one andurging the other to a relinquishment of a portion oftheir income during the war." 7These subjects he continued to urge upon the minister." Saturday, Dec. 2nd. Dined at the Speaker'slarge party, talked much with Pitt. Hatsell speakingof general corruption. 7th. Dinner at homeMorton Pitt, Colquhoun, and others much talk aboutpolice, and assessed taxes storm louder and louder.Colquhoun speaks of it as a most unfortunate plan.8th. Anxious in the night about politics. Interview withPitt House much discussion with Henry Thorns*To William Hey Esq. , ^ Diary.1797. VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS. 247ton, who sadly worried about assessed taxes. 9th.Much serious talk with Pitt, stating the necessity ofeconomy, and preventing profusion and jobs." " Youmay perhaps think," he wrote afterwards, 8 " that Iwas disposed to be liberal at the expense of others inadvising ministers and official men to give up a partof their incomes; but in truth, though I originallycontended against encouraging the voluntary contributionsas a general measure, yet when they had beenset on foot, I subscribed at the Bank what, with myassessed taxes which are extremely low, amounted tonear an eighth of my clear income, and also contributedin my parish, and for Mrs. Wilberforce in theladies' subscription."On the night of the 14th, when the questionwas next discussed, " Fox and Sheridan returned.Fox speaking well on assessed taxes : much shaken.I think Pitt must give them up. House very late.18th. Tierney's motion on Dundas's place spoke forhim." Whilst the Assessed Tax Bill was passingthrough the House, he was " exerting " himself " toprevail upon the merchants and bankers in the city,to bring forward in the commercial world a proportionateimpost upon all property." 9 " Morning " ofDec. 18th, " off to city, to try to rouse the moniedmen to exertion saw several who are for contribution.19th. House. Spoke warmly and plainly for publiccontribution. Tierney animadverted very hot House.20th. To the city, to stir up some life amongst citizens<> To W. Hey Esq. March 15, 1798. 9 To W. Hey Esq.248 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1797.for contribution of property. 21st. To the city againon the same business got them to agree to meet.House. Assessed taxes committee."At this time he wrote to Lord Lancaster,'' My dear Lancaster,I must answer your question about LordDuncan. It is not only true that after the action heordered all the crew who could be mustered on deck,and directed his chaplain to read the Thanksgiving,in which they were exhorted by the gallant Admiralto join, as having such reason to be thankful ; but (asDundas told a friend of mine) just before the fleet gotinto action, having given all the necessary orders heretired into his cabin, and offered up an earnest prayerto God to support him in the approaching tryinghour, and to bless his arms with victory ; and, addedDundas, ' when the brave old veteran told me this thetears ran down his manly cheeks.' Knowing youwould like to hear this anecdote, I put it down for youwhilst fresh in my mind.Our plan of finance is on its passage through thecommittee. We have granted already great exemptions; but I own I fear we must concede to peoplethe permission to lessen their assessments by reducingtheir establishments. I have been for the lasttwo or three days amongst the city gentlemen, tourge them to come forward with an invitation to usto attempt the plan of a tax on all property of everykind, of 1 per cent on the capital or so much on1797. FINANCIAL DIFFICULTIES. 240the income. But I fear there is not public spiritenough to make my endeavour of any avail. However,there is to be a meeting tomorrow, to consider. 4my dear fellow, I see too much of the interior ofthings to be comfortable.Ever affectionately yours,W. Wilberforce."22nd. Off to the city. Breakfasted at HenryThornton's about capital contribution. The meetingheld." " It was most respectably attended, andthey went so far as to propose to Mr. Pitt, the measure1 desired." 10 "Henry Thornton and others to Pittwith it. 23rd. Pitt's about the plan. Found himrational and full of it. Talking with him for half anhour." Yet " after all nothing came of it." Hissupport of the Assessed Taxes Bill was of greatimportance to the ministry ; as it evinced the judgmentof an independent man in favour of its absolutenecessity. " Nothing," he declared, " can make mesupport it, but the consciousness that we have no alternative.I dread the venomous rankling which it willproduce, during the three years of its operation." 11The part he took rendered him peculiarly obnoxiousto the opposition, and in the debate upon the finalpassing of the Bill, Mr. Fox charged him with indulgingin acrimonious personalities. " Fox," he says,unjustly accusing me. Uneasy fearing that I hado To William Hey Esq. March, 1798To William Hey Esq. Jan. 1, 1798M 3250 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1797.been guilty." " I was sadly disturbed," he writesafterwards, upon a fuller examination of his conduct,at Fox's imputations too much alas, on scrutinizing,from the fear of losing credit with all, even themoderate oppositionists. But I think I can appeal toGod that his charge was false, and that I feel evengood-will to him. Oh may I learn to distrust andkeep my heart with all diligence." 12Having just rendered him such material service, hewas much hurt by Mr. Pitt's conduct on the night theBill passed through committee, in rejecting some slightexemptions which he pressed earnestly upon him.Dec. 30th. House very late on Assessed Taxes. Isparred with Pitt, and he negatived several exemptingclauses. I much cut, and angry." " Alas ! alas ! " ishis reflection on the following day, " with what shameought I to look at myself ! What conflicting passionsyesterday in the House of Commons mortificationanger resentment, from such conduct in Pitt ;though I ought to expect it from him, and can wellbear with his faults towards God all these feelingsworking with anger at myself, from the consciousnessthat I was not what a Christian should be. Ohwhat a troubled state ! When I got home I prayedto God, and looked to him for help through Christ,and have in some measure found my heart restored topeace and love, to reconciliation, (which in the Housewas but hollow I fear,) and to a desire of returninggood for evil, of being above the little slights andJournal, Jan. 14, 1798.1797. CHURCH MISSIONARY SOCIETY. 251refinements of this life, looking upwards and forwards.Yet even still I find my heart disposed to harbourangry thoughts. I have found the golden rule usefulin quieting my mind putting myself in Pitt's place,&c. May this teach me to know myself, to walkmore watchfully, to seek more earnestly for strength,help, and peace, and love, and the meekness andgentleness of Christ. Oh may God guide me." 13Though he had been so much occupied by publicbusiness since his return to London, yet his lettersand journals refer continually to other important engagements." Dined and slept at Battersea Rise,"he enters on Nov. 9th, " for Missionary meetingSimeon Charles Grant Venn. Something, but notmuch, done Simeon in earnest." This was the firstcommencement of a plan for promoting enlargedmissionary exertion, to which he had recourse uponthe failure of his efforts to obtain by vote of parliamentsome national provision for christianizing India. Itoccupied his attention for the two following years,and issued, in the year 1800, in the Church MissionarySociety for Africa and the East. " Nov. 23rd. ProclamationSociety's meeting. Erskine wanting to wavebringing up Williams u for judgment said he would notcompromise his character for any set of men. Wefirm." " Much interested all this week about Hullvicarage." This was just vacant by the death ofJoseph Milner, " the simple honest fellow you sawin Palace Yard," he tells Lord Lancaster. " Your13 Journal, Sunday, Dec. 31. M Publisher of Paine's Age of Reason.252 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1797.sympathetic kindness had too well anticipated IsaacMilner's feelings. He is the most affectionate ofbrothers, and the loss has been like tearing off alimb. I hope he will get over it, but it has shakenhim sorely." 15 " All the time I have been writing,poor Milner has been in my mind." 16 " Friday. A. Y.with us alone. Interesting talk, eager and vehement.I wish he were walking more softly. Talked withChancellor about Graham's scrape, and heard hisideas about Methodists." "Saturday, Nov. 25th.M. at breakfast explaining his affairs shamefullyused. Poor fellow ! his bad character from formermisconduct will make it difficult to serve him."Tuesday. Gave dinner. Mitford, Henry Legge,Thornton, Unwin, &c. St. Helen's snapped up byStadtholder. They staid late chatting. Rationalday." " Dec. 1 th. To Fulham, Bishop of London's, todinner by ourselves much talk, evening, with him.Letter about my book, and his answer 17 to a manabout his ' religious state serious, humble, and verypleasing. Mr. Owen curate of Fulham to tea andsupper. Next morning the Archbishop came tobreakfast, and we discussed long about churchmatters. I telling them much."Though I have been quietly at church," he says,noting his state of feelings on the 1 8th of December,18 "and not in the cavalcade, yet how little hasDec. 5. * To William Hey Esq.17 V/d. the answer in Hodgson's " Life of Porters," p. 295.The Public Thanksgiving-day.1797. RETROSPECT OF THE YEAR. 253my heart joined in the prayers of the day ! Howlittle am I impressed as I ought to be with a sense ofheavenly things ! and yet I hope I am labouring afterthem, and striving to raise my mind. I go to prayer,to bless God for His mercies ; and I will enumerateseveral : Public and political blessings ; His kindnessesto myself personally. I will pray to Himfor my country, and for wisdom for myself, to teachme how to act. Oh may the resolution to live forHis glory be uppermost in my soul, and may I learna holy resignation to His will ; endeavouring to workwhilst it is day, and yet to be easy, cheerful, disinterested,composed, and happy, enjoying the peace ofGod."I may be indispensably occupied tomorrow, (December31st,) so let me now look back on the pastyear, and bless God for its many mercies. Oh howwonderful are His ways ! An eventful year with memy book my marriage health restored in sickness.How ungrateful have I been, and how oftentempting God to withdraw from me ! But His mercyendure for ever ; and the vilest, prostrating himselfbefore Him with penitence and faith in the blood ofJesus, may obtain remission of his sins, and the Spiritof renewing grace. This is my hope here I rest myfoot. Friends died this year Eliot Dr. ClarkeJoseph Milner. I still spared. How strongly dothese events teach us that the time is short ! Oh ! mayI learn and be wise. Public events mutiny termsLIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1798.named Dutch victory. I will go to pray, and humblemyself before God. The lessons I have learnedof my defects teach me to strive earnestly against pride ;inordinate love of the favour of man ; every feelingof malice ; selfishness in not judging fairly betweenothers and myself; above all, earthly-mindedness, nothaving my mind raised above the region of storms.May I learn wisdom and watchfulness from past falls,and so grow in grace. Oh what a blessed thing isthe Sunday for giving us an opportunity of seriousself-examination, retrospect, and drawing water outof the wells of salvation." 9The Christmas recess was spent by him at Bath,where he complains that his " time was frittered awayin calls and dining out. Let me try to get more timefor meditation and Scripture. I have read barely achapter each day through this hurrying week. Diningout every day has a bad effect on the mind ; I willtry to dine at home, at least once, and if I cantwice every week." " Entire solitude I find a differentthing from even being with my wife only ; itseems to give me over more entirely to the power,and throw me more absolutely upon the mercy, ofGod. Oh what cause have I for gratitude ! but myheart has been cold it is overgrown with weeds ;may God enable me at this crowded place to live toHis glory." ^ " This morning I thought I felt someof the powers of the world to come when I went to19 Journal. 20 Journal, Jan. 14.1798. RETURN TO TOWN. 255church. G. broke in upon my walk intended for meditation.I have found this week the benefit of readingScripture almost daily." 21To Mrs. Wilberforce who remained in PalaceYard, he writes at the same time, " Let us endeavourto feel that gratitude which the goodness we haveexperienced should inspire. When I compare mylot with that of almost every other member of parliamentwhom I know, what singular blessings havebeen vouchsafed me ! I was careless, dissipated,ardent in pursuit of reputation, and by this time, butfor religion, should have been a prey to the workingsof ambition. Why am I taken and another left ? . . . .It quite grieves me for your sake, to have but a pooraccount to render of myself. I had a sad night again,and in consequence am far from well to-day ; but Hewho had not where to lay His head, had doubtlesssleepless nights and languid days, as I have," &c.By the 3rd of February he was again in town, and engagedin his usual incessant occupations. " Your letter,"he tells Mr. Stephen, " found me in a crowd, and Ihave ever since been, and still am, in company ; butamid conversation and interruption, I take up mypen to return a few hasty words of reply." Mr. Stephenhad now openly avowed his devotion to thecause of Abolition. " You are now at liberty tomake my intelligence as public as you please, if itmay do any good. I no longer wish for any reserveas to any thing I have done, or may do, in relation81 Journal, Jan. 28.256 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1798.to that subject." 22 He undertook it as a sacredcause, and the whole energy of his powerful mindwas directed to its conduct. One of his letters 23 toMr. Wilberforce strikingly displays his ingenuityand ardour. After tracing marks of retribution fortheir crimes towards the negroes, in events which hadrecently convulsed the other nations of Europe, " itremains only," he continues, " that Great Britain,certainly their most implacable enemy, should feelthe last disabling inflictions of the scourge she haswell deserved. My views of the event are awfuland alarming, but only, I confess, under this aspect.It is not in our party divisions, in our falling credit,our broken Bank, (for such in spite of delusion it is,)nor in the force of our enemy ; but it is in the marriageof our national interests to the detestable commerceof Liverpool, and the oppression of the WestIndies, that I foresee our political destruction. Dundaswill go on to waste our last energies between thetropics, Pitt will support him, and you and yourfriends will support Pitt, till Africa has no longer afoe to fear in Great Britain. It is for this that Pittwas made eloquent, and great, and, if you will, virtuous,' all that a man can be who is not religious,'and for this that the opposition are wicked and dangerouscharacters : the strength of our government,the support of good men to it ; the strength of France,and its falling into the hands of bad men . . these and?z Letter from James Stephen Esq. Aug. 22, 1797.Sept. 20, 17J7.1798. MR. STEPHEN'S CO-OPERATION. 257all the other uncommon circumstances that have existedand do exist, to kindle and inflame the war andto carry it to extremes, have all been concerted in thecabinet of heaven to bring forth its long oppressed, degradedchildren with a mighty hand and with an outstretchedarm.But you will think me half mad, and wholly presumptuous.I cannot help it : I must divulge thesethoughts to somebody, and who is likely to makemore allowance for them than you ? you, who are theMoses of these Israelites, though at the same time acourtier of Pharaoh."This ardour in the cause, directed by an accurateacquaintance with the actual state of the West Indies,made Mr. Stephen's aid invaluable. It was alwaysaccepted with readiness and cordiality. " Stephen,"says the Diary, 24 " frankly and kindly reproving mefor not pleading the cause of the slaves watchfullyenough, and guarding it in the case of Trinidad, andSpain's late proposals. I doubt. Pitt promises repealof the proclamation for trade with Spanish colonies."Yet to this subject he had not been slow to call theminister's attention. While at Bath he had writtenTO THE RIGHT HON. WILLIAM PITT.Jan. 30, 1798.My dear Pitt,My head and heart have both been long full ofsome thoughts which I wished to state to you 3 when aFeb. 25.258 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1798.little less under extreme pressure than during thesitting of parliament.Perhaps even yet you may not have happened tosee an order in council, allowing, notwithstanding thewar, an intercourse to subsist between our WestIndian colonies and those of Spain, in which negroslaves are the chief articles for us to supply. I knowthese commercial matters are not within your department,and that therefore your assent is perhaps asked,if at all, when your mind is full of other subjects.But let me only remind you, that the House of Commonsdid actually pass the Bill for abolishing theforeign Slave Trade, and that if contracts are madeagain for supplying Spain for a term of years, it maythrow obstacles in the way. It would give me morepleasure than I can express, to find that any furthermeasures, or even thoughts on this subject . . . painfulto me for many reasons . . . were rendered needless,by my hearing the order was revoked.Every one is calling out to you to summon thenation to arm itself in the common defence. Youhear how nobly my Yorkshiremen are acting. I musthave more discussion on that head, for they still wishyou to impose an equal rate on all property.Yours ever sincerely,W. WILBERFORCE."Another question which speedily arose, shows theimportance as well as the earnestness of Mr. Stephen'sremonstrances. The removal of the Carib tribes1798. CARIB LANDS. 259after the insurrection in the island of St. Vincent's,and the conquest of Trinidad in 1797, had openedtheir virgin lands to British enterprise and capital.In the arrangements to which these events gave rise,Mr. Pitt had almost consented to a plan which,though intended to prevent the importation ofAfricans for the cultivation of our acquired possessions,would in fact have led to the removal of theCreole slaves from our older islands, to the unhealthywork of clearing new lands. Mr. Stephen's localknowledge discovered to him at once the consequenceswhich would follow the adoption of these measures.TO William WILBERFORCE ESQ.Saturday morning.My dear Sir,The Carib lands lie heavy at my heart. Inever doubted that as Naboth was killed, his vineyardwould sooner or later be taken possession of; but it istoo much, that, to save hypocritical appearances, thedeed should be done in a way productive of a twofoldportion of human misery, and that you and I shouldbe made accessories to this aggravation.I learnt on Thursday evening, from new authority,that Mr. Pitt has come into their secret plans, and haspledged himself to a committee of the murderous band,that the lands shall be granted on those terms. Anopulent planter of St. Vincent's is raising a large sumby annuities, disadvantageous though the resource is,that he may buy up negroes in the old islands, and beready to plunge deep into the golden mine that is260 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1798.opening. Speculation is opening her rapacious mouthin other directions towards the same object ; andLloyd's Coffee House is in a roar of merriment, at thedexterous compromise Mr. Pitt has made between hisreligious friends and his and Dundas's West Indiasupporters. Well may the slave merchants laugh atthis wise plan of giving them a new market in theold islands, where payment is more secure, for thesake of not opening to them an equal one in a newsettlement, with such unsafe paymasters as newsettlers generally are ! Well may the planters alsolaugh, since they will, by being already proprietors ofslaves, have a great advantage over new adventurers,whether they choose to buy lands, or to sell slaves atthe inflamed prices of ardent speculation, and supplytheir places gradually by new purchases from theslave ships. But they have a still better prospectfrom this happy compromise. Can they wish a bettermeans of supporting their false theories, than the experimentof raising or keeping up a Creole stock ofslaves on estates yet to be cleared of wood the mortalityincident to the clearing and settling new landsbeing great indeed ? How will they exult over you inafew years, (should Heaven permit them to scourgetheir species so long,) when it appears that your newcolony, settled on Abolition principles, can neitherkeep up its numbers, nor exist without supplies fromAfrica ! It will cost them then nothing to deny what noman will now refuse to admit, that new lands are generallyfatal to their first cultivators in the West Indies.But this is all nothing to the other considerations I1798. CARIB LANDS. 261mentioned to you. The poor Creole negroes boughtor removed for this purpose, instead of an ameliorationof their lot, as your exertions and the aspect ofevents promised them, will be torn from all the littlecomforts they possess, and from almost all their connexionsfor ever ; even from their immediate familiesin general, for few, if any, women or children are sentto clear and settle new lands ; and all this for no end,but that new imported wretches may be broken in totheir miserable destiny upon their old estates insteadof new ones. I beg Mr. Pitt's pardon, I had forgotthe more important end of his reputation. You willsay I am uncandid here ; but really my charity doesnot go so far as to believe it possible he can be innocentof indirect and selfish views on this occasion.He may not have adverted to these consequencesthat I admit is very probable, nor may he see as I dothe utter impossibility of attaining by any laws orregulations the concurrent end he professes to have inview, which I understood from you last Sunday is thepreventing African negroes being substituted for thosetaken away from other colonies or other estates.But where are these laws or regulations? Shouldthey not have at least preceded his irreversible concession?Should he not first have been assured oftheir sufficiency as well as their enactment? Tatecommission is making out, if not already made. Tetecommissioners are named. Was he overreached ? Didhe not know that the characters he treated with wereWest Indians ? Did he not feel that circumspection262 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1798.was necessary, and that he ought at least to have consultedyou, or heard some counsel on the other side,before he committed himself by any engagements ?e But it is wronging his capacity to suppose him sucha miserable dupe, and that after all he has seen, afterall his own eloquence has exposed, of the insincerityand fraud, as well as the incurable obstinacy, of youropponents and the West India legislatures ; after allthe difficulties he has seen in the way of the broadest,simplest, and most authoritative regulations in thecolonies ; he could be blind to the consequences ofallowing this commission to issue without a previousfoundation laid for its due execution by acts of St.Vincent's and of the other assemblies, transmittedand approved of here. Besides, he told you of theplan that I know he had not got your answer, atleast your approbation. Little did I suppose when youhinted the plan, and I lost some opportunities of drawingyour attention to it, that the veto was to be withdrawnwithout further consultation, much less without thatprovision for its due execution, which I knew wouldopen long and complex discussions. Had his interferencebeen spontaneous, more hesitation would bedue in condemning this hollow compromise ; but itwas prompted by you ; by his fear of losing your verypowerful support ; a fear which, had it not been relievedby a knowledge of the strong hold he had onyou, would long since, I verily believe, have producedthe Abolition of the Slave Trade. It is the judgmentperhaps of a biassed man ; but of one who has heard1798. FROM JAMES STEPHEN ESQ. 263your defence for him, powerful in my feelings for theadvocate, and of one who is not his enemy, andwould have been warmly his friend, but for this veryopinion.'' But whither am I travelling ? Not finding you atPalace Yard yesterday or this morning, I sat down(at a busy time) to say a few words, and not to writea long letter. I might have gone to Broomfieldalmost as soon : and yet I have still to say what is mostmaterial. Have you stopped, or have you any hopesof stopping, this measure ? If not the commissionitself, can you at least prevail to get the perniciousqualification withdrawn, that we may not have toreproach ourselves with having been the authors of themisery that will flow from it ? I say we, because youtold me once I had been the means of stopping thegrants when they were to have been unqualified. Ifyou can do neither, I think I am bound in conscienceto try what / can do through the Morning Chronicle,by a public development of the iniquitous compromiseand its tendencies.Without consulting you I would not do this, becauseyou once complained of my conduct in a similar case,and my heart took home the accusation. God forbidI should sin again against a friendship which is thehonour, and happiness of my life.I am, dear Sir,Yours very respectfully, andvery affectionately,J. STEPHEN."264 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1798.Your letter finds me," replies Mr. Wilberforce,not very well, with tired eyes and a fatigued head ;but it calls forth the little animation of which Iam capable, and I need not say, interests me deeply.I take shame to myself that I did not make it mybusiness to see Mr. Pitt on this important subject,in consequence of what you said to me on Saturdaylast. I could make a tolerable excuse to others,but I own I cannot quite excuse myself. However,what I can do I will : immediately writing toMr. Pitt, and bespeaking an interview with himbefore he goes any further. Notwithstanding whatyou say, I cannot conceive that he has made any concessionwhich would in fairness bind him, (if any compactcould be valid when productive of such effects asyou anticipate,) supposing the principle on which hehas conceived himself consenting impracticable andfallacious.As for your Morning Chronicle, God forbid, (I sayit ex imo,) that from any delicacy of friendship youshould forbear for a moment from any thing whichmight really tend ever so little to the prevention ofmisery and bloodshed. I fairly own to you I see nogood in such a discussion, but much evil. I must laydown my pen ; indeed I scribble this amid talkingand business. I will only say, go on to prick me intoconstant attention to this subject, and for any defectof candour of which you speak towards a certain person,(and I will fairly say I think you are liable to thecharge, but in no greater degree than is common,)1798. PROCLAMATION RESCINDED. 265we will reserve that for conversation. Let me seeyou on Tuesday. I will if possible see Mr. Pitt previously,and know how the case stands."His private remonstrances with the minister succeededafter a time in stopping the objectionable plan."At last got the proclamation about slaves rescinded." 25Mr. Stephen's vehement zeal could scarcely rest contentedwithout a public denunciation of the measure.I still clearly think," he wrote, " that you havebeen improperly silent, and that when you see thegovernment loading the bloody altars of commerce,the idol of this Carthage, with an increase of humanvictims, and building new altars for the same execrablepurpose, while the sword of Almighty vengeanceseems uplifted over us for that very offence, you arebound by the situation wherein you have placed yourselfto cry aloud against it. You are even the ratherbound to do so, because those high priests of Moloch,Lord Liverpool and Mr. Dundas, are your political,and Mr. Pitt also your private friend." " Go on, mydear sir," is Mr. Wilberforce's answer, " and welcome.Believe me, I wish you not to abate any thing of theforce or frankness of your animadversions. I havenot yet had the opportunity of deliberately and fullyquestioning myself on the charge you have brought,but I mean to enter into as impartial a self-examinationas I am able on that head, and then I may perhapscall upon you to justify. For your franknessDiary, April 1.VOL. II. N266 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1798.however I feel myself obliged. Openness is the onlyfoundation and preservative of friendship, and thoughby it I have lost some friends, or I should rather sayhave discovered that I never possessed them, yet ithas cemented and attached me still more closely tothe two best I have in the world. Let me thereforeclaim from you at all times your undisguised opinions.I promise on my part as impartial a deliberation as Iam able to exercise, and I hope if I am convinced Ishall be able to act up to my convictions. I will evenconcede that I ought studiously to guard against abias to which I am liable, if not from personal connexion,yet from an apprehension of mischief from weakeninggovernment, and strengthening the hands ofopposition. Nothing is more useful to any man actingin situations and matters complicated in their relationsand bearings, and in which the passions maycreep in, than to talk things over with a man ofsense, who lives with a different set, and has differentprejudices and attachments. May I be able to actwith fidelity in my important station, and be moresolicitous to acquit myself to God and my own conscience,than to my fellow-creatures." " I trust,"says his Diary after a conversation on the subject,that I have preserved the due medium : all think mewrong." He was in truth, at this time, in littledanger from that bias which Mr. Stephen suspected.His public course was marked rather by distrust ofthe opposition than by confidence in administration.1-798. TO WILLIAM SMITH ESQ. 267A reply to a letter from Mr. William Smith 50plainly discovers this state of feeling.The motion for Abolition shall be made in about afortnight. Poor William Dickson is in town ; he looksforlorn, and most sincerely do I wish I could effectuallyserve him. I shall be very glad to consult with youon this subject. As to serving him with administration,which he cannot help looking to I see, you havenearly as much interest in that quarter as I have, andI do not know how to put it more strongly.And this leads me naturally to that part of yourletter which interests me most. I think you are right,my dear William, in proposing that we should keepup a more frequent intercourse, and in the effect likelyto be produced by it on both our minds. And yet I mustfrankly say that you wrong me when you state that Ihave asperities against the opposition. It is occasionallypart of my Sunday's occupation to look intothe state of my heart in this relation, and to disciplineit in a way which might seem almost too mechanicalto any one who had not considered sufficiently thestructure and workings of the human mind. I impresson myself the uncertainty of all political opinions,and how often different practical judgments in personswho agree in abstract principles arise from differencesas to matters of fact, and as to the credit they giverespectively to different sources of intelligence. ThenI put myself in the situation of an opposition man,and call up the ideas, with their proper apparel and inFeb. 20.N 2268 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1798.their several bearings, which present themselves tohis mental eye. Then I consider how naturally theopposition men are irritated by constant failure, andby their feeling that they and theirs are suffering,and likely to suffer, from what they conceive to beincapacity or wicked intentions, which they have invain been striving to counteract. Above all, I viewthe several leading men in connexion with religioustopics. I consider their sad state, till I truly feel forthem ; and this it is impossible to do without emotionsof cordial good-will rising up into action. Itrust I can sincerely declare, that I sometimes look atthem thus (and something of these sensations I experienceat this very moment) with emotions of enlargedand unmixed affection. Now this processtends to leave my mind softened and warmed towardsthem. But it does not alter my views of the consequencesof their measures, or of the necessity ofwarning the public of what appears to me (speakingin the presence of God) the urgent duty of counteractingtheir hostile attempts against the presentgovernment.I wish I had plenty of time, that I might let youstill more into my sentiments. I believe I didonce hint to you (what I cannot express in writing)whence I dreaded the storm breaking forth.But it appears to me to be my duty while I fill theforward political situation I now enjoy, (let me retractthat term for possess, it is no enjoyment ; howoften do Mrs. W. and I wish for private life ! as often1798. MR. PITT. 269as we dare indulge such an idea,) to use my utmostendeavours for repressing this approaching mischief.To be honest with you, I must confess that I feelmore real spleen against administration than againstopposition, and that for many reasons ; some I fear toopersonal, for self, alas, will creep in and taint thepurity of our motives; but still more, I hope, ongood and substantial grounds. It seems to me thatthey have had (and even still have) it in their power,I will not say to dispel the cloud which hangs overthis country, but to brighten our prospects materially,and that, by means the most virtuous, the most praiseworthy,the most honourable to themselves. I havesubmitted to that most painful duty of remonstratingagainst what I thought wrong, of urging what I feright ; and perhaps with a heart galled and woundedand saddened by neglect, and frustration, and anticipationof evil, I have had to fulfil the duty (for suchon the whole it has appeared to me) of defendingthem and rebutting their opponents.Having thus far hinted the state of my mind, I will,however, declare my solemn conviction that you greatlyinjure Mr. Pitt by the opinion you entertain of him.And it is my deliberate judgment, formed on muchexperience, and close observation, that he has moredisinterested patriotism and a purer mind than almost(I scarce need say almost) any man, not under the influenceof Christian principles, I ever knew. That hehas weaknesses and faults I freely confess, but a wantof ardent zeal for the public welfare, and of the stricterLIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1798.est love of truth, are not, I believe as God shall judgeme, of the number. I speak not this from the partialityof personal affection. In fact, for severalyears past, there has been so little of the eadem velleand eadem nolle, that our friendship has starved forwant of nutriment. I really love him for his publicqualities and his private ones, though there too he ismuch misunderstood. But how can I expect heshould love me much, who have been so long renderingmyself in various ways vexatious to him, andabove all, when, poor fellow, he never schools hismind by a cessation from political ruminations,the most blinding, hardening, and souring of allothers ?I have been drawn into much greater lengththan I was aware of, and still I have but expresseda tenth of what I teem with. But I must laydown my pen, only let me add what I said in myformer letter. 27 Seek first the kingdom of Godand his righteousness, set your affections on thingsabove ; ask wisdom of God humbly and perseveringly,and read the Scriptures with a practical rather than acritical spirit. All this is right on your scheme ofreligion as well as on mine. Perhaps if you go onthis plan we may not differ so much in religious matters.But I am running on again. Farewell, then.We will now and then exchange letters, and when youcome to town, if you dislike it not, we will talk over37 " Pelham sent his book against mine (addressed to William Smith'swife). William Smith's and my letters." Diary, Feb. 25.1798. SUNDAY ASSOCIATION. 271all these things at some vacant hour. Believe mewith every friendly wish for you and yours,My dear William, yours ever,WILLIAM WILBERFORCE.I have been interrupted inter scribendum, andforced to scribble en galop. I wish I may be legible."Many other important matters now claimed a shareof his attention. He still acted as a director of theSierra Leone Company : and that infant colony,struggling with peculiar difficulties, arid visited withthe ravages of European warfare, was a source ofceaseless anxiety to its conductors. " We have been,"he writes to the governor, " what we call unfortunatein having our ships so often captured, &c. but we arealittle prone (perhaps not a little) to expect to besecured by Providence against the common accidentsto which human beings are liable ; when engaged inworks of piety and charity. It should cure us of thiserroneous estimate of things to recollect that St. Paul,in recapitulating his sufferings, not only enumeratesstoning and the malice of men, but ' thrice was Ishipwrecked, a night and a day have I been in thedeep.' In short, Providence seemed to fight againsthim, as well as a world which was not worthy of him."At home he was still the watchful guardian of publicmorals, and at this time was especially engaged inan attempt to promote the better observance of theSunday. " March 12th. All morning at the Bishop272 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1798.of Durham's, on Sunday Bill. 13th. Bishop of London'sSunday association long discussion 'Archbishopunwilling." The result of these deliberationswas the suspension of all attempts at legislative interference,and the adoption of a voluntary engagementto promote the observance of the day. Much waseffected by this effort : many amongst the highestranks made the declaration, and faithfully observedtheir pledge. One great object at the present momentwas to stop the Sunday entertainments of the Speakerof the House of Commons; but the attempt wasalmost defeated by the too forward communications ofsome who were privy to the consultation.March 21st. Bishop of Durham's. The King tohave the declaration laid before him by the Bishop ofLondon. Bishop of Durham's early on proclamationsub-committee Bishop of London's report. The Kingheard him out and turned the conversation. The Bishopof Durham tried the Speaker, but in vain." ^ " Eveningto the Speaker on Sunday declaration plan ; he veryunreasonably angry I deeply moved and much hurt.Staid late with him, and afterwards could not get tosleep." 29 " Interview with the Speaker, who extremelyoffended at the declaration, and being asked to change(the) day (of his parliamentary meetings). ' Personalinsult,' &c. I told him that it was not so meant.The attempt has failed, but I hope God will acceptit." 30He mixed too upon principle as much as he was ableDiary, March 28. *> Diary, April 17. 30 Diary, May 5.1798. DIARY. 273in general society. " The Bishop of London, Mrs.Endicott, Hatsells, Powder, and Lady Waldegravedined with me rational talk the Bishop and Hat-sellboth opposing me as to times being gone off inreligion. The Bishop preaching every Friday in Lent.Crowds to hear him fine people and gentlemenstanding all the time. I affirmed that there is lessthought of God though more refinement." 3 * " I wentto Pitt's where I supped tete-astute. Much politicaltalk on O'Connor, Favey, 32 &c. arrested : on defenceof country, &c. Home late." 33 " To Dundas's in theevening to meet Chigwell on internal defence,Pitt, Duke of Buccleugh, Bathurst, Samuel Thornton,Carrington, Chancellor after discussion wentup-stairs till half past twelve, and supped. Home withPitt and Duke." Yet he was little satisfied with theamount of his exertions. " Milner tells me that I taketoo little part in public business, that I speak too littleupon great questions." 34 " This last week rolled awaylike a day, and little done I fear always out, or peopleto dinner too little time or reading. I will try anaccount to check and discover how it is. Last weekLetters Lord Clare's Speech Bible almost daily." 35This last week hurrying people with us late hoursand I fear but little done. Proclamation Society,two days. Committee on treatment of French prisoners.Beverley Drainage. Arthur Young's manu-diary,March 3.w James Quigley, otherwise James John Favey.M Diary, March 10. M Ib. Feb. 25.Ib. March 4.N 3274 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1798.script. Much company. Not, very well." 36 " I ammuch disturbed between a sense of the necessity ofnot giving up the world, and the evil effects from mypresent great intercourse with it both to my heart andunderstanding." 37 " Many doubts about company,whether I ought not in great measure to give it up."The secret of his maintaining an untainted spiritin this full bustle of worldly distractions may befound in the motive from which alone he mixed inthem, and in the habits of self-communing which hecarefully maintained. The perfect rest of succeedingSundays . "I feel the comfort of Sunday verysensibly to-day." 38 " Oh it is a blessed thing to havethe Sunday devoted to God " 39 . . . was of great serviceto him here ; and the full entries of his Journal are asearching review of his conduct and spirit through theweek.This last hurrying week has kept and now leavesmy soul in a sad state. How little does my heartseem to have its affections above ! I doubt aboutgiving up much of this raffled hurrying system. MayGod for Christ's sake guide and support me. Lastweek, angry from pride at Pitt and the Speaker vainin regard to Pelham's letter. Oh what a multitude ofmercies have I to be thankful for ! Compare my lotwith K.'s." 40This last week, in which I hoped so much to bedone, has gone by, and how little got through ! And36 Diary, March 25. * Journal, Feb. 18.39 Ib. May 20. Ib. Sept 30. *o Diary, Feb. 25.1798. JOURNAL. 275though my affections this day are a good deal calledforth, how little have I of late been under the influenceof real Christian tempers ! How sadly defective am Iin humility ! When I look into myself I find myselfpoor indeed compared with my highly-favoured state ;but how little do I feel this habitually ! How fondam I of distinction (my constitutional vice) ! Thiswould not be, if I was truly humble within, at thecore. Here meditation daily, or as frequent as mightbe, would do much. Let me try for it. Oh may thisday be of lasting service to me ! and at this time,when probably war and tumult are at hand, may Iserve God and fear nothing. May I boldly walk inthe might of the Lord, and sigh and cry for the abominationsdone in the land. May I grow in humility,peace, and love, in meekness, holy courage, self-denial,active exertion, and discreet zeal." " I feel a firmconfidence, that if through God's grace I am enabledto keep close to him in love, fear, trust, and obedience,I shall go on well ; most likely even in this life, beingperhaps remarkably preserved from evil ; but at allevents I shall be supported under whatever may belaid upon me. These are days in which I shouldespecially strive to grow in preparedness for changingworlds, and for whatever sharp trials I may be calledto. Oh what humiliation becomes me when I thinkof my innumerable mercies !" 41 " I resolve to be upin time to have an hour before breakfast for seriousmeditation, prayer, and Scripture preparation for41 Journal, March 7, 11, &c.276 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1798.these dangerous times ; also more time for unbrokenthought ; half or three-quarters of an hour on parliamentarytopics." 42This week I have got more morning time forserious reading and reflection. I have now beentaking a musing walk, and, alas, what cause do Ifind for humiliation ! During the ensuing week ifM. be with us, as it is likely, I shall be subject toseveral temptations as heretofore. Let me now resolveto keep earlier hours ; not curtail evening prayer ;turn the conversation to profitable and rational topics;be meek, and gentle, and humble, and kind. Howmuch I owe him !" 43His marriage interfered far less than might havebeen expected with his various occupations. " Thecause of my long silence," he tells his sister, 44 " hasbeen really, as I believe, my having been more thaneven commonly busy. . . . How fast time and life toorolls away ! It seems but a span since we were togetherat Hull ; and more than six months have sincegone over our heads. My hours have passed pleasantly; greatly indeed have I reason to be thankfulfor the signal blessing which Providence last yearconferred upon me. My dearest wife bears my hurryingway of life with great sweetness ; but it would beasort of gaol delivery to her no less than to myself toescape from the tumult of this bustling town, and retireto the enjoyment of country scenes and countryoccupations. But I am well aware that it is not4 * Journal, April 15. Ib. April 22. < March 9.1798. SLAVE TRADE DEBATE. 277right for me to indulge in such reveries. My businessis cut out for me, and Providence has graciouslyblessed me with the means of being cheered under it ;which means I should do wrong to pervert into asource of indolent self-enjoyment, flinching from mycollar and refusing to draw my load because a littleweary of being in the harness. At all times in whichone feels this sense of weariness, and longs for quietnessand peace, one should endeavour to make it subservientto the purpose of raising one's mind heavenward,and of establishing a practical feeling of thevanity and transitoriness of all human things, and ofthis life being but a passage, and our home thatrest that remaineth for the people of God'"Early in the spring he again brought the Abolitionquestion before parliament. April 3rd. " Busy preparingfor Slave motion, which made. Fox, Grey,Sheridan, &c. came. Thought we had carried it83 to 87." The debate was again long and earnest,and the West Indian opposition still fought under thecover of apparent concession. The horrors of thetrade were now candidly admitted by Mr. Bryan Edwardsand his followers, who contented themselveswith the safer objection, that a vote of Abolition. wouldonly substitute an illicit for a legal traffic.In this debate, the friends of Abolition were for thefirst time openly supported by the eloquence of Mr.Canning ; and in it the vote as well as the speech ofMr. Windham first upheld the continuance of theSlave Trade. This was a part of that change, which278 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1798.the recoil from French principles had gradually effectedin his mind. In the debate of 1796, though his votewas with his former friends, his speech was falteringand uncertain. On the motion of Mr. Ellis in 1797,he avowed a preference for gradual abolition ; and byApril 1798, he had learned to justify his place in themajority, by which the question of immediate abolitionwas directly negatived.Though defeated on the division. " on the whole,"says Mr. Wilberforce, " we got ground." 45 This convictionrendered the present and succeeding year a periodof the most active exertion in the cause. It was resolvedto propose the immediate abolition of the tradealong the northern coast of Africa. Upon the 4thof May, the measure was brought forward by Mr.Henry Thornton ; but the session was found to be toofar advanced, and the House too full of business, forits present consideration; and on the 18th of June itwas deferred until the following session.As the season advanced the Diary exhibits his usualamount of daily occupations, with slight notices ofthe most important amongst passing events.April 5th. Busy all morning. Lancaster, Bankes,Henry Thornton, &c. dined with me before House.House land tax business. The Swiss destroyingtheir officers from false suspicion of treachery. Firstblood spilt in Ireland. What talk about ' our proudsituation alas ! " April 15th. Sunday. " This lastweek, which I had hoped would be of great effect inDiary, April 3.1798. DIARY. 279getting through my business, has flown away insensibly,and little done, yet working hard. Chief businessspeeches on Slave Trade for Debrett and Wood-fallletters business about defence Jeremiah'sLamentations and Ezekiel began. More and morelikelihood of French landing. Shank's discoverymuch vaunted, of fitting merchant ships' boats withcannon or carronades. Poor E. came to town onWednesday age to him setting in gloomily howkind is Lancaster to him ! Great conspiracy detectedat Manchester. 21st. Dined exhibition annualaffair about 170 present. Great set of democratstaken up, proposing to murder witnesses who are togive evidence at Maidstone. Things begin to lookbetter in Europe. 24th. Out early to Bishop of Durham'ssociety on Erskine's refusing" (to retain hisbrief if Williams was brought up for judgment).House on magistrates' Bill. We refused Bankes'schildren's ball.May 5th. Dined at Lambeth public day, withHatsell and Lord Auckland large party. Whenthere, heard from Pitt about Fox's speech at theWhig club wrote about it. Talked much with SirWilliam Scott, and Dr. Surges who praised my bookmuch. 7th. Pitt gave up any other proceedingsagainst Fox but striking out of the Privy Council :which done. 10th. Busy all day on Slave CarryingBill. 11th. Busy, Slave Bill consultation. 18th.House till late. Buxton's motion about property tax.It illustrates human nature. He would have with-isoLIFE OP WILBERFORCE. 1798.drawn it if fairly used. 1 9th. This last fortnightmuch parliamentary business land tax sale Bill, shipowners' Bill, Slave Carrying Bill, and African Bill,framing and House. Took possession of Broomfieldfor the first time. Too much castle building on cominghere. Oh check these follies. Is it not enough Christsays, e I come quickly ?'21 st. With Stephen and Henry Thornton aboutAfrican limited Abolition. Dined late at Grant's,to meet his Scotch relation. Terribly silent. 23rd.To town : heard the issue of the trials. Quigleyconvicted. Strange letter from Arthur Young to Lloyd. Dan. Sykes says, that he knows thename of the man by whom Quigley's pocket paper waswritten, which he got accidentally in his way throughtown. Democrats speak well of Plumer's behaviournot so of Attorney-general. Magistrates' costs misdemeanourBill. Beat argued well, I think. ToBroomfield at night with Burgh and Lancaster.24th. To town, but no House. Much talk about thetrials. There appears amongst the democratical gentrymuch concert and sympathy of knowledge andfeeling. I should have acquitted O'Connor on Buller'scharge; but doubt on the evidence. Pitt clearabout O'Connor's guilt. This week to town daily :rather wasting time in bits and broken pieces.27th. Whitsunday. Pleasant day, spent as Sundaysshould be. 28th. Ashley came in at my dressingtime, and brought word of Pitt and Tierney'sduel yesterday. I more shocked than almost ever. I1798. MOTION ON PITT'S DUEL. 281resolved to do something if possible. 30th. To town.Found people much alive about duel, and disposed totake it up. I gave notice [of a motion on the subjectin the House of Commons] . Letter from Pitt, evening."TO W. Wilberforce ESQ.My dear Wilberforce,I am not the person to argue with you on asubject in which I am a good deal concerned. I hopetoo that I am incapable of doubting your kindness tome(however mistaken I may think it) if you let anysentiment of that sort actuate you on the presentoccasion. I must suppose that some such feeling hasinadvertently operated upon you, because whatevermay be your general sentiments on subjects of thisnature, they can have acquired no new tone or additionalargument from any thing that has passed inthis transaction. You must be supposed to bring thisforward in reference to the individual case.In doing so, you will be accessary in loading one ofthe parties with unfair and unmerited obloquy. Withrespect to the other party, myself, I feel it a realduty to say to you frankly that your motion is one formy removal. If any step on the subject is proposedin parliament and agreed to, I shall feel from thatmoment that I can be of more use out of office thanin it ; for in it, according to the feelings I entertain,I could be of none. I state to you, as I think Iought, distinctly and explicitly what I feel. I hope I282 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1798.need not repeat what I always feel personally toyourself.Yours ever,WILLIAM PITT.Downing Street, Wednesday,May 30th, 1798, 11 Pam."Strange length to which he carries the point ofhonour." 4f5The hope which had led Mr. Wilberforce, in spiteof all his personal feeling, to give notice of his motionhad now almost deserted him. Instead of beingable to carry a strong resolution against the principleof duels, through the general feeling which had beenexcited by an apprehension for the safety of Mr. Pitt,he found that the fear of censuring the minister wouldlead many to defend the system in order to screen theman. He began therefore to doubt the wisdom ofpersevering in his motion. "June 1st. To town to-dayaud yesterday, and back in the evening. Much discussionabout duel motion. Saw Pitt and others allpressed me to give it up. Consulted Grant and HenryThornton, and at length resolved to give it up, as notmore than five or six would support me, and not morethan one or two speak, and I could only have carriedit so far, as for preventing ministers fighting duels.June 2nd. Being resolved, I wrote to Pitt to giveit up."< Diary, May 30.1798. MOTION ABANDONED. 283TO THE RIGHT HON. WILLIAM PITT."My dear Pitt,I scarcely need assure you that I have giventhe most serious and impartial consideration to thequestion, whether to persist in bringing forwardmy intended motion or to relinquish it. My ownopinion as to the propriety of it in itself, remainsunaltered. But being also convinced that it wouldbe productive on the whole of more practical harmthan practical good, and that it would probablyrather impair than advance the credit of that greatprinciple which I wish chiefly to keep in view, (I meanthe duty of obeying the Supreme Being, and cultivatingHis favour,) I have resolved to give it up ; andwhen thus resolved, I cannot hesitate a moment insending you word of my determination. At the sametime I shall be much obliged to you if you will notmention my resolution generally, though you may,where you may think it necessary; but for manyreasons I do not wish it to be publicly known till it isheard from myself. The Speaker is the only personof our town friends, to whom I shall open myself atpresent."I am sure, my dear P. that I need not tell you thatthe idea of my being compelled by duty to do any thingpainful or embarrassing to you has hurt me not alittle ; but I know you too well not to be sure thateven you yourself would not wish me to be influencedby this consideration against the dictates of my constLIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1798.science. I will only hint the pain you have beenthe occasion of my suffering on the subject itself,which I had intended to bring into discussion. I willonly say, that whatever mischiefs may hereafter flowfrom it, will not be imputable to me. It is my sincereprayer, my dear Pitt, that you may here be thehonoured instrument of Providence for your country'sgood, and for the well-being of the civilized world ;and much more that you may at length partake of amore solid and durable happiness and honour thanthis world can bestow. I am, and I trust I evershall be,Your affectionate and faithful friend,W. WILBERFORCE."Broomfield, Sat. June 2, 1798."Received an answer from Pitt that he was greatlyrelieved by my relinquishment he seriously ill." 47Downing Street, Saturday, 6 Pam.' My dear Wilberforce,I cannot say to you how much I am relievedby your determination, which I am sincerely convincedis right on your own principles, as much as onthose of persons who think differently. Much lesscan I tell you how sincerely I feel your cordial friendshipand kindness on all occasions, as well wherewe differ as where we agree.Ever affectionately yours,W. PITT.*t Diary, June 2.1798. LETTER FROM PITT.' 285I mentioned the first part of your letter to Rose,who was with me when I opened it, before I read itthrough, but he has promised to communicate it tonobody. I have since sent it to Dundas, to which Ithought you would not object, as he was very anxious,and his return to town depended upon it. We haveexcellent accounts to-day from Ireland, and (what Ihope will lead to something still better) an account inthe French paper of the 29th of May, that Buonaparte'sexpedition sailed from Toulon on the 19th,with twelve sail of the line. If we are not unfortunate,Nelson with the same number will meet him in theMediterranean."Monday, June 4th. Staid away from court onaccount of motion impending. The King asked theSpeaker if I persevered. Pitt told me the King approvedof his conduct. 5th. To town. House declaredthat I gave up my motion because no support." " I amsure," he wrote to Lord Lancaster, 48 " you have beenfull of a letter to me, as I have been teeming towardsyou since the last eventful Sunday, but one thing oranother has perpetually intervened to prevent yourhearing from me : I will send you a word or two, tospare you the anxiety which you might be otherwiselikely to feel on my account from the idea of tomorrow'sdiscussion. I wave my motion for reasonswhich I am sure you would think good.June 4.286 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1798.I must say that this late incident more illustrates thecharacter and exposes the selfishness of the system ofmodern honour, than any transaction that ever happened.Tarleton has told me he tried to prevail on Tierneyto forbear, but in vain ; and I have some reason tobelieve that there was a good deal of talk about itamongst the party before the meeting took place.It is reported also with an appearance of truth, thatthe Speaker knew of it on Saturday. Were you inthe House the whole time ? I think we came intogether when Tierney was calling on the Speakerfor protection. I will only add, I was never so muchshocked as when Ashley brought me down the newson Monday morning."What cause have I for humiliation," are hissecret reflections on Sunday the 27th, " in my temperin the House of Commons on Friday evening, whenPitt greatly provoked me, by intervening between meand Washington, and putting off the Slave CarryingBill. Alas, love how cold in me ! I was near resentingit upon the spot. I now am thankful that I did not.God, how full of mercies, hast Thou been to me ! "How little " (he continues, Sunday, June 17th) "did1 think that Pitt's conduct, which, poor fellow, madehim mortify me, would draw him, as it did, into thescrape which produced his duel, which took place onthe very day (of my former entry) at three o'clock.How thankful for Christianity to soothe my angryspirit ! and with what pleasure did I look back during1798. CHURCH PATRONAGE. 287that Sunday on my conduct in making it up with himwithout show on that same day ! *' 49Friday, " June 8th. To town. Sad accounts fromIreland. French Toulon fleet out with Buonaparte.I have become an honorary member of St. Margaret'scorps, with Bankes, Belgrave, &c. 10th. Taken ill, andfor four or five days very threatening. Persuaded notto go to town on St. John's motion about O'Connor.1 4th. To town. Sheridan's motion on Ireland. I fullof thoughts, but not having pondered on the subjectfeared I had not reflected enough to speak. 16th.Letter to Sir Christopher Sykes on his rejoinder tomy refusal to ask Pitt for a living for his sonexplained to him frankly "and fully."TO SIR CHRISTOPHER SYKES, BART. SLEDMERE,YORKSHIRE.Broomfield near London, June 10, 1798.My dear Sir Christopher,Amidst the various feelings which your lastletter excited, there were none, I can truly assureyou, which were not of a friendly quality, and I washighly gratified by the frankness and candour withwhich you opened your mind to me. I did not receiveit till late the day before yesterday, on my arrival intown for the House, and yesterday I was so muchoccupied as to be absolutely prevented from writingto you. This morning, (though my having had several49 Journal.288 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1798.inmates and visitors at our new residence, near ClaphamCommon, has swallowed up my time,) I preferscribbling you a hasty reply to suffering you to waitfor my answer till I have a little leisure.The subject on which I shall have to give you mysentiments is one on which, whatever I write, thoughput down on paper in a hurry, will be the result ofdeliberate reflection. I can have no objection, mydear Sir Christopher, to treat you with the samefrankness you have used towards me, and to state toyou the principles on which I think it right to regulatemy conduct in the case of all ecclesiastical preferments.What you say of the minister and Chancellor being,in their capacity of patrons, trustees for the public,is a very just remark, and shows that you have thoughtover the subject so as to have fixed principles on it.But there is another consideration to which, though Iam sure it must have been in your mind, you have notso much adverted in your letter, and this thereforeI will state as briefly as I am able.As the influence any man possesses, and hisopportunities of usefulness, are all so many trusts forthe employment of which he will hereafter have togive account, so there are no opportunities of usefulnesswhich are trusts from their very nature moreweighty and important than the power of recommendingto any ecclesiastical preferment which has thecare of souls. To speak seriously, and otherwise Ican scarcely do justice to the argument, the number ofthe individuals who may be rescued from eternal1798. DUTY OF PRIVATE PATRONS. 289misery and brought to the enjoyment of eternal happiness,and the degree of the eternal happiness even ofthe happy, must, humanly speaking, depend on theminister set over the parish to which they belong.Therefore, I am bound to remember, in the disposalof any living, (whether by my own presenting to itdirectly, or by using my influence with the patron,)that the interest the parishioners have in the nominationis that of as many persons as the parish consistsof, and is of an everlasting, infinite value ; that whichthe clergyman to be presented to it has in it is thetemporal interest of one individual. It follows ofcourse, that I must attend to the two following principlesin my recommendations to church preferment.1st, That of naming the man whom in my conscienceI believe, on the whole, likely to do most good in thestation to be filled ; and 2ndly, That of endeavouringto employ my influence, so as that any given measureof it may be productive of the utmost possible benefit.This will require me, in looking out for pieces of prefermentabout which to interest myself, to advert tothe size of the parish and its circumstances, to thenumber and situation of the flock, rather than to thevalue of the pasture ; thus endeavouring to place themost useful man I can find in the most extensivesphere of usefulness.But I must be still more particular in order togive you any adequate notion of my sentiments. Itis my fixed opinion, formed on much reading, consideration,and experience, that there has been forVOL. ii. o290 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1798.many years among the majority of our clergy a fataland melancholy departure from the true principles ofChristianity, and of the Church of England ; fromthose principles which prevail throughout her Articles,her Liturgy, the writings of her venerable martyrs,and of many of her brightest ornaments. I am notspeaking of speculative matter ; this declension, or,if I would give it its true name, this heresy, is important,because its practical effects are in the highestdegree mischievous. I have stated this in my latepublication as clearly and as strongly as I could. Theinference from it is obvious. In selecting a ministerfor any living it is not enough to know that he isdiligent and exemplary in his conduct, nor yet thathis talents, knowledge, and manner of officiating areevery thing that one could wish, but I must ask, whatare his doctrines ?I have said enough to put you in possessionof my principles, and I hope I can add that I haveacted on them uniformly and without deviation formany years. In the case of those who have beennearest and dearest to me, I have adhered to them.I will only appeal in this view to the instance of Dr.Clarke, whose very laborious living produced him butabout 250 per annum. The place was highly unpleasant(comparatively speaking) to him, and stillmore to my sister. But being convinced that he wason many accounts better fitted to do good at Hullthan most other men would be, or than he would bein almost any other place, I made no effort for fixing1798. GOVERNMENT FAVOURS. 291him in any situation more eligible as to temporal ;though I will frankly tell you that I had the deaneryof York in view for him in case he had lived, as beingthat for which he was eminently qualified.The account I have received of your son from afriend to whom he is pretty well known, is in manyparticulars highly creditable to him, and such as toallow me not to give up the hope (a hope which I contemplatewith real satisfaction) of some time or otherbeing instrumental in his preferment. I shall be veryglad to become acquainted with him. I need scarcelysay that it was a painful effort to me to write toyou the answer I did, and I am sure I should commencemy acquaintance with him with a bias in hisfavour, both from his general character and my goodwilltowards you and your family.There is much more in my mind, but I have nottime to put it on paper, and what is more material isalready said."It was only upon general grounds that he now askedany such favours at the hands of government. " WhenI was a young man," he told a friend who had requestedhis good offices in favour of a client, " I ownI was often sanguine in my hopes of obtaining situationsunder government for persons, whom, for theirown sakes or that of their connexions, I wished toserve. But a longer acquaintance with life dampedthese expectations, and taught me, though slowly, thata man who would act on my principles and go ono 2292 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE 1798.my plan, must not expect to be successful in thiscompetition. Such things are only to be got byan earnestness and importunity very unbecomingmy situation."June 1 6th. The Toulon scheme supposedfor the West Indies. Buonaparte rivals Alexanderthe Great. I think he wishes to get off theEnglish invasion. Poor Burgh almost heartbrokenabout Ireland. Popery not hinted at as oneof the causes of Irish barbarism. Lord Cornwallis isgoing. Had rather go to India. 22nd. House onLord G. Cavendish's motion about Ireland spokeshortly. Sheridan's taunt about my conscience, whilehe himself convicted of a misstatement. Fox, Grey,&c. there. Fox about Slave Trade. House verylate home near five o'clock. 23rd. Dined Bishopof London's much talk about Ireland. 28th. Rebelcamp at Wexford stormed, all apparently suppressed.Pitt well again. Reported that he insane ; thatwounded in the duel ; that going into the House ofLords ; that disgusted with something that passed inHouse of Commons."CHAPTER XV.JUNE 1798 TO SEPTEMBER 1799.Settlement at Broomfield His mother's death Letter toHannah More His charities Christian Observer Lettersto William Hey Protection of Jersey Methodists Parliamentmeets Mr. Pitt's designs Cold Bath Fields' prisonDebates on the Union Motion for Abolition again defeatedSlave Trade Limitation Bill Lost in Upper House Sundaynewspapers Weakness of his health.PARLIAMENT was prorogued upon the 29th of June,and Mr. Wilberforce immediately established himselfat Broomfield for the summer. " My situation here,"he says, " though so comfortable, will require muchwatchfulness, and plan, and circumspection, or mytime will be frittered away, my usefulness abridged,and my soul spiritualized. I will consider well howto turn it to the best account, and form my plandeliberately, with prayer for wisdom and for strengthto keep my resolutions. My wife's health absolutelyrequires a villa. A plan of study and anarrangement of time to be formed, and the business ofthe recess to be chalked out. Oh what cause have Ifor shame, comparing myself with my advantages and294 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1798.mercies." 1 " To try this recess at six hours betweenbreakfast and dinner, and two hours before breakfastfor thought and real business." 2 " Surely," he writesduring a sharp attack of illness with which Mrs. Wilberforcewas visited, " God is punishing me for a feelingof exultation. ' I said in my prosperity, I shallnever be moved. Thou, Lord, of Thy goodness hastmade my hill so strong. Thou didst turn away Thyface, and I was troubled.' How uncertain are all humanthings ! I hope I feel some Christian resignation, andholy reliance on the mercy and goodness of God andmy Saviour." 3While he was here engaged with " books, letters,a little dictating, and many friends," 4 hereceived an account of the illness, and by the nextpost of the death, of his aged mother. Unwillinglyleaving Mrs. Wilberforce, who was on the eve of herfirst confinement, he set off immediately for Hull, toattend his mother's funeral. " You will join withme," he writes to Mrs. Wilberforce from Stamford 5on his return to Broomfield, " in thanking God forHis goodness in having thus far protected me on myway. I got to Barton waterside about a quarter totwelve yesterday, and after a remarkably fine passageI was in the old house by one o'clock. This morning,at six o'clock, I set out, with (in spite of all remonstrances)some little pomp, in the funeral procession toBeverley, and the last solemn service being ended, IJournal. * Ib. June 24. 3 Ib.Diary. * July 7.1798. TO MRS. WILBERFORCE. 295returned to Hesse, and was'again at Barton by eleven ;and now here I am only eighty-nine miles from London,and hoping to be with you on Monday evening.I shall of course stay here all tomorrow ; and though,not having heard from you, some thoughts and wishesabout you will steal in, I have a pleasure in the ideaof halting, and spending a quiet day in blessing andpraising that gracious Being, who to me has beenrich in mercy, and abundant in loving-kindness. Ohthat 1 were more warmly thankful and more zealouslyactive !My dear mother did not suffer in death, and Itrust she is happy. The change gradually producedin her during the last eight years was highly gratifyingto all who loved her, and looked forward. It wasa solemn and an affecting scene to me, yesterday evening,to be in my mother's room, and see the bed whereI was born, and where my father and my mother died,and where she then lay in her coffin. I was alone, andI need not say to you, or seek to conceal from you, Iput up my prayers that the scene might work its dueeffect. It is late, and I must retire." " Had a delightfulcontemplative evening walk in Burleigh park.I have felt this day, I hope, in some degree rightlydisposed ; but oh let me not confound occasional feelingswith being a true Christian. And yet, O Lord,I would resolutely endeavour to walk worthy of myhigh and holy calling. O enlighten my ignorance,purify my corruptions, warm my coldness, and fix myvolatility. Oh may my mother's death impress me !296 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1798.May I crucify the flesh. What manifold mercieshave I received. God has remarkably prospered meon my way : He seems to give me present encouragementfor obeying Him. This seems a sad carelessplace, alas ! I talked to several common people.Found the butchers' shops open. At church, miserablework. Remnant of Sunday school only eightchildren, and no more in the place. I have seldomseen a more apparently irreligious place. A shopkeepersaid, none of the clergy active, or went amongstthe poor. One Presbyterian meeting." 6Monday, up early, and travelled on as fast as I could ;got to Broomfield by nine o'clock, safely, I thank God,and found all well." " My dear wife," he notes a fewdays later, " is now ill. How dependent does thismake me feel upon the power and goodness of God !What a humbling impression have I of my owninability ; that all my happiness, and all that belongsto me, is at the disposal of the Supreme Being !So it ought always to be. This is ' to walk softly.'I see as usual the kind hand of a gracious God, disposinglittle incidents with a favouring kindness.Whatever may be God's will now, may I submit withhumble, acquiescing confidence. I have been far toolittle careful to improve the opportunities of usefulnessafforded by my situation in married life. May I beenabled to do better ; and if God should give me anoffspring, may I bring it up in His faith, and fear, andJove, as a Christian should be educated to go through6 Diary and Journal, July 8.1798. Bromfield. 297such a world as this." 7 " Oh what abundant causehave I for gratitude," he says the following week :how well all has gone on, both with mother andchild ! I will take a musing walk of gratitude andintercession. How full of mercies is God to me, andhow void am I of gratitude ! How little desirous ofdiffusing the happiness so freely given to me ! Ohmay I still feel more the weight of my burthen, chargingit on myself and pressing it home ; placingmyself in Christ's sight, in that of angels, and spiritsof just men made perfect. O Lord, renew me ; letthis corruption put on incorruption, even here in heart,and bring forth the graces of the Spirit." 8At Broomfield he was within reach of his Londonbusiness, and was surrounded by his friends. " July11th. Burgh came to dinner Henry Thornton afterit rational conversation. 12th. Malta taken, and noother news of Buonaparte. La Fayette talking ofassisting the oppressed people of Ireland. Thorntonand Grant to evening council, about Sierra Leone.16th. After breakfast to Auckland's, and then on toPitt at Holwood. Tete-astute with Pitt and muchpolitical talk. He much better improved in habitsalso beautifying his place with great taste marksof ingenuousness and integrity. Resenting and spurningthe bigoted fury of Irish Protestants." 9 Soonafter this visit he wrote to Lord Lancaster.7 Journal, July 21. e Ib. July 29, and Aug 5.9 Diary.O 3298 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1798.My dear Lancaster,I am sure you and Lady Lancaster will bekindly solicitous to know how our nursery goes on.I thank God, my dear wife and our little boy haveuniformly been as well as possible. . I know yourfriendly heart is gratified by my thus annihilating thedistance between us, and bringing you within view ofme in my new relations.You ask me concerning the report 10 about Pitt.Altogether without foundation, is my answer. Butour oppositionists either know human nature well,or they pursue instinctively the means adapted toproduce their malevolent end. Report and calumniateconfidently and diligently : no matter if thereport be proved false, and the calumny be onceformally, distinctly, and authoritatively rebutted onits authors : go on reporting the same tale, moreconfidently and more diligently. It will graduallysink into the minds of men, and there leave a depositumwhich will permanently tincture them ; andif, from our friends foolishly neglecting these rumourswhen first propagated, they are suffered to diffusethemselves without contradiction, as if too foolishto be believed, (but the folly is ours, nothing it toofoolish to be believed,) then the business may bedone in less time, and the story will soon gain credit.There is no ground whatever for the rumour concerningPitt. Yet the opposition papers go on with itoVid. page 292.1798. TO HANNAH MORE. 299I spent a day with him lately, tte--tte, and not tosay that the particular story I have been alluding towas disproved, he appeared better than he has beenall the winter, and his habits much more wholesome.I must say farewell. Kind remembrances to LadyLancaster and your daughters.Ever yours,W. Wilberforce."July 18th. Montagu came with his family discussedaffairs with him, he truly pleasing and philosophical.Evening, Carrington, very kindly, about myaccounts ; he made me out richer than I conceived."This discovery was soon conveyed in a characteristicmode to Mrs. Hannah More.My dear Madam,The letter you wrote to Mrs. Henry Thornton,concerning your Mongewell intercourse, has made adeep impression on me ; and though no one can prizemore highly than myself your services in Somerset-shire,yet I believe it would be right for you to pay avisit to the Prince Bishop, at Auckland. 11 HenryThornton and I agree in our judgment, that you cannotdecline this new sphere of usefulness. Do youremember the idea of a great man, (I think Huygens,)that there might be stars, of which the light, thoughalways on its journey, had not yet travelled down to11 Mrs. Hannah More had been invited to assist the Bishop in hisbenevolent design of establishing schools in his diocese.300 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1798.us. It is somewhat like this with the light of theblessed gospel, to too many districts in this verycountry. I wish you to consider this as an opportunityof conveying it into a dark corner of the island.Go then to Auckland, and may the grace of God gowith you. I am convinced that, on many accounts,you would be able to do far more than myself, or anyother person living, with this primary planet, whichis surrounded with satellites. It is more, it is a verysun, the centre of an entire system. I will with allmy heart meet you there if possible. The Bishop hasoften invited me and Mrs. W.But I am pressed for time, and have one point moreon which I must detain you, I mean the extreme importanceof your husbanding your strength. I havelooked into the state of my finances, and am in goodcase in what respects this world. I can appropriateas large a sum as may be requisite for your operations.lam clear you ought to purchase ease, which is withyou the power of continuing your exertions, thoughat a dear rate, by allowing yourself the accommodationof a carriage. Surely we know each other well enoughto communicate on this or any other subject withoutembarrassment or reserve. You ought to permit thefriends of your institutions to assist you with money toany extent which may be requisite for carrying themon. What signifies it in what shape and for what purposethe money is to be applied ? In the compositionand resolution of forces it all produces an effect in therequired direction. It is really absurd that we who1798. TO HANNAH MORE. 301affect to be deeply interested for the maintenance ofthe system, should not ; give it the only support whichour situation renders us able to afford. Each partnershould supply that in which he most abounds : themonied, money ; you and your sisters, what is far morevaluable, and what no money can procure. Now doact if you are convinced." ." I love and admirethe zeal of your young clergy. Indeed it refreshesand revives me when sickened by the shabby topicsand shabby people, great and small, with whom I amof necessity too conversant, to turn my eyes to youand your little Christian communion of saints. 18Believe me ever sincerely yours,W. Wilberforce."I have talked with Henry Thornton," he writesagain, " concerning the Somersetshire operations, andwe have agreed that 400 per annum should be allottedby us to that service. Mrs. Bouverie's money inHenry Thornton's hands is to furnish 200, and heand I 100 each I need not say any thing inaddition to what I have before expressed of my earnestimputation that you would bear in m ind that yourbest contribution a thousand times over is of trouble,time, and personal exertions, and your great objectshould be how you can furnish these in the mostabundant measure and the longest continuance. Ifby giving 200 or 300 of your own you abridge yourpersonal contributions for one year, the operations'* Letters of July 11 and 19.302 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1798.would be a loser by the bargain, to say nothing of thepain you make us all feel by not calling on us freelyfor such pecuniary supplies as may be wanting. Youare the main-spring of the machine ; and it is yourbusiness to keep that in order, ours to supply subordinatemovements (I did not mean a pun but a post-chaisenow occurs as one of them). Do not think metedious in reverting so often to this well-worn remonstrance.When I was with you I saw it was stillneeded; and I am like the man who preached forthirty years together against drunkenness, because hisparish still continued the vice." 13Never distress yourself, my dear Mary," hewrote 14 this summer to another correspondent, "onthe ground of my being put to expense on account ofyourself, or your near relatives ; you give what is farmore valuable than money time, thought, serious,active, affectionate, persevering attention ; and as ithas pleased God of His good providence to bless mewith affluence, and to give me the power, and I hopethe heart, to assist those who are less gifted with thegood things of this life, how can I employ them moreproperly than on near relations, and when I strengthenyour hands, who are always endeavouring to servetheir best interest. You may say to , that onyour account, I am willing to take the charge ofCharles's education for two or three years."The sums which, as " a good steward," he thus dispensedto those who needed, formed a large portion of13 Dec. 10. " Aug. 24.1798. HIS CHARITIES. 303his annual income. As a young man, he had beencharitable from the natural impulses of a generousspirit. By an account book, which has escapeddestruction, he appears to have expended in the year1783, between five and six hundred pounds in thisway. There are in it many such entries as, " Sent to theRev. Mr. Emerson of Keswick, a most excellent manwith a large family, and mean to do so annually, abank note, 20." But his conduct was no soonerregulated by higher principles than he determined toallot a fixed proportion of his income (obtained oftenby personal self-denial in small things) to works ofcharity. Before his marriage, at least one-fourth ofit was so employed ; and in this year the record stillremaining (and it is incomplete) accounts for morethan 2000. Some of the particular entries show thehidden channels in which his bounty flowed, cheeringmany hearts who never knew their benefactor.Besides regular almoners for the distribution of smallsums, to one of whom in the course of this year heintrusted above a hundred pounds, he was in thehabit of relieving through many others the distresswhich came under their observation. This he didespecially in the case of active clergymen, in whosehands he often placed an annual sum of considerableamount for parochial distribution. Four of thosewhich occur this year, and are marked annualexpenses, are for sums of 25, 26, 30, and 40,respectively. Great zeal in their vocation constitutedof itself a claim on his assistance, even in districts for304 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1798.which he had ho local interest. " Mr* Charles'sschools in Wales, annually 21."Some of these entries are highly characteristic . " Expensesof Mr. Atkinson's act for Leeds church 100."Lent Robert Wells 13, which never expect againhe has a wife and six children to maintain, and ekesout a scanty income by a trade in old clothes." " SentDr. Chapman five guineas for a book which not read,and impertinently sent me ; but Irving says he is aworthy man, and he must be distressed to act in this manner."" Sent Captain S. five guineas (a gentleman indistress sometimes most of all so." " Sent him tenpounds in addition, which he said would render him completelycomfortable." " C., only justified by my havingadvised him originally to enter the law, 50." ff CaptainPearce 5 5s. He is but a moderate hand I fear,but in urgent want." " Lent M. 100, not verywillingly, because though I sincerely wish to servehim, I think this plan of paying off all his debts willnot make him economize. It is Mr. Pitt's plan."In compliance with my rule I must put it downgiven, but if he lives I shall receive again from CaptainHall, 15 100." " Given W. C. 55 on a solemnpromise that he will never again issue a bill, and notborrow of any one without previously informing me.He is not economical, but has a claim on me fromhaving lived in my service, and imprudence must bepardoned. He is sure that from his salary he can graduallyrepay me, but I cannot believe it." {t Given W.Vid. vol. i. p. 355.1798. HIS CHARITIES. 305C. 63 to enable him to refund what he has taken ofthe Board's money. I do it only because it would beruin to him to withhold it. I doubt if even underthese circumstances quite right. I have solemnlyassured him it should be the last time of my assistinghim, and have given him parting advice. He hastreated me ill in applying only 21 of the last 70 Igave him to this purpose. As I have told him plainly,I fear he cannot be saved from ruin. I have hadmuch anxiety and vexation from him, and my onlycomfort is that I treat him like a Christian, he me as aman of the world. He dislikes me, and feels no gratitudeto me I know for what I have done. (Private ; putdown as a record of my judgment and feelings)"For Foully Expedition, 50." " Rev. Mr. Scott,half a year of his son's College allowance, 15.""paid Williams's bill for expenses of Dowlin 16 andDevereux's trial, 200." " Remainder of Williams'sbill unfairly coming upon me, 500." " For St.Anne's School annually 31 IQs. Qd."Almost every charitable institution of the metropolis,of Yorkshire, and of many other parts, (extendingin some instances to Edinburgh,) is included inhis list of annual subscriptions. He had also regularannuitants. Not a few who afterwards acquiredindependence and wealth were indebted to hissupport for carrying them through their earlystruggles. Two who rose to the judicial bench arethis year mentioned as receiving from him 300.6 The witnesses against Kinder, vit. vol. i. p. 357.306 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1798.Besides his contribution to the Eland Society,he supported readily young men of promise in theireducation for Holy Orders ; and through every yearof its protracted continuance he drew largely fromhis own resources for the expenses of the Abolitioncontest.It was especially his habit to relieve those who in thehigher walks of life were reduced to unexpected indigence.Many letters acknowledging such aid, andtracing to it oftentimes escape from ruin, appear inhis correspondence. One such instance has beenfurnished by his secretary. " ( Mr. Ashley,' he oncesaid to me, * I have an application from an officer ofthe navy who is imprisoned for debt. I do not liketo send Burgess' (his almoner) ' to him, and I havenot time to go myself; would you inquire into thecircumstances ? ' That very day I went, and foundan officer in gaol for 80. He had a family dependenton him with no prospect of paying his debt ; andas a last hope, at the governor's suggestion, had madethis application." Mr. Wilberforce was well knownamong the London prisons, where, with the Rev. JohnUnwin, he had of old often visited and relieved thedebtors. " The officer," continues Mr. Ashley, " hadreferred him to Sir Sidney Smith, to whom he wroteimmediately. I was in the room when Sir Sidneycalled on the following morning. ' I know thepoor man well,' he said, ' we were opposed to oneanother on the Baltic, he in the Russian, I in theSwedish service ; he is a brave fellow, and I would1798. DIARY. 307do any thing I could for him ; but you know, Wilberforce,we officers are pinched sometimes, and mycharity purse is not very full.' e Leave that to me,Sir Sidney,' was his answer. Mr. Wilberforce paidhis debt, fitted him out, and got him a command.He met an enemy's ship, captured her, was promoted ;and within a year I saw him coming to call in PalaceYard in the uniform of a post captain."He continued engaged in his usual pursuits andsurrounded by his friends until the beginning ofSeptember. " July 29th. Venn on ( rich and poormeet together' good. People about to build a newchapel because he ' does not preach the gospel.' Hemuch disturbed. Much talk with Milner about hispreaching, and the growing faults of the young clergy.He conceives them getting into a rational way ofpreaching." " Aug. 21st. Our christening in theafternoon. News of Buonaparte's arrival in Alexandria.Sunday, Sept. 2nd. How excellent a sermonhas Venn been preaching upon Luke xiv. 28 countingthe cost if we profess to be Christians. It affectedmy heart it humbled me in the dust. My days passaway in hurry, yet I do not think it right to go upon theretired plan. Oh may I wait on God diligently ! Hewill then level hills and fill up plains before me.Sept. 5th. To town, to see Pitt no news. Saw hisFinance plan. They do not believe Buonaparte to beatAlexandria. Emperor of Russia coming forward,and Prussia neutral. Austria must-quarrel withFrance. Bad news from Nelson. Lord Elgin called308 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1798.yesterday. 7th. Report that 30,000 French landedin Ireland. 14th. French landed in Ireland surrenderedat discretion. 22nd. Buonaparte's reachingAlexandria confirmed."He was much occupied at this time with a plan forsetting up a periodical religious publication whichshould admit "a moderate degree of political andcommon intelligence." 17 "Mr. Babington and Iwent this morning to Mr. Henry Thornton's to breakfast,to talk over the matter of the Magazine and itseditor. We concur in opinion that a small committee,perhaps not more than three, would form the besteditor. Mr. Scott is a man of whose strength ofunderstanding, correctness of religious views, integrity,disinterestedness, diligence, and perseverance, I thinkvery highly ; he is systematically opposing the vices,both speculative and practical, of the religious world;and they are many and great, and likely to beattended with numerous and important mischiefs.But Mr.* Scott is a rough diamond, and almostincapable of polish from his time of life and naturaltemper ; he has not general knowledge nor taste sufficientfor such an office as you would commit to him.We have anatomized several other subjects, but I havenot time to detail to you the result of our dissection." 18I highly approve of a suggestion thrown out by Mr.Pearson, that the appointment or removal of aneditor should be vested Jn a society composed ofcountry and town ministers. The considerationsLetter to W, Hey Esq. Nov. 19. 19 Ib. July 281798. CHRISTIAN OBSERVER. 309which recommend this to me, will of themselves occurto your mind. I will only suggest to you the differentcharacter of serious religion in the country, and intown, in the former more solid, and in the lattermore showy and talkative ; the different character ofthe clergy too in the town and in the country, whichis related to the former difference both as cause andeffect. I am sorry to say that the actual state ofLondon, and I might add the mode of preachingadopted by some who, wishing to avoid the prevailingabuses, run into another extreme, strongly enforce theargument which might at all times be urged ongeneral principles for such a combination." ;After much consideration and discussion, the firstnumber of the Christian Observer was published inJanuary, 1801. Several of its early articles werefrom the pen of Mr. Wilberforce and Mr. HenryThornton.Other schemes of extensive usefulness now occupiedhis thoughts. " I am pressed for time," he writes, 20but am unwilling to lay down my pen withoutmentioning a project of my own, which is quite inembryo ; but I shall be glad for you to give it admission,and let it lie hatching in your cerebellum. It isthat a school, under the management and superintendenceof the clergy, should be opened in every parish orsmall district for the religious instruction of such aschoose to send their children. They (I mean ourgreat men) who are not on any higher grounds intoWilliam Hey Esq. Sept 19. * Ib. Aug. 28.310 LIFE OF Wilberforce. 1798.pressed with a sense of the value of religious instruction,may perhaps be induced to support the systemfrom considerations of a political nature.While a nation preserves a general reverence for theopinions and institutions of its forefathers, even thoughthe bulk of the people are not under any deep impressionsof piety, the rising generation is always educated witha prejudice in favour of the religion of the country, andwith a disposition to befriend and maintain it. Thenit may be thought the state may leave it to the peoplein general to bring up their own children as they will.But now, when I fear infidelity has made such deepinroads into our middle classes, and when the nature ofour constitution, in addition to the levelling doctrinesof our day, speedily diffuses throughout the wholecommunity the sentiments and habits of the higherorders ; I fear, if we leave it to the lower orders ingeneral to educate their own children, they will receivelittle or no education at all little prepossession infavour of Christianity, or disposition to stand up for it ;and when these no longer exist, the vantage ground ofour clergy is taken away from them. I have beenscribbling amidst incessant interruptions, and muchconversation in which I have been compelled to join.I must now bid you farewell, assuring you of my constantfriendly remembrance."Early in September he left Broomfield, to jointhe family of Mrs. Wilberforce, in .Warwickshire,whence he wrote again to the same correspondent.1798. TO WILLIAM HEY ESQ. 311September 18.My dear Sir,When I left the neighbourhood of London,ten days ago, it was held to be next to impossiblethat a rupture should not take place between theFrench and Austrians. The Emperor of Russia alsoappears to be coming forward in force. I scarceknow whether to wish this or not, so many differentaspects does the same event present. . I will mentionto you in confidence, that government contemplatesrepealing the Assessed Taxes Act, and substitutinga universal impost on all income. I hopethe public spirit of the commercial world will bearthis provision ; and I throw out to you that such ascheme is projected, because I wish you both to giveme your own opinions, and also to smooth the way asmuch as you can for the passage of a measure in itselfso rough and obnoxious. You remember that myWest Riding friends expressed themselves in thespring very desirous that some such system shouldbe adopted. Besides all other recommendations, itappears to me to have this, that people will not injurethe public revenue, but the contrary, by economizingin their personal expenses, in order to enable themselvesto pay their required proportion.If you have not read the Irish Reports and Appendixes,I recommend them to your perusal. Theyreally beat down all opposition. Alas, alas ! what a312 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1798.world is this, and what cause do we find daily foracknowledging that it is sin which makes men wildbeasts to each other ; whereas, the gospel-would unitethem in the bonds of love. Farewell, my dear sir,may God bless you and yours.I am,Ever sincerely yours,W. WILBERFORCE."After spending a fortnight in Warwickshire, andpaying a hasty visit at Yoxall Lodge, he got byOct. 3rd, to Bath, through beautiful Rodboroughvale ; where rejoicing for Nelson's glorious victory ;news of which first met us in detail there." " It isremarkable," he writes to Lord Lancaster, 21 " thaton the very same day which brought your letter expressingyour confidence in the issue of any navalengagement under Nelson's auspices, the intelligencearrived of his most glorious action ; the most signalvictory 22 with which a gracious Providence everblessed our arms. The piety and naivete of his letterwould delight you, I am persuaded, as it does us."Are not you almost as much delighted with Nelson'sletter as with the victory itself. It is the most signalsuccess with which Providence ever crowned our navalefforts." 23At Bath, finding " the waters agree well," he reiOct. 5. * 2 The battle of the Nile, Aug. 1.To Mrs. Hannah More, Oct. 4.1798. TO CHARLES GRANT ESQ. 313gained above a month, " much in society," and engagedin reading " Locke with my wife and sister,Come's Walpole, Montesquieu, Roman History, Wakefield'sLife, Bible, and much time in letters." Oct.18th. " To-day the news arrived of the defeat of theFrench needing by Sir J. Warren. Sir George Beaumont,Creates, &c. with us. Jay told his origin andstory very simply : a bricklayer employed on Beckford'shouse began to preach at 16 humble and notdemocratical. Cecil at Bath, and dined with us. 19th.Mayor's dinner three hundred people sat between SirSidney Smith and Fraser. Heard Sir Sidney's storyhow got off from confinement, burnt ships at Toulon,and managed in Swedish fleet. 20th. To CowslipGreen all kind and hospitable. Report of Warren'svictory. 22nd. To Bath. Laurelled mail coachbrought certain news of Warren's victory over fleetinvading Ireland La Hoche, and eight largefrigates." The next day he wrote to CharlesGrant Esq.Bath, October 23, 1798.My dear Friend,I felt most sensibly the kindness of yourletter respecting Lord Nelson's victory, though Ihave been remiss in not sooner returning you myhearty thanks for it. These I beg you now toaccept. We have reason once more to praise thename of our gracious and almighty Guardian.VOL. ir. p314 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1798.You will understand my meaning, when I say thatso much success makes me almost tremble.I have written to Lord Teignmouth to congratulatehim on his safe arrival in England, and notknowing where he is I will enclose my letter,begging you to forward it. I wish he may settle inour neighbourhood, though I have scarcely thoughtmyself warranted in throwing out the idea tohimself.Your family I hope are all well. We are muchas usual. We have availed ourselves of our vicinityto Cowslip Green, to get over to our friends there fortwo or three days, and have found the settlementwhich we visited in the most improving state. Thedegree in which it has pleased God to bless the laboursof these extraordinary women, is indeed wonderful.We left Mrs. Hannah More in her usual Monday'sstate yesterday morning, and have prevailed on herto come over to us, and take a course of the waters.It would be difficult to find any one who labours sodiligently, under circumstances in which I fear Ishould give up the struggle, and fall back into myeasy chair.I have much to say to you, but I have manyletters to write, and there is no place in which I findmy time more broken in upon. Mrs. W. desires tobe affectionately remembered to yourself and all yourhouse, and so I am sure would Mrs. Clarke, if sheknew I was writing to you. I often think of you, and1798. JERSEY METHODISTS. 315I need not, I hope, assure you, that it is always withinterest and affection.Believe me,My dear Sir,Your faithful friend,W. Wilberforce."He remained at Bath about a fortnight longer.Oct. 26th. Burgh came to us from Bristol Hot-wellsstrongly against the Union * only to be done by force.'Pitt busy about the Irish Union. Nov. 6th. Lady St.John and David Hartley dined with us. Rational talk.David quite bitten with the new philosophy at 68 or69 ; thinking our times worse than any former, notin science only, but moral conduct. Thinks the lastwas occasioned by the ambition of kings ' Littlemen now know their own strength,' &c. 7th. Resolvedto go to town directly for Methodists' sake." 24It was the natural consequence of his public character,that those who were in any difficulty, especially ifit was connected with religion, applied at once to himas the redresser of their wrongs. The Sunday drillingwhich had just been introduced into the ChannelIslands, was most offensive to the religious principlesof the Wesleyan Methodists ; and their refusal toconform to the appointment of the local governmentsubjected them in many instances to fine and imprisonment.They appealed to Mr. Wilberforce, andwhilst still at Broomfield he had seen Mr. DundasJournal.P 2316 LIFE OF wilberforce. 1798.upon the subject, and procured the promise of hisinterference in their cause. He now heard from Dr.Coke, that not only were these oppressive measuresstill maintained, but that on the 18th of October atthe states meeting of the Isle of Jersey, it was determinedto proceed to banishment against those whorefused to perform this military duty. To appealagainst this Bill he moved hastily to London ; andhaving reached Broomfie d on the 10th of Novemberwent on the 13th to town on the Methodists' business;" but found that " neither Pitt nor Dundaswere come." 25 Within a few days he convinced Mr.Dundas of the injustice of such a needless violation ofthe rights of conscience, and after some delay succeededin getting " the Jersey Methodists' causedecided in their favour Banishment Bill assentrefused." 26On the 14th of December, " supped," he says,with Pitt tete-astute ; whom and Lord Camden(the first time since Ireland) I saw for a quarter ofan hour in the morning. Much talk about Europe,Ireland, income tax, Lord Cornwallis, Union." ^ Hewrote after the morning's interview to Mr. Bankes.My dear Bankes,I have just seen Pitt for a few minutes, andam to have a longer talk with him perhaps this evening.He is of course in high spirits, and what isbetter, his health, which had seemed to be again de-diary,Nov. 13. * Ib. Dec. 8. *" Ib.1798. TO HENRY Danes ESQ. 317clinging a few weeks ago, is now, I am assured, moreradically improved than one could almost have hoped.What I have learned from him as to the state ofEurope is, only a little more in detail, the generalopinion we must form of it from what is known to allthe world. I did not break ground on the Irishquestion, on which I shall be very glad to confer withyou. Lord Camden came in while I was with Pittwith a large party of Hibernian, who are to dinewith him to-day.I have at length got through the first volume ofCome, the only one I carried about with me ; and Imust say I think you have formed too favourable ajudgment both of the matter and of the execution of thework ; though I quite agree with you in esteeming itas a valuable one for want of a better, on account ofthe events it treats of. But my grand quarrel withthe man is, that he writes like one of those knavishcoxcomb parsons, (I have known several of this stamp,)who are so afraid of being thought tinctured with professionalprejudices, or of carrying into their politicalspeculations any of their religious persuasions, thatthey suppose all statesmen to be a race of beingsmore devoid of common integrity than they reallyare ; and defend measures, and reason on principles,which would be disclaimed by them as altogetherunjustifiable. I am glad to say that I think the workwarrants the persuasion that the general standard ofmoral practice is higher than it was fifty or sixtyyears ago. Much of this I conceive is owing to the318 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1798.House of Commons. However I did not design toget into this long discussion this morning. I may aswell reserve the rest of my animadversions. Farewell.Believe me ever, my dear Bankes,very sincerely yours,W. WILBERFORCE."Parliament met upon the 20th of November.I hear," he writes the day preceding, " thatall the opposition but Mr. Fox mean to attend tomorrow.It requires more than common power offront for all who were at Maidstone, to hold up thehead without blushing. Mr. Pitt, I may say to you,is extremely favourable to the idea of a union withIreland. Though listening myself to the proposalwith complacency, I see many and great difficultiesin the way. Imprimis, let me ask you, and when youwrite, answer my question, would you admit papistsinto the parliament of the empire ?Let me also" request your first thoughts on anothersubject which I touch upon in confidence,that of making an arrangement for the tithes similarto that which has been effected in the instanceof the land tax . . . every incumbent receiving considerablymore annually than his present income,and the residue constituting a fund of which partmight be reserved for the purpose of compensatingany diminution of the value of money, and the remainderapplied to increasing small livings, or someother ecclesiastical object. I almost tremble at the1798. TO WILLIAM HEY ESQ. 319idea of changing the mode of supporting the clergy,at least of making them depend on the dividends ofpublic funds for their stipend.I am scribbling amidst interruption and mustconclude ; yet not without one word of humbleacknowledgment of the goodness of God in ourlate naval successes. I think Lord Nelson's letterhas produced a disposition to speak more of Providence.May it have the effect of helping toawaken to recollection a people loaded with blessings.I am meditating a visit to the Archbishopto press again the proposition you recommended,of authorizing the building of chapels of ease tofall in to the mother church after a term of years.The increase of dissenting chapels, wherever the dissentershave entered on the execution of their plan ofvillage preaching, is beyond measure great ; in oneyear I think ninety in the diocese of London, andnear fifty in that of Sarum. Farewell." ^A severe attack of indisposition confined him to thehouse at the commencement of the session ; but bythe 25th of November he was nearly in his usualhealth. " My feeling, when so ill on Wednesdaymorning, was, that I had not been active enough inthe cause of God : oh let me now employ with greaterdiligence the powers which he has restored." 29 " 26th.Lord Camden called, and sat an hour with me onIrish matters. Milner came in the evening. 27th.Milner and Pearson long discussion about liberty andTo W. Hey Esq. Nov. 19. *> Journal, Nov. 25.320 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1798.necessity. Pearson conquered completely. Walkedmorning, with Pitt and Grenville much talk aboutincome tax. Dec. 6th. Milner off. Much affectedabout religious unbelief 'worst and hardest trialwhen one has made a bridge, to have it taken from one.'Pitt's plan of income tax seems well received uponthe whole." He took an active part in perfecting thedetails of this measure, spending several mornings " atPitt's, with Cooksonon and Gottt from Leeds, about theincome tax. Met Sargent there, and all struck out aplan for commercial incomes." 30 "With Cooksonon andGottt at Pitt's all morning. We hit off a plan for commercialcommission. 31 Walker says the manufacturerscan't and won't pay."He held also a conspicuous place in the concludingdebates of this year. "Dec. 20th. Complained of misrepresentationof parliamentary speeches, and suggesteda remedy." In opposing the suspension of the HabeasCorpus Act upon the following day, Mr. Courteneymade a violent attack upon the treatment of the stateprisoners confined in Cold Bath Fields Prison; andin a taunting tone especially invoked in their behalfthe sympathies of Mr. Wilberforce. He was well acquaintedwith the management of that prison, bothfrom personal inspection, (a work of charity to whichhe had been long accustomed, 32 ) and constant comaDiary, Dec. 13. 3 > Ib. 17.3 * He had received with no small pleasure from Howard the philanthropist,just before his death, a copy of his last work, with a request thathe would " accept this book from him as a small testimony of hisesteem."1798. REPLY TO Courteney. 321indication with Dr. Glasse one of the visitingmagistrates. He entered the House in the course ofthe debate, and "found Courtenay speaking. GotGlasse's minutes, and answered well, but perhaps toolightly." M His reply was remarkably effective : itsaccurate acquaintance with the subject completelyrefuted Mr. Courtenay's graver charges, whilst itabounded in ready humour, and apposite allusionsdrawn from the most various sources. " The hon.gent, tells us the prisoners are starved. But whatsays a visiting magistrate who lately sent me theresult of his own observation ? With the permissionof the House, I will read his very words. ' I saw theirdinner : better I would not wish on my own table.It was roast 'beef and plum pudding.' Aye, sir, andmy friend is a doctor of divinity ! Why this differenceof statement reminds me of Parson Adams' bewilderment,when one passenger assured him as the stagedrove by a mansion, that its owner was the besthusband and father, and the most generous friend, inthe whole world ; whilst another woke up at themoment with the exclamation, What a fine estate !what a pity it belongs to such a rascal ! Thesimplicity of Parson Adams led him to conclude thatthey must be speaking of two different persons. Now,sir, though I do not mean to charge the hon. gent,with being a Parson Adams in simplicity, yet surelywhen he hears these dissimilar accounts he may welldoubt whether they describe the self-same place."39 Diary.p 3322 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1798.How long is it, Wilberforce," whispered Pitt, leaningover from the treasury bench as he sat down, " sinceyou read Joseph Andrews ? "Mr. Courtenay, smarting under this unexpectedchastisement, attempted a retort, when a few days laterthe subject was again before the House. After quotingin a tone of ridicule a passage from Mr. Wilberforce'swork on " Practical Christianity," he complained ofthe " Christian rancour and religious facetiousness "with which he had been treated. He was taught inMr. Wilberforce's answer, that " a religious manmight sometimes be facetious," as he was remindedthat " the irreligious did not of necessity escape beingdull." The review of these debates in the Journalaffords a striking instance of the rigid scrutiny to whichhe subjected his conduct. Though he had transgressedin no degree the strictest limits of temperate debate,yet he found " causes of humiliation in these last fewdays. What solicitude about human estimation !(which is perhaps the cause of all the rest.) I humblyhope that I have been schooling myself ; but oh howmuch do I want of that unruffled love which shouldreign in the heart of the true Christian ! This neednot, nor I think should it, prevent his actively, andperhaps even warmly, engaging in debate, and reprovingvice. But there should be love within, and where thatis, it will show itself in outward marks. I hope I feelno ill-will to any, and I pray and strive against it.Oh what are the little reproaches and assaults I encounter,compared with those under which Stephen1798. JOURNAL. 323could say, ' Lord, lay not this sin to their charge,'and, ' Father, forgive them ! ' Let me strive to growin humility, in disesteem and disrelish of worldlyestimation, and in love. In what a fermentation ofspirits was I on the night of answering Courtenay !How jealous of character and greedy of applause !Alas ! alas ! Create in me a clean heart, O God, andrenew a right spirit within me." 3lHouse Dec. 22nd, and found Tierney speaking.Sparred about Lord Auckland. Income tax till late."I am pleading," he says, " with Pitt the cause ofpoor clergymen and other small life-income personsand large families : for the latter I think successfully ;for the former I doubt. It will be a dreadful increasefor a man of 260 per annum, to pay instead of 4 or5, (the amount of his assessed taxes,) 26, the newintended impost. What a world it is ! I bless God,London is a place which speaks loudly in one's earsthe lesson of the apostle, ' The fashion of this worldpasseth away.' " M31st. House Tierney 's complaint of misrepresentationin the Times sad work went off well providentially.The Morning Chronicle falsely charges mewith the authorship], or sending [of the article." 36We have had warm work in parliament of late," hetells Lord Lancaster, "and I have been taking a moreforward part than I like. The most gross and scandalousmisrepresentations of my speeches have been3 Journal, Dec. 23. M Letter to Mrs. Hannah More, Dec. 15.30 Diary.324 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1798.lately made in the Morning Chronicle, and thereseems a general disposition to proceed against theopposition papers if Tierney compels us to proceedagainst the Times. There never was given in anypaper a tolerable account of one of the most masterlypieces of reasoning I ever heard, when Pitt contendedat large with a view to prove the impracticability andinjustice of taxing capital rather than income." **Jan. 1st, 1799. " I meant to-day to be devoted toreligious offices, but the House's meeting preventedmore than receiving the sacrament this morning, anda little reading to-night. I am now going to privateprayer. What cause have I for humiliation, whatroom for improvement ! " xThe beginning of this year was almost engrossed bythe question of the Irish Union. Jan. 7th. " Supped atPitt's, about Irish Union he candid and open, but Ido not like it. 11th. I have great doubts about theUnion, and Bankes still more. French successesagainst Neapolitans. No mails arrive. Emperor ofRussia behaving well. Pitt thinking things not so hadin Italy, and that the Emperor [of Austria] will bedrawn in by the Queen of Naples. 18th. To townto discuss about Union with Bankes and HenryThornton. 23rd. Dined Bankes's before House,which on Address for King's message about UnionSheridan Canning ; what envy of him I saw universallyGrey, Tierney, and others going out whenhe got up." " 25th. Pitt sanguine that after Unionv Dec. 28. * Journal.1799. IRISH UNION. 325Roman Catholics would soon acquire political rights :resolved to give up plan rather than exclude them.If Irish House did not pass something violent onTuesday last he thinks it will go down. AccusesF. of breach of faith in stirring up instead of waiting.Pitt fair and honourable, as always more than anyother political man. Poor Burgh wild. Bankes clearand strong against it. Auckland evidently so secretly.Lord Clare for. Speaker now for, and satisfied. Ihear the Roman Catholics more against it than theywere. The Bishops all against Pitt's tithe plan. TheKing said, * I am for it if it is for the good of thechurch, and against it if contra." 39My objections to the Union," he tells Mr.Babington, 40 "decrease, if any thing, but the preponderanceof my judgment is against it on theterms proposed. Pitt as usual is more fair andopen, and well-intentioned, and even well-principled,than any other of his class. He is firmly persuadedthat the Union will open the most promising wayby which the Roman Catholics may obtain politicalpower. Entre nous, it grows more doubtful whetherit will be carried in Ireland, and the extremevacuity and unacquaintedness with the great andcomplicated topics and questions . . many of themrespecting first principles of government . . which onemay perceive in many sensible, experienced, well-intentionedmen, is surprising. The democrats arecirculating the most flagrant falsehoods concerningDiary. Jan. 25.326 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1799.the Cold Bath Fields House of Correction. Thiswhole transaction teaches us to look upwards andforwards, and to disregard human estimation. Myold assailant, the Cambridge Chronicle, is again atwork on me, making parliamentary speeches for me,and then censuring them." 28th. " News cameyesterday of Irish rejection of the Union. Dundasstill talks as if sanguine of carrying it shortly. 41 Feb.10th. My judgment at length made up for the UnionLord Cornwallis talks of * Boroughs hawking by thoseinfatuated people, and an apathy about the Union.'Bankes's political integrity great."His great desire in supporting the Union, was towiden the basis of political power, and so destroy thatpredominant influence of a few great families, by whichIreland had been long misgoverned. In whatever respectshis hopes were frustrated, in this at least hedeemed them abundantly fulfilled. " From this time,"he warmly declared, " never were the true interestsof any country more fairly and liberally consulted."Many of the evils of the old system came out in thediscussions which followed the rebellion. " When astatement had been made to the House of the cruelpractices, approaching certainly to torture, by whichthe discovery of concealed arms had been enforced,John Claudius Beresford rose to reply, and said witha force and honesty, the impression of which I nevercan forget, ' I fear and feel deep shame in makingthe avowal I fear it is too true I defend it not but41 Diary.1799. LORD CLARE. 327I trust I may be permitted to refer, as some palliationof these atrocities, to the state of my unhappy country,where rebellion and its attendant horrors had rousedon both sides to the highest pitch all the strongestpassions of our nature.' I was with Pitt in theHouse of Lords when Lord Clare replied to a similarcharge ' Well, suppose it were so ; but surely,' &c.I shall never forget Pitt's look. He turned round tomewith that high indignant stare which sometimesmarked his countenance, and stalked out of theHouse." 4211th. House. Irish propositions till late. Wantedto speak, but no opportunity. 14th. Very ill allday. Evening, mended but not well enough to go tothe House where meant to go, and speak. Toosolicitous about it." At this time he wrote to LordLancaster :My dear Lancaster,You will perhaps be surprised not to see my namein the debates upon the Union. The fact is, that Ihad no good opportunity until the day on which allthe young Lords delivered their harangues, and Ishould then have said my say, but for my being sounwell that I could not venture to the House ; thoughtill the very last moment I would not abandon theattempt. Bankes and I canvassed the question together,and it ended in our embracing differentopinions ; the separation, as often happens in political45 Con. Mem. '328 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1799.questions, at last resolving itself into a different wayof viewing one single argument. Burgh is still onfive, and I dare scarcely tell him how decidedly I amfavourable to the measure.Foreign politics are in a very doubtful state.The Austrian minister had positively promised, andpledged his honour to the King of Naples, yet ' inlilium precepts fugit.' The Emperor has broughthimself into the state in which a man is apt to beinvolved by timid, and still more by dishonest andselfish, counsels. The French force him either togo to war with every disadvantage, or to put himselfalmost into their power by sending away theRussian troops who are come by his invitation, andthus incensing his only active confederate. If Austriadoes go to war, Russia will. Of the two, she hasbehaved lately the most handsomely. A few dayswill determine the result.I am ever affectionately yours,W. Wilberforce."Feb. 23rd. Gave dinner to Abbot, H. Legge,Attorney-general, 43 Mrs. >-, &c. Rational day formen, but bad for women. Attorney-general, Abbot,Legge, all strongly condemning Mackintosh's givinglectures in Lincoln's Inn Hall. I had thoughts ofattending. Pitt and Speaker prevailed upon theBenchers, and Chancellor approves." " Carlyle earnestabout editing Bible in Arabic." " Monday. Longw Sir John Scott.1799. ANNUAL MOTION FOR ABOLITION. 329discussion with Bishop of London. He frank, amiable,and pious. Evening, A.'s, where Hatsel, alarmed atitinerancy. Their low notions about giving livings." 4lThe conduct of the Abolition question was now hischief business. " Forced," he says, Feb. 20th, " toput off Slave business to-day. Coloured delegate fromAntigua showed me advertisement for skilful whipperindignant at degraded state." 45 " I suspect,"wrote Mr. Stephen, " that the advertisement youshowed me is a device of those half wise and whollyunprincipled people, whom you have the glory of havingfor your enemies. I do not warn you of this foryour own credit, you have a security they wot not of.What an advantage it is of virtue over vice, thatthough a pure heart (from its own experience, alas)knows how to find out one that is corrupt, the badcannot comprehend the principle on which such asyou act ; but I should exult in exposing this villany, ifsuch it be." 46 Such however it was not ; it was toofaithful an expositor of the occasional enormities ofthat detested system.Upon the 1st of March Mr. Wilberforce broughtforward his motion for immediate Abolition. Thesameness of a contest which had lasted for elevenyears, was in some degree relieved by the wit of Mr.Canning, and the eloquence of Mr. Pitt and Mr.Wilberforce. Having shown the folly of leaving, aswas now proposed, the work of Abolition to coloniallegislation, he again brought before the House theDiary. Ib. Feb. 26.330 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1799.evils which its continuance inflicted upon Africa.The coast of that great continent, for a distance offour thousand miles, is kept by the influence of thistrade in the lowest state of darkness, ignorance, andblood. Such has been the effect of intercourse withEurope. For contrary to all experience, the civilizationof the interior is three centuries advanced. Yet eventhere, may be perceived some fatal influence from thisdeadly traffic. The storm upon the surface stirsslightly even the still depths of ocean." Againhe warned the House not " to provoke the wrath ofHeaven by this hardened continuance in acknowledgedguilt. I do not mean, sir, that we mustexpect to see the avenging hand of Providence laidbare in hurricanes and earthquakes ; but there is anestablished order in God's government, a sure connexionbetween vice and misery, which through theoperation of natural causes, works out His will andvindicates His moral government."Though defeated by a majority of 84 to 54, he wasconvinced that the cause was gaining ground, and sethimself to introduce into the system some immediatemitigation of its horrors.If you can hit off," he wrote to Mr. Stephen, 47any effectual mode of preventing the importationsfor opening new lands, you will render a most essentialservice to humanity. I have no doubt we could carrythrough our House any bill which should cut off thisgreat limb without doing more."March 25.1799. SLAVE TRADE LIMITATION BILL. 331Two other measures of last year were now revived ;one, carried through by Mr. William Smith, for regulatingthe middle passage ; and the other, broughtforward. upon the 5th of March by Mr. Henry Thornton,for confining the trade within certain limits uponthe coast of Africa. Upon the second reading of thisbill " Pitt coolly put off the debate when I had manifesteda design of answering P.'s speech, and so leftmisrepresentations without a word. William Smith'sanger, Henry Thornton's coolness deep impressionon me, but conquered I hope in a Christian way. IncomeTax Bill suggested amendments ; that for valuingland Pitt at last forced to admit ; others not." 4815th. House, where taken ill, and forced home.Shocked to see P. and all the rest opposing Bill forlimiting from part of African coast, like entire abolition,alas ! 19th. Better, but not permitted to go out.Limitation Bill in House. Evening Thornton called,and we discussed for some time. 20th. House LimitationBill, second reading carried.April 12th. Dined with Thornton, and House LimitationBill counted out, (as yesterday,) but now hisBill carried first. 16th. Town early. Prison committee.House counted out as usual on Smith and Dolben'sBill. 18th. Saw Belgrave about Sunday newspapers.Stephen earnest about St. Vincent Carib lands. 22nd.House till past twelve. Address the Union Canningclever indeed Douglas heavy Lord Sheffield readingPitt pegging Fitzpatrick. 26th. Cold day, so didDiary, March 13.332 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1799.not go to St. James's with Union Address, but staidat Broomfield and wrote society's paper." 49His health had been unusually delicate this spring.A serious return," he told Mr. Hey, 50 " of illness,availing itself of the very severe and cheerless northeasternblasts, has stuck to me more obstinatelythan usual. This has compelled me to lessen thenumber of my working hours, and has crowded intothem such a multitude of matters, that I have beenquite unable to clear my way." This had enforced aprivate resolution," which he tells Lord Lancaster 3lhe " had been forced to form, of giving up the diningsystem : for the evening is the only time when I canget an hour or two of uninterrupted quiet, and I cannot,like Burgh, extend my working hours at pleasure ;expend a copious stream of midnight oil, and thenbe as fresh the next day as if nothing had happened."This resolution withdrew him in a measure fromgeneral society. " I must be more executive. Dinedat home before the House, refusing Pitt to meet oldfriends." K "I seem to separate quietly from acquaintance."53 " Dined at Lord Camden's, first latedinner for months, to meet Pitt, Lord Chatham,Bishop of Lincoln, Steele, Pepper Arden. Conversationtoo loose great successes of the Austrians overthe French Pitt less sanguine than formerly, buthoping that six months will see the thing out." 34More than once he mentions in his Journal this CornsDiary. * April 8. 31 Feb. 22.Diary, May 3. Ib. March 21. M Ib. April 17.1799. JOURNAL. 333narrative " quiet as having had some good effect uponhis heart, in enabling him a little to realize unseenthings, and live more in the fear of God." M " Ihave been more able to bridle my passions, and bemore meek and gentle, and really full of love." MThese impressions he was most solicitous to deepen,setting apart from time to time a day for abstinence,and meditation. " Saturday at Broomfield all day.I meant it to be a day devoted to God. The morningserious, by myself, though not so completely as I hadwished. I had refused several friends, but Carlyle ^came suddenly with offer about Lord . Elgin, andcompelled to see him." M "I have with some difficultyand management kept this day clear, to be setapart for humiliation and devotion, and such abstinenceas my body will bear. I am now about to fall toself-examination, and confession, and humiliation;looking into myself ; condemning myself before God,and imploring forgiveness for Christ's sake. Oh whata terrible array of sins do I behold when I look back !early renunciation of God ; then, many yearsentirely sinful; then, since the good providence ofGod drew me forth from this depth of iniquity in theautumn of 1785, how little have I improved andgrown in grace ! Let me now humble myself, chieflyfor forgetfulness of God, and Christ, and the HolySpirit, and invisible things ; for ingratitude to God,*> Journal, March 3. * Ib. April 21.>' lev. I D. Carlyle, Professor's Arabic at Cambridge, accompaniedLord Elgin in his embassy to Constantinople.Diary, May 4.334 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1799.though loaded with mercies, recalled by sicknesses ;. a thousand gracious providence ! I go to prayer,humbly throwing myself on the promised mercies ofGod in Christ," 59 " Though, I thank God, I am lesssensual than I was, yet I find my heart cold and flat.To-day I received the sacrament, but how dead was I !O God, do Thou enlighten me. May I attain what isreal in Christian experience, without running into asect, or party set of opinions." 60The narrowness of party spirit was alien to thewhole temper of his mind, and whether he abstainedfrom general society, or remarked in it what he wascompelled to blame, his judgments equally express akind and healthful tone of feeling. " To Holwood byhalf-past four Pitt riding out Lord Camden andI. Villiers came, with whom walked. He said thatMrs. Villiers was reading my book blamed my notassociating. Pitt, Canning, and Pepper Arden camein late to dinner. I attacked Canning on indecencyof Anti Jacobin. Evening he and Pitt reading classics."61 " My heart has been moved," says hisJournal of the following day, " by the society of myold friends at Pitt's. Alas ! alas ! how sad to seethem thoughtless of their immortal souls ; so wise, soacute ! I hope I felt in some degree properly on theoccasion and afterwards ; oh that I might feel more,and act more, and be more useful : may God bless methrough Christ." 62 "Pitt's birth-daylow-spiritedJournal, May 4. &> Ib. May 12.61 Diary, May 18. & Journal. May 19.1799. INTENTIONS OF GOVERNMENT. 335dined Dundas's great entertainment Duke andDuchess of Gordon, and others. I could not assimilate,and all flat and cold." MThough he mixed less with them in their socialmeetings, he was careful to avoid all causeless separation; and with Mr. Pitt especially, in spite of manypolitical differences, he maintained much of theintimacy of earlier years. " The Bishop of Lincoln,"he says, " good-natured ; but Pitt having told me ofhis thinking the great bulk of the more serious clergygreat rascals, [he is] not open, I fear. I have stated toPitt all my ideas about [the] church, its state andevils, and the only mode of providing for its security.He listened earnestly, but no decisive opinion." 61 Inthese familiar interviews, Mr. Pitt laid before himthe plans of administration, and often profited by hissuggestions. " Government," he tells Mr. Hey, 65are about to bring forward some measures for suppressingthe societies of United Englishmen andBritons ; for preventing meetings in private, with engagementsor oaths of secrecy ; for compelling alldebating and lecturing societies to furnish the meansof notoriety to the magistrate ; to secure that noprinted paper shall be circulated without its bearingthe name of some real person ; and in short for givingthe means of proceeding against the author or publisher,if really libellous : so far, I think, no man instructedby experience can object. Indeed I seenothing in all this contrary to the genuine principles<* Diary, May 28. * Ib. April 11. April 8.336 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1799.of political and social liberty. But another thing isunder consideration of great delicacy and importance.I have not time to go into it fully, yet I wish to throwout something for you to ruminate upon. Some checkis wished to be imposed on the indiscriminate right ofpreaching, which, as you perhaps know, has lately beenexercised to a much greater extent than ever before.I have not yet thought on this difficult subject for onequarter of an hour. But the only expedients whichhave been suggested seem to me on the first viewstrongly objectionable, e. g. making the registrationof conventicles not a matter of course, but empoweringthe magistrates to grant or withhold licences."Have I told you before," he writes a few monthslater, " (but do not speak of it,) that from alarm at theincreasing assiduity of the itinerant home missionaries,who, many of them the most illiterate of men, takeout their licences as dissenting teachers, and thus goabout protected by the Toleration Act, some measuresare in contemplation for limiting the privileges enjoyedunder it. I saw this storm brewing in thespring, and warned Pitt against any infringement ofperfect toleration, telling him that the principles tobe adhered to were publicity and responsibility. Towhom can the discretionary power of judging whatteachers are duly qualified be justly committed ? I.dread these gathering clouds, &C." 66As the session advanced, engagements increasedupon him. The Slave Trade Limitation Bill, which86 To Thomas Babington Esq. Nov. 5.1799. SLAVE LIMITATION BILL. 337had passed the Commons on the second of May, wasexposed to severe opposition in the upper House.He was continually occupied in providing the witnesseswho were examined at the bar, and watchingdaily over the interests of the Bill. " To Grenville'sabout Slave Limitation Bill. Drew up petitionto the Lords. Then to city to get Sierra Leonecommon seal." "House of Lords Slave Bill."Dawes and Macaulay dined with me. Then Houseof Lords Slave Limitation evidence." 67 " June4th. Did not go to the birth-day, because notwell, and also Slave Limitation Bill not popular atcourt. 5th. To Bishop of Durham's ProclamationSociety read Report. House of Lords Slave Bill.Late to Broomfield with Macaulay. 8th. At Broom-fieldall day. Season uncommonly backward, scarce abeginning of leaves on our oaks. Mr. and Mrs. Wrongsdined with us, and Mr. Homer. Spirited conversation,(Anti Jacobin, &c.) " . . " Pitt exertinghimself about our Slave Limitation Bill. ( neverknew so severe a dressing as Emanuel received beforethe whole Cabinet about it.) Pitt resolves to move tostop new lands' cultivation next year I wish it thisyear. French fleet into Toulon. My spirits low fromPitt's swaggering about finance. Put down for loan,which refused. I take to Grenville again for his fairSlave Trade conduct. Kenyon prejudiced by LordThurlow."Nothing could exceed the hearty earnestness withDiary, May 31, &c.VOL. II. Q338 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1799.which Lord Grenville defended the Limitation Bill.Unsupported by the immediate adherents of thegovernment, he was left to withstand the repeatedopposition of one member of the royal family, thecommercial sagacity of Lord Liverpool, and thesturdy bluntness of Lord Thurlow ; yet he wasready for every encounter, and maintained the conflictto the last. While this Bill was passing slowlythrough its different stages, Mr. Wilberforce was busyin the Commons with a measure prepared by LordBelgrave and himself for suppressing Sunday newspapers.It was brought forward by Lord Belgraveupon the 27th of May ; upon the 30th he successfullydefended its enactments from the gibes of Mr. Sheridan;but "it was thrown out, June 11th, upon thesecond reading. Windham's speech philosophical.Jekyll's manner profane. I did not speak. Thetemper of the House against us. The Bishop ofLondon deeply wounded at its loss." ^When the Bill was first designed, Mr. Pitt had promisedMr. Wilberforce his co-operation, but he waspersuaded by Mr. Dundas to retract his pledge, thatgovernment might not be weakened by the loss oftheir unlawful succour ; three out of the four Sundaynewspapers supporting ministry. The measure, whichhad almost succeeded in the hands of independentmen, would have been carried through triumphantlywith Mr. Pitt's concurrence.June 16th. Taken quite unwell. 19th. Better,Diary.1799. TO LORD MUNCASTER. 339but still kept unwillingly from London. Littledone but to-day serious thoughts on loving Godand Christ, and prayer Leighton, &c." w " Myframe of mind," he notes on the following Sunday ,70better, I bless God, than for some time past. Ihope that the leisure, and season, and space forrecollection afforded by my late indisposition, hasbeen the blessed means of reviving what was dead ofChristian hope and faith. Yet, oh how languidare they still ! What cause have I for earnest prayer,and diligent reading of Scripture, and constant watchfulnessand self-examination ! " " 24th. House ofLords Slave Limitation Bill. Macaulay's examinationhe ill. Dawes's evidence middling, but thelawyers charmed with his honesty." 71 " 30th. Itaken ill again suffering sadly. July 1st. Better,but still ill. 2nd. Stephen summing up before theHouse of Lords."Men in general," he writes at this time to LordLancaster, " are sanguine in their hopes, but mybarometer does not rise and fall with every accountwhich I receive from the continent. Would to God(most solemnly I say it) I could see more seriousnessat home ; then indeed I should take courage.I understand from all quarters that London wasnever before so gay, so splendid, so expensive, asthis spring. Balls upon balls given by people whowere hitherto unknown, and to whom in former daysDiary. *> Journal, June 23. TI Diary.Q 2340 LIFE OP WILBERFORCE. 1799.the great world would not have gone. We have atlength the strongest probability of carrying the SlaveLimitation Bill. There has been no small fermenton this subject, and both Pitt and Grenville havebeen conducting themselves with great spirit, andsome of our opponents have been humiliated. Haveyou read Park's book ? In one place it will make yourheart bleed ; yet the man is held out as an abolitionist,either himself, or in the tendency of his work, whichhowever Bryan Edwards superintended and edited.It pleads, trumpet-tongued, against that diabolicalsystem of wickedness and cruelty." These favourableexpectations were but short-lived.July 5th. Second reading of Slave Trade LimitationBill in the House of Lords, when 27 only to 32,and 36 proxies each." The bishops' proxies all infavour of it. " Thurlow, profane balderdash. Westmorelandcoarse. Bishop of Rochester, ill-judgedapplication of Scripture. Grenville spoke well." 72Never," he adds upon the following day, " so disappointedand grieved by any defeat." " 8th. Totown early, to meet Pitt and Grenville about SlaveTrade business discussion for an hour ; and privatewith Pitt he sanguine about carrying it next year.Grenville says we had fourteen more, but for mistakesabout proxies, and should have carried it. Pitt clearthe King has used no influence against us. Lord A.shabby, staying away and keeping two proxies.7* Diary.1799. PARLIAMENT PROROGUED. 341Stephen most earnest for our cause, but uncandidabout Pitt ; generously returning fees, 73 above 200,in the handsomest way."Parliament was prorogued upon the 12th of July,and Mr. Wilberforce retired to the comparative restof Broomfield. " The recess," he says, 74 " is beginning.Oh may I spend it well, and try more andmore to devote my understanding, and heart, and allmy faculties and powers, to the glory of God andChrist, being more and more weaned from vanity,and the love of this world's praise ; yet more and moreactive, useful, indefatigable, adorning the doctrine ofGod our Saviour. Oh for more gratitude and love.Heard to-day of a clergyman in the Isle of Wight, 75to whom my book was blessed. Oh praise, praise ! "We trust," he wrote to Mr. Newton who was leavingLondon for a while, " that you will not forget usin your rural rambles, for I doubt not you have manyan oratory where the spreading foliage forms yourcanopy, and the natural sounds of the country joinwith you in a harmonious chorus of praise. Farewell,believe me ever affectionately yours." 76 After receivingMr. Newton's answer, he writes again.Broomfield, July 27.My dear Sir,I should be very unfeeling and ungrateful, if Icould suffer so kind an effusion of the tenderness of an7- 1 For examining witnesses, &c. before the House of Lords.?< Diary, July 21. The Rev. Legs Richmond. July 13.342 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1799.absent friend to remain for a single day unanswered ;especially as, through the abundant mercy of God, Iam able to gratify your affectionate solicitude for meand mine by informing you that Mrs. W. has beensafely delivered of a daughter, and both mother andinfant are doing well. Surely I can never be sufficientlythankful for all the instances I have experiencedof the goodness, the never-failing bounty, of myGod and Saviour.I wish I could afford Mr. Taylor any satisfactoryintelligence on the subject on which you have consultedme. I have frequently endeavoured to impressthe minds of several of our bishops with theimportance, merely in a view of sound church policy,of facilitating the building of chapels of ease ; nor amI altogether without hopes of having made some impression: but I durst not presume so far on the effectI had produced, as to propose my measure as I wishedlast session of parliament. It is an object I shallkeep steadily in my eye.I remain, my dear Sir,Yours affectionately and sincerely,W. WILBERFORCE."I could not be quiet yesterday," he says the dayafter his birth-day, 77 " though I got a contemplativewalk, and even to-day I have less time thanI could wish for looking back through the year,fi Journal, Aug. 25.1799. Bromfield. 343and awakening pious gratitude for the multipliedmercies of God. How often have I been sick andrestored ! How few, if any, days of suffering, eitherbodily or mental ! My wife and child going on wellanda daughter born (July 21st) and doing well.Instances repeatedly heard of my book doing good.How gracious is God through Christ, to fill my cupwith blessings, yet not to lessen or commute in whatis still more important ! "The time which he now had at his disposal waseagerly employed in general reading; and the firstweek of the recess he was engaged in " letters,Robertson, Hume, Bible, &c." Yet he was too nearLondon to obtain the rest from business and societywhich his delicate constitution needed. " July 29th.Pitt sanguine Buonaparte quite defeated. Pitthopes a convention signed with King of Prussia, andDenmark : Sweden joining also in the measure. 30th.Was going to Holwood, but put off by Pitt, havinga large party going to Lord Romney's review tabletwo miles long, waiting on horse-back, &c. wilmingtonabout Woolwich Academy sad exhibition ofpetty tyranny among young men. Intended goingto Woolwich business, but put off the design fromillness.August 12th. Lord Romney's great fete tothe King, 5600, 78 volunteer corps, &c. 14th. Totown about Sierra Leone matters. Saw Pitt, who79 "The entertainment, to which 6500 persons sat down," &c. AnnBeg.344 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1799.returned last night. Expedition for Holland sailedyesterday. Pitt sanguine, but looking forward toother campaigns. King of Prussia worse thanever. Pitt thinks fear sanguine in hope of cooperationin the country. Littledale, Hope, &c.say no ; they behaved so ill before our soldiery.Our colony 79 in extreme peril ; I pressing Pitt to befriendus. 15th. Town betimes council of five-admiraltythen Sierra Leone House till past four.Dined at Henry Thornton's, King's Arms Yard, withMacaulay. 17th. When intending letters, Venn camein and desired me to go to the Archbishop's aboutMissionary Society. After deliberation I went andhad a long talk with the Archbishop. 80 25th. Milnerpreached his Buxton Sermon on Christianity's corruptions.All serious persons much struck with it.Afternoon, Milner and I talked about Carlyle's affair.Much difficulty about his money. Then disputedwith Milner about final perseverance. 26th. Wroteto Pitt about Carlyle. Doubts about Person'sgoing to Constantinople. Taken ill again yesterday,and sent an excuse to Pitt to put off Hoi-wood."81These repeated attacks (fever, accompanied byother debilitating symptoms) at length convinced him~ g Sierra Leone.50 The next year (July 24) he informed the Rev. John Scott of the resultof his application : that the Archbishop, whom he had urged to placehimself at the head of the society, would look on its proceedings withcandour, and regretted that he could not with propriety at once expresshis full concurrence.8' Diary.1799. TO HANNAH MORE. 345of the necessity of more entire repose. " Fraser,"he says, 82 " earnest with me to lie by, and relax andsure (just as Milner) that I shall break down otherwise."He consented therefore to leave the neighbourhoodof London, and set off, Aug. 31st, for Teston,whence he writes to Hannah More :Sept. 4.My dear Friend,The Grants and we (which comprehensiveword includes all my family) came here on Saturdaylast, and are enjoying the finest weather we havehad this year in this most beautiful place, whichnever looked more charming. Poor Mrs. Bouverie !It is affecting to think how soon the dead are forgotten.The cause of my coming here was the shamefulsuit instituted against Sir Charles. *,So you are got back to head-quarters. I dread lestthe next account should state the return of your complaints,yet I trust, though you could not be prevailedon to prolong your recess, you will attend to your healthas much as is compatible with a tolerable discharge ofyour functions. I want to know how the proceedingsagainst you go on, or whether they are laid aside, asI wish to hear. Milner and Fraser have been givingme a most serious and forcible lecture on the necessityof taking care of myself, and of living a more quiet life.Now that I experience the necessity of checking myselfin my disposition to work, I look back withDiary, Aug. 25.Q 3346 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1799.regret, not unmixed with shame and compunction, onthat period of my life when I was more equal to labour,both bodily and mental. What a mercy it is, thatwith all our sinking sense of unworthiness and unprofitableness,there is a throne of grace to which wemay resort with the assured hope of acceptance throughfaith in a Redeemer ! I rejoice in the rapid sale ofthe book.Yours ever affectionately,with kind remembrances toLieut-general Martha,W. WILBERFORCE."CHAPTER XVI.SEPTEMBER 1799 TO DECEMBER 1800.Bath Temporary . retirement Buonaparte's proposals Returnto town Scarcity Defeats an attempt to alter TolerationAct Bill against bull-baiting West Indian anticipationsClamours for peace Bognor Anxiety respectingMrs. Wilberforce Attempts to remedy the distress of thelower orders.AFTER a fortnight spent at Teston, he returned toBroomfield, " parliament being summoned on the24th of September for sending the militia to Holland.Much shocked at the idea." 1 He did not howeverawait the meeting. A recurrence of his late attacksmade it plain that he was as yet unfit for business, andgiving up the House, though much discomposed, heset off" on Milner's and Fraser's opinion " upon 13thfor Bath. Here he spent four months in full enjoymentof domestic life ; " with more quiet than eversince we married ; " 2 " getting through a good dealof work and reading." He mixed but little in society ;and only for some such specific purpose, as, " Oct. 8thevening to H.'s at Mrs. H.'s desire and hoped withDiary. * Ib.348 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1799.some serious intention, but found none. He lookedlike a skeleton, yet gay and irreligious. I tried in vainto bring him to close quarters." 3 He " dined at Ack-hom's" also " to meet Ellis, by particular desire, aboutWest Indies. He well meaning and liberal, but too faroff to close on middle term Acklom middle way." 4Here have we been," he writes to Hannah More, 5near a week. You and your house and your proceedingshave been constantly in my mind and muchin my talk since our arrival How are you inhealth ? Do not, I beg of you, omit an autumnal courseof waters. Have not I a right to pronounce thisinjunction ; I, M. P. for the county of York, who onthe very day of parliament meeting am writing to youfrom Bath, and with no intention of going up ? "Compelled for a season to give up public life, his Diaryshows that he watched quietly from his retirementthe course of its troubled waters. " Nov. 9th. Troopscome back from Holland Pitt's own doing, as soon asDuke of York thought no more to be done ; it hadbeen resolved before that 40,000 more to go over.Owen's exemplary conduct, and soldiers more religiousand moral than common. Austria and Russia defeatedin Switzerland ; Zurich taken by the French. Dukeof York's convention, and 8000 men sent to man theirfleet. Sparrow a most wonderful man, never defeated,his power of conciliating attachment and confidenceunequalled. Soldiers always shout when they see him.17th. Dismal accounts of the state of the harvest, and3 Diary, Oct. 8. * Jan. 10, 1800. 5 Bath, Sept. 21.1799. RETIREMENT AT BATH. 349of the sowing corn for next year. Fears of famine.Alas, what a world!" 6Near Bath, Nov. 5, 1799.My dear Lancaster,My history is this. Smarting from past experienceof the incessant interruptions inseparable froma residence in Bath, from the first week of my arrivalI employed myself in looking about for a villa, and myindustry was quickened when it became probable thatI might be able to spend the following three monthsat a distance from the capital ; but we searched in vainfor near a month. At length we have succeeded, and wearequartered in a middling house, which however hasthe comfort of a tolerable garden, and above all therecommendation of withdrawing us from the circle ofthe Pump-room ; and by showing that we are willingto pay a price for retirement, of procuring for us a rightto be quiet without offence. The Chancellor, PepperArden, Lord Camden, and the Archbishop of Canterburyhave all been here ; the latter is still with us."I went last Sunday to a church where he administeredthe sacrament, and heard him read the serviceinimitably." " I thank God I am certainly better,and Mrs. Wilberforce, and Mrs. Clarke, and ourlittle ones are as well as can be expected.I have just received your letter, and knowing thekeenness of your sensibility, I feel for you on the conventionof Holland. I own I never much relished the8 Diary.350 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1799.expedition, nor do I think that such schemes are theforte of our administration. I used to blame yourextravagant exaltation of the talents of our premier.I, who yet declare it as my fixed opinion that, in manyintellectual and some moral excellences, I never knewhis equal, (so far as religion is not concerned,) am notblind to his infirmities.Gisborne another book ! he deserves to live in aforest. May God bless you and yours. Kind remembrances.Yours ever,W. WILBERFORCE.P. S. I dare not be quite certain, but am nearly so,that you may send back your war-horse to his formerpeaceful pursuits, and call for the . . . What a businessthat provisional cavalry ! "Wilberforce has bought a house near Bath," saysHenry Thornton, 7 " which I a little lament, on theground of the bad economy of it j for he is a man,who, were he in Norway or Siberia, would find himselfinfested by company; since he would even producea population, for the sake of his society, in the regionsof the earth where it is the least. His heart also is solarge that he never will be able to refrain from invitingpeople to his house. The quiet and solitudehe looks to will, I conceive, be impossible, and theBath house will be troubled with exactly the sameheap of fellows as the Battersea Rise one."7 Mr. Henry Thornton to Mrs. Hannah More, Oct. 30.1799. MORAL PHILOSOPHY. 351I bless God," he tells Mr. Babington, 8 " I certainlyam much improved in health since our arrivalhere ; and we are now on a plan of great quiet, regularity,and ease. This is using the means, and Idesire to use them with cheerfulness and gratitude,leaving the event to God. We have been reading,and are still engaged on, Gisborne's Moral Philosophy ;and I am quite pleased I own to be able to say, thatI think he has fully established his charge againstPaley, and shown, with great effect, how little such aprinciple as general expediency is fit for man. If Imistake not there are some errors, and I doubt if hemight not have made his charge against Paley stillmore manifestly valid. I am glad to find he is publishingagain. While he goes on thus, I will allowhim to live in a forest. I found that so much use wasmade of my going to Jay's that I have kept away."The improvement of his health, and increase of hisknowledge, were not the only ends which he soughtto attain from this opportunity of leisure. He beganand closed it with a day of more than ordinary devotion,and his weekly Diary marks the careful watchwhich he kept over his spirit. " For some time,"he says, 9 " I have resolved to allot this day to God ;to spiritual exercises, especially in the way of humiliation.Fasting disqualifies me, God knoweth, for religiouscommunion by disordering my body, so all Ican do here is to be very temperate. I am now about,as it seems, . . but let me remember how uncertain aresNov. 5. Journal, Oct. 3.352 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1799.all earthly prospects, . . to spend near four monthsquietly, compared with my past life ; wherein I shallbe able to attend to my health, which, next to mysoul's prosperity, it seems right to make my chief object; and at the same time to study a good deal, andcultivate faculties, my neglect of which I numberamong my very criminal omissions. My objects thereforein this day of solemn supplication and (in mymeasure) fasting, are to beg God's guidance andblessing on my endeavours to spend the ensuing intervalbetween this time and the meeting of parliament,piously, usefully, wisely, holily ; first, however,humbly imploring pardon for all my past manifoldoffences, which to be particularly noted, and earnestlysupplicating for grace to deliver me from the bondageof my corruptions. Then should come praise andthanksgiving, for the multiplied and prodigious merciesand blessings of God. Then resignation and self-dedicationto God, desiring to submit myself toHim to do and suffer His will. Lastly, intercession.To prepare me for all the rest, let me open byearnestly praying to Him to bless me in my presentattempts, to chase away from me all evil spirits, andall wandering thoughts and worldly interruptions, andto soften, enlighten, warm, enlarge, and sustain myheart, and my spirits also, that I may not weary in thework, but delight in it, and rejoice in the privilege ofspending a day in communion with my God andSaviour."Last year," he says upon the 5th of January,1800. JOURNAL. 3531800, 10 " has been marked with mercies to me.. . When I look back upon the time spent here, itseems but a week or two, instead of since the 28th ofOctober ; and when I look forward to London life,how do I recoil from it ! I humbly hope that I amresolutely determined for Christ, and not solicitousabout worldly greatness, wealth, reputation. . . Andnow that I am on the point of returning to London,I would humbly pray for a large measure of grace toenable me to stand against the world, the flesh, andthe devil. I would humbly resolve through the Spiritto live by faith, and to go on diligently, devoutly,humbly, endeavouring to glorify God and benefit myfellow-creatures."In this spirit he returned to public life. " Thisweek," he says, 11 " came the account of Buonaparte'sletter, and Lord Grenville's answer. I am grieved tothe heart, fearful that I must differ, but leave off considerationuntil indispensable, and I can hear what Pittsays. Chigwell says people angry. Ellis disapproves.Burgh sure that the Union will not be carried inIreland, yet manifestly afraid."Before he returned to town he 'wrote to Lord Lancaster.Jan. 7.My dear Lancaster,Merry Christmasses ' and * happy New Years,'and all the good wishes that ever were poured forth fromthe fullest reservoir of benevolence within the heart of10 Journal. " Diary, Jan. 12.354 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1800.man ; or rather which, like some rivers, gushed outspontaneously with a force not to be resisted ; all thesehave inundated me, and still I remain dry and silent.Oil we know resists water more than any thing, andif I were polished all over with the courtly varnish ofSt. James's, it might be accounted for ; but that aman who has not shown his face at court for theseeighteen months, should thus suffer his friends tohave so slippery a hold of him, is wonderful indeed,and not to be accounted for on the ordinary principlesof human depravity. Yet, though so longsilent, I have not been unfeeling, and though I havekept my emotions to myself, I have been warmedwith cordial good wishes for the happiness of you andyours. And now, though somewhat of the latest, acceptmy hearty prayers for your welfare here andhereafter.The day of meeting approaches. You ask mewhat is then to come forward. I know not positively,though I suspect that the Income Tax Bill will be oneof our first matters ; and that the recent correspondencebetween the King and Buonaparte will find ussome discussion. On this head I would be loth toform a hasty opinion. But I must say I was shockedat Lord Grenville's letter ; for though our governmentmight feel adverse to any measure which mightappear to give the stamp of our authority to Buonaparte'snew dignity, yet I must say that, unless theyhave some better reason than I fear they possess forbelieving that he is likely to be hurled from his1800. BUONAPARTE'S LETTER TO THE KING. 355throne, it seems a desperate game to play to offend,and insult, and thereby irritate this vain man beyondthe hope of forgiveness. Alas ! alas ! Lancaster, myheart aches. However there is a perfect home oflove, and peace, and happiness, and we are invited tothe enjoyment of it. Let every fresh proof thereforeof the unsatisfactoriness of human things have theeffect of urging us forward towards this one true pointof rest with renewed energy.Believe me ever affectionately yours,W. Wilberforce."I forbear to form an opinion," he wrote ten dayslater to a friend who applied for information, " until Ishall have heard from Mr. Pitt the principles onwhich he justifies Lord Grenville's answer. It naturallyindeed suggests itself, that supposing Buonaparteto have tottered on his pedestal, our government,by indicating a disposition to treat with him, wouldhave fixed him in his place. If therefore there appeareda considerable probability of his fall, it mightbe advisable to reject his offer flatly. But as I saidbefore, I can only guess ; I am as yet uninstructed inparticulars, and I therefore pause." 12He reached the neighbourhood of London upon the23rd of January, two days after parliament had met ;and on the 24th " wrote to Pitt, and he sent for meto town. I saw him. Till then I was strongly disposedto condemn the offer of Buonaparte's offer toiTo F. Hare Naylor Esq. Tau. 16.356 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1800.treat; greatly shocked at it. He shook me. 27th.To town for House, but business put off on account ofPitt's cold. Called at Bankes's and discussed politics.Slowly came over to approve of the rejection ofBuonaparte's offer, though not of Lord Grenville'sletter. Gisborne and Babington both did so moreclearly." 13TO THE RIGHT HON. W. PITT.My dear Pitt,I feel the force of what you urged on Friday,superadded to my own reflections, which you willbelieve were scarcely unblessed, and though I confess,frankly, that I should have rejoiced if you could haveseen it safe and proper to consent to negociategen-rally, yet I yield to the considerations you stated,and to the duty of not contradicting those in executivegovernment in whom one has been used to repose confidence,in a case especially of such capital importance,without being at least perfectly sure that theyare wrong, and that I am right myself. I hope theaddress will not go into particulars : indeed I presumenot, as the message does not.Believe me, my dear Pitt,Yours ever,W. WILBERFORCE.Battersea Rise, Monday morning.I hope you are yourself quite well again to-day."is Diary.1800. SUPPORTS ADDRESS. 357Having arrived at this conclusion, though with suchreluctance, he felt bound in support of administrationto avow it in the House. With this speech in thedebate of Feb. 17th, he pronounces himself "extremelydiscontented." 14 " Pitt," he says, " sanguinethat Russians and Austrians quite well agreed, andAustrians persuaded by Lord Into to acceptRussian forces ; yet within a week, Russians marchinghome, quarrelling with Austrians. Some relianceplaced upon the Chouans, but nothing heard of themsince. Lord St. Helen's quite blaming ministry; soalso Lord Teignmouth. Bankes, Henry, and I longdoubtful, but on the whole agreeing. I too earnestand strong in speaking, so as to wear the face of beingmore warlike than I really was.""I need not, I hope, assure you," he wrote to a friend,whose high opinion of Buonaparte had led him to regretMr. Pitt's decision, " how long and anxiously I ponderedover the question. I do not recollect any publicmeasure on which, when it became absolutely necessaryfor me to take one side or the other, I so muchdoubted which was right. But it often happens, thatwhen, after painful deliberation, the mind is at lengthmade up, and an opinion is to be declared, that scalewhich perhaps preponderated but by a single grain,obtains the whole notice ; inasmuch as the object is tostate the result of cogitation, (to use a good old-fashionedword,) not the particulars of which it consisted,with all the shifting, and hesitations, andDiary.358 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1800.balancing, and counterbalanced of the mind ; and tothe world therefore we may appear ten times moredecided and strong than we really are. So it has beenwith me in the present instance. I sicken at the campaignwhich is breaking out, but I am not clearenough to warrant my actively interfering or concurringto oppose those ministers whose system I havehitherto supported, and whose leader has beenbrought to consent to treat for peace with a sinceredesire of effecting it, (I speak from unequivocalproofs, which have fallen under my own notice,) andwho still does not talk the violent language used bysome of his colleagues. You will agree with me, I amsure, that except in a very clear case we should notinterfere legislatively, and take the management ofaffairs out of the hand of the executive power." 15In the debate of February i3th, upon the Suspensionof the Habeas Corpus, he again supported ministers inaspeech on which he looked back with less dissatisfaction.Other business now multiplied upon him.Much occupied," he says, Feb. 17th, " about thescarcity ; urging government, which sadly torpid andtardy Sheffield and Speaker our way. King butmiddling. Dutch expedition debate. Governmentmade good their point. Canning clever . . genius. but too often speaking, and too flippant and ambitious.All things rising in price. What shockingwork, Grattan and Carry fighting during debate, andCrack putting the sheriff into a ditch, who stoppingTo F. Hare Naylor Esq.1800. SCARCITY DREADED. 359them. All people disapproving of Grenville's uncivilanswer, though in general approving of rejection ofoverture. Pitt too much encouraging Canning ; ofwhom, however, a sad envy prevails. House of Lords'agreement, moved by Archbishop of Canterbury,drawn up by Lord Auckland, who had not told colleagues.Grenville and Chancellor scorning, andsaying parliament had better have let it alone, andthat scarcity exaggerated. Poor Burgh almost madabout the Union. I am fearful of his doing or writingsome extravagant thing." " March 16th. The lastfortnight sadly disturbed canal and other businesspotatoes, fish, &c." 16I have been striving," he tells Lord Lancaster,to prevail on my Yorkshire manufacturers to makeherrings half cured a material article of their consumption.You cannot well imagine how much prejudicemust be encountered in such an attempt." 1TThe prospect of increasing scarcity rendered this agloomy season. " We know not what times arecoming on, but if God be for us, who can be againstus ? Oh may I therefore lay up treasure in heaven,and wait upon the Lord." " Now that He seems aboutto try His people, what cause have I to pray, andgird up the loins of my mind ! May I grow in grace,and become more ' meet for the inheritance of thesaints in light.' How amiable is the simple, childlikespirit of Lady Catherine Graham ! " " I have muchbefore me, oh that God would enable me, and move16 Diary, March 16. '? Letter to Lord Lancaster.360 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1800.the hearts of others : doubtless I might better hopeit, if I were deeply earnest in prayer." 18The plan which he was most anxious to persuade theminister to sanction, throughout this time of scarcity,would have proved no less politic than it was humane.Instead of meeting the present emergency, increased asit was by the sudden change of prices, by the ordinarymachinery of Poor's Rates, and so establishing a dangerousprecedent, he would have made an extraordinarygrant for cases of extreme distress : but he couldnot prevail. " I am much grieved at Pitt's languorabout the scarcity. They will do nothing effectual.Great sufferings of the West Riding people. I dreadlest God have given our government over to a spiritof delusion that they should think of attacking theDissenters and Methodists ! I fear the worst. I amvery doubtful if we had not better have consentedto treat. Chouans seem melted away Russia goneAustria too perhaps. Pitt I am convinced has notrust in me on any religious subject. To see thisdesign drawn out in a bill ! Never so much movedby any public measure." 19This was the impression of a moment of despondency: for though one at least to whose opinion Mr.Pitt naturally deferred on questions which concernedreligion, was continually on the watch to lessen Mr.Wilberforce's influence, it was still great, and in thisvery instance successful. " There are ideas," he tellsMr. Hey, " of materially abridging the privileges ensJournal, March 16, and April 13. > 9 Diary, March 16.1800. TOLERATION ACT THREATENED. 3G1toyed under the Toleration Act. I am persuaded thatrestraints would quicken the zeal of the Methodistsand Dissenters to break through them, that prosecutionswould be incessant, and that the prevalence of thepersecuted opinions and the popularity of the persecutedteachers would be the sure result. I hope stillthat I may be able to prevent any strong measurefrom being brought forward. I am not at liberty toopen to you." 20 Two days afterwards he writes, 21 " Allon the important subject on which I lately wrote toyou remains in statu quo ; except that the Methodistshave got to the knowledge of some measures beingin contemplation, through Michael Angelo Taylor atDurham. I have kept them quiet. I am more andmore clear that if the measure does go forward, theeffects will be most important."I told Mr. Pitt that I was ready to assentto one restriction, namely, that no one should exercisethe office of a teacher without having receiveda testimonial from the sect to which he shouldbelong. This would put a stop to the practicewhich I am told prevails at Salisbury, and (as Iheard from Mr. Jay the dissenting minister) at Bath,of a number of raw, ignorant lads going out onpreaching parties every Sunday. I fear the Bishop ofLincoln (this is whispered to your private ear in thestrictest confidence) will renew his attempt nextyear. If such a bill as was lately in contemplationTo W. Hey Esq. March 29.*' To Thomas Arlington Esq. April 2.VOL. II. R362 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1800.should pass, it would be the most fatal blow both tochurch and state, which has been struck since theRestoration.I believe I before told you, and I do not retractthe sentiment on further reflection, that I place moredependence on Mr. Pitt's moderation and fairness ofmind, (though less in this instance than in any other,)than either on the House of Lords or Commons. Inshort, so utterly ignorant in all religious matters isthe gay world, and the busy, and the high, and thepolitical, that any measure government should proposewould be easily carried. I find no success in my endeavoursto convince my friends on the bench, of theexpediency of facilitating the building of new churcheswith a right of patronage. More than once I haveproposed in private a general law to that effect;but it would answer no good end to bring forwardsuch a measure in the House of Commons, withouthaving previously secured support for it." 22Amongst his private papers, there appears a full statementof the great service to religious peace which herendered on this occasion. "A member 23 of parliament,who on his accession to a large fortune, by his father'sdeath, discontinued the practice of the legal profession,but who acted as a magistrate with a considerable senseof his own importance, got into a quarrel with a personwho came to be licensed as a dissenting teacher.Finding the applicant very ignorant, and somewhatforward, he at first resisted the man's claim, but To W. Hey Esq. Sept. 7. 3 Michael Angelo Taylor Esq.1800. CONFERENCE WITH PITT. 3G3covering that the law clearly entitled him to a licenceon paying the specified fee of Is. or Gd., he warmlyexclaimed, that if such was the law then, it shouldnot so continue. Accordingly he considered howbest to introduce some discretionary power to magistrates,in the granting or withholding of dissentingministers' licences. His purpose reached the ears ofthe Methodists and Dissenters of the city which herepresented in parliament, and he soon found that ifhe should persist in his endeavour, it would be at theexpense of his seat. His intention had perhaps beenrather the effervescence of the moment, than thedeliberate result of that consideration which so seriousa subject might well require. He set himself thereforeto devise how best to get out of the difficulty,and, through what medium I never heard, he actuallyprevailed on Mr. Pitt's government, indeed on Mr.Pitt himself, to adopt his measure. The precisenature of the regulations I cannot recollect withcertainty, but I am positively sure, that they tendedmaterially to restrict the freedom hitherto enjoyed byProtestant Dissenters, and a fine for the first offence,and imprisonment for the second, were the sanctionsby which they were to be enforced. The intelligencethat some such measure was about to be proposed toparliament, reached the ears of some of the dissentingministers, from one of whom I believe it was that Ireceived the first intimation of the design.I lost no time in conferring with Mr. Pitt on thesubject, but he had been strongly biassed in favour ofR 2364 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1800.the measure by Bishop Prettyman, on whom I urgedin vain the serious consequences that must infalliblyensue. I well remember stating to him my firm persuasion,that within a few weeks after the passing ofthe intended law, several of the dissenting ministersthroughout the kingdom, most distinguished for talentsand popularity, would be in prison ; and I urged onhim, that even supposing them not to be actuated bya sense of duty, for which I myself gave them creditorto be cheered by the idea of suffering for righteousness'sake, they would be more than compensated forall the evils of imprisonment by their augmentedpopularity. The Bishop, however, would not assentto my view of the case, and finding Mr. Pitt intendedto bring the measure forward, I begged I might havea full confidential discussion of the subject. Accordinglywe spent some hours together at a tete-astute supper,and I confess I never till then knew how deep aprejudice his mind had conceived against the class ofclergy to whom he knew me to be attached.It was in vain that I mentioned to him Mr. Robinsonof Leicester, Mr. Richardson of York, Mr. Milnerof Hull, Mr. Atkinson of Leeds, and others of similarprinciples ; his language was such as to imply that hethought ill of their moral character, and it clearlyappeared that the prejudice arose out of the confidencehe reposed in the Bishop of Lincoln. I rememberproposing to him, to employ any friend whose mindshould not already have received a bias on either side,to visit the several places I had mentioned, to inquire1800. HE DEFEATS THE PLAN. 365into their characters, and to ascertain the principlesand conduct of their adherents, adding my confidentpersuasion that both their moral and political principleswould be found favourable to the peace and goodorder of society ; indeed I went further, and allegedthat they were in general friendly to his administration,from believing these to be promoted by its continuance.All however was of no avail, and all I couldobtain from Mr. Pitt was an assurance that the measureshould not be actually introduced without hisgiving me another opportunity of talking the matterover with him. Happily that opportunity neveroccurred ; of course I was in no hurry to press for it ;and the attempt never was resumed ; but some yearsafter, when Lord Sidmouth's memorable bill was inprogress, which excited such an immense ferment andproduced a vast number of petitions, by which it wasdefeated in the House of Lords, Lord Pedestal (formerlySir John Mitford) stated, that he well rememberedthat during Mr. Pitt's administration a strongerthan the bill then in progress had been in contemplation,and that he did not know why it had beendropped. I must say, considering every thing, I havealways been extremely thankful for any share I hadin preventing the introduction of this scheme." S4He was much " hurt," he tells Mrs. Hannah Morethis session, 55 at the defeat of another measure bearingupon the moral interests of the people. " Sir WilliamPulteney, who brought forward the bill to suppressMS. Mem. * To Mrs. Hannah More, April 25.366 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1800.bull-baiting at the instance of some people in thecountry, (I declined because I am a common hack insuch services, but I promised to move it if nobody elsewould,) argued it like a parish officer, and never oncementioned the cruelty. No summonses for attendancewere sent about as is usual. In consequence not oneThornton, nor many others, were present, any morethan myself. I had received from some county magistratesan account of barbarities practised in this generouspastime of Windham's, which would be surpassedonly by the tortures of an Indian warrior. A Surreymagistrate told a friend of mine yesterday, that somepeople met for a boxing match, and the magistratesproceeding to separate them, they threw their hatsinto the air, and declaring Mr. Windham had defendedboxing in parliament, called out, ' Windhamand Liberty.' A strange and novel association, bythe way ! Canning, to do him justice, was ashamedof himself, and told me when I showed him theaccount of cruelties, (which Windham read coldly,)that he had no idea of the real nature of the practicehe had been defending. Alas ! alas ! we bear about usmultiplied plague spots, sure indicative of a fallingstate."This last week," he says, May 4th, " a veryhurrying one in parliament little Scripture readingand retirement wool business, consultations, &c.Worried about it from getting up to bed time andlatish Houses. I ought to be thankful for beingcarried so well through. Poor G.'s scrape hard1800. HIS SISTER'S MARRIAGE. 367usage the more felt because he not used to it. Iam pretty well. The children with the hoopingcough." 26A letter from Rossi Castle' he writes at thesame time to Mr. Ross, " finding me stewing in thiscrowded and dusty city in the middle of a delightfulsummer day, excites a natural longing for lakes, andmountains, and shady retreats, and other such luxuriesof nature. But we have all our several posts,and, whether in town or country, * the time is short,'and we have much to do in it." w The marriage of hissister, Mrs. Clarke, to Mr. Stephen, had recentlyoccupied his thoughts. " I trust," he writes, " itwill please God to bless the union. Stephen is animproved and improving character, one .of thosewhom religion has transformed, and in whom it hastriumphed by conquering some strong natural infirmities.He has talent, great sensibility, and generosity.My chief objection was, that it seemed likemy sister's beginning life again, and going to sea oncemore in a crazy vessel. However, God is a Godof mercy and loving-kindness, and Christ is a tenderMaster, ever ready to relieve and comfort us." 28West Indian matters too had engaged him much.The Abolition had not been proposed in parliamentthis session, because the " West Indians had talkedof a compromise," ^ by which he hoped to " be ableto obtain a suspension of the Slave Trade for five orDiary, May 4. To Hercules Ross Esq. May 6.w To Miss Mary Bird, May 19. Diary, Feb. 17.368 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1800.seven years." 30 In this hope he was after much negociationdisappointed. " I have suffered," he says,(June 6th,) " great chagrin on the subject of the SlaveTrade. Pitt listened too easily to the assurance ofseveral of the principal of the West Indian proprietors,who declared themselves willing to support a suspensionfor five years ; till at length, when we hoped allwas going on prosperously, a public meeting of theWest Indian body, at which a strong anti-abolitionspirit was manifested, shook the resolution of ourtimid converts, and all, except Sir William Young,turned round. I wished Pitt to come forward withthe measure notwithstanding, and tried to prevail onDundas to support us in it. But the latter, thoughextremely angry at the Jamaica people, who, in a reportrecently come over, talk big and dispute our rightto abolish, &c. will not, I fear, consent to support usnow. Lord Grenville is very earnest for laying a taxon all negroes imported into the islands, to be appliedin the encouragement of population, but I am clearthat the regulation would be futile. Negroes haverisen in price from 76 to 120 per head, and yetthey have been bought in greater numbers than ever,so that on the whole any tax would be of no avail.Pitt declares that he will, by an order of council, stopthe importation of negroes into the new settlements,into which three-fourths, speaking loosely, of thewhole importation have been brought." 3l30 Letter to Thomas Babington Esq. April 2.31 To the Rev. T. Gisborne, June 6.1800. HOPE OF GENERAL ABOLITION. 369Yet though this attempt at compromise had failed,he took a cheerful view of the prospects of the cause.If you knew all I do' he tells Mr. Stephen, " youwould think you saw the streaks of light indicating theopening day, and rewarding all our past sufferings, andelucidating the way of Heaven." These cheeringanticipations were closely connected with a plan whichhe thus explains to one whom, from personal acquaintancewith Napoleon, he thought alle to assistmaterially in its accomplishment.TO F. HARE Taylor ESQ.July 5.My dear Sir, N *I have long had it in contemplation, whenever anegociation for peace should take place, to endeavourto effect through its means the general Abolition of theSlave Trade. All the "powers which carry on thatdetested traffic, except Denmark, (which has agreedto abolish in 1800,) and America, (which has done itin part,) will be implicated in the negociation ; and thegrand argument used against us having been, thatGreat Britain's relinquishment of the Slave Tradewould only be the surrendering of it to other countries,whereas if others would join us they would notobject, our opponents on their own ground would beforced to give up the contest.Now I cannot doubt but that there would be onour part a willingness to meet half way any pro3370 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1800.position for the Abolition of the Slave Trade ; butI fear lest I should not be able to obtain an instructionto our diplomatic agent to make the proposal.You know what different opinions there are in theCabinet on that subject. Would I were the starlingto hollow ' Abolition ' in the Grand Consul's ear. Ithink I remember your saying that the subject hadattracted his notice ; oh that he might be sensible ofthe opportunity Providence puts into his hands ; itwould be worth almost the endurance of all that ispast to effect such an object. There would be theless reason against his bringing forward the proposition,because even granting, (what I utterly deny,)that on the most abstracted mercenary principles,the Slave Trade is profitable to a nation having WestIndian colonies, the state of the French islands precludestheir being contaminated with such bloodyprofit. This is a topic upon which I should havemuch to say in conversation, but I have thrown outenough, I hope and believe, to excite in your mindsomething of that warmth, which by the discussion Ihave generated in my own.Believe me to bevery sincerely yours,W. WILBERFORCE."The war meantime proceeded ; and men's eyes werefixed with changing hopes upon its various incidents."Government," he writes, " have received an accountindirectly, to .which they give credit, but not implicitly1800. TO LORD Minister. 371or very sanguinely, of the Austrians having gained agreat victory in Swabia. This would be important. Iam tired of war, and trust there will be an end of it inafew months." 32 But events soon wore a differentaspect."July 1.My dear Lancaster,How speedily are our prospects clouded ! Thiscapture of the Danish frigate is a very awkwardbusiness, and we must succumb, (to borrow thelanguage which you have been lately used to,) or weshall be at war I fear with the three northern powers ;and Buonaparte would desire no more. I rather fearthis incident may prompt the Grand Consul to askhigher terms than he would otherwise have required,and thereby prevent a peace. With you I dread thatevent ; strong as France must be for future attack,yet the continuance of the war would be still worse.I hear that the West Riding of Yorkshire is so pacific,that if a meeting should be called, ninety-nine outof a hundred would petition. The wool business andPitt's demeanour (which last is still rankling) may inpart have occasioned this, but it is what must be expectedafter so long a continuance of war.How I pant for Windermere and Derwent-water !What delight should I feel in carrying my dearest wifeto that land of wonders and beauties ! But I think I canturn my time to better account, and give up the idea.The hospitable hall of Lancaster forms a part of thex To Lord Lancaster, June 7.372 LIFE OF Wilberforce. 1800.picture, which in my view of the lakes my imaginationconjures up. Le terns viendra, I trust, when we shallhave a session which will end in May. At the close ofone I always feel as if I might have done muchwhich has been neglected. Alas ! alas ! how littleshall we be satisfied with our exertions, when wecome to form an adequate idea of what has been donefor us ! But I must conclude. We have been somelittle time at Mr. Stephen's, close to the Thames, andhave at least once every day gone upon the water.Mrs. Wilberforce, as well as myself, delights in it.Ever affectionately yours,W. WILBERFORCE."My Yorkshire friends," he tells Lord Camden,begin to be very impatient for peace. I trust thisnorthern squall will not prevent the settling of theelements into that calm which is so desirable. Aboveall other things, it is to be wished that governmentshould now carry the public along with them."Though much pressed for time," he writes to Mr.Bankes, 33 " I will at least send you a few words to informyou (of course under that degree of secrecy whichthe nature of the case requires) that government havereceived despatches from Vienna, dated the 19th ofJune, when they accepted our subsidy of a million forkeeping up an army of 200,000 men, and expressedtheir determination not to make peace without ourbeing included. They had not, however, heard ofM July 4.1800. TO HENRY BANKES ESQ. 373the defeat of Melts, though they knew of Buonaparte'shaving passed the Alps. How far the reverse theyhave experienced will change their resolutions, timemust show. I can scarcely conceive Melts (whohowever had with him a confidential adviser) wouldhave dared to make such a convention, if he had notbeen apprized of his court's willingness to make agreat sacrifice as the price of peace.What is most important for your guidance andmine, is, that Pitt's language is just what we couldwish, firm, but temperate. He is more sanguine thanI am in his expectations, or rather in his opinions, thatthe Austrians could still drive Buonaparte out of thefield, if they would exert themselves. But there seemsa proper sense of the probable necessity of makingpeace, with a disposition to assume a firm aspect, inorder to make it on tolerable terms. I believe hewill still propose the subsidy, but of course take precautionsagainst its being paid an hour before thetime of the Austrians performing their part of thecontract."Summer was now far advanced, but the House wasstill sitting, and this long continuance of businessgreatly exhausted his strength. " I had seriousthoughts," he says, July 23rd, 34 " of attending theassizes this summer, but parliamentary business is notyet quite at an end, and we have sat so late that Ishall have but a short time for ' pruning my feathersand letting grow my wings.' In truth, both body andTo Ralph Creyke Esq.374 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1800.mind with me, and understanding too, call for a littlequiet after the incessant turmoil and drudgery inwhich they have been engaged for six or seven months."I feel myself a good deal shattered, and reminded ofthe necessity of more regularity and care than I haveof late observed." 35 " I pant for a little quiet, and Ithink I feel a more than ordinary languor permanently ;however the promises of the gospel fail not, yetwhenever I look back upon the little I have hithertodone in life, I long to be more executive in whatremains." 36 Upon the 22nd of August he was on hisroad into the country.Leatherhead, Aug. 22.My dear Lancaster,My life has been one continual worry for sometimepast, and I quite pant for a little rest. I havebeen paying and receiving a few visits round the capital,though still a bankrupt in civilities ; and we arenow on our way to Bognor Rocks, that my wife andthe children may breathe sea air, after repeated illnesses.In the beginning of October we design tomove to Bath. A box full of unanswered lettersaccompanies me, but before I enter on the task of replyingto them, I will break the long silence I haveobserved to you.I have been much amused at the idea of the Drinhis full splendour, his tail spread, and his crestreared, and of the various sensations he must haveTo Samuel Smith Esq. Aug. 19. * To Henry Thornton Esq.1800. BOGNOR. 375excited in your mind. I think you would hardly beso much imposed upon, as to conceive all the blusterquite to my taste. Yet there are many good qualities,great generosity, and frankness, (enough of that you'llsay,) and disinterestedness, and real benevolence. Anunderstanding only disparaged by affecting eloquencewhere plain speaking would have been preferable, butreally acute and occasionally powerful expression.There is also a fund of unfeigned zeal for religion andmorality. In short, were mankind in general such, itwould be indeed a noisy world, but far happier than itis. All this is to your private ear, of course. You knowhis place of residence, and that I am often there. Itis no more than justice to him to say that he is, takingall together, the best filler of a pulpit in that largecircle. The political horizon is very gloomy, and wesadly deserve chastisement. This consideration lowersmy spirits, yet Providence has been abundantly graciousto us, and we are not treated as we deserve.Every blessing attend you and yours. Rememberthe one thing needful, my kind friend, and believeme ever most truly yours,W. Wilberforce."Soon after his arrival he wrote to Hannah More."Bognor, Aug. 29.My dear Friend,I am in a course of answering a box full ofletters, which have long reproached me for my negli-376 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1800.hence, but let me steal for awhile from them, andtheir comparatively uninteresting subjects, and refreshmyself by a few minutes' intercourse with you. IndeedI am ashamed of not having sooner replied to yourlast very interesting report. But first a few words ofmy own proceedings.We spent three or four days with Lady Landgrave,thence we came back to Broomfield to receivea visit or two, and at length, with no small difficulty,we got off with my budget at my back, and by slowbut laborious journeys arrived at this quiet place onSaturday last. Henry joined us on Wednesday, andMrs. Thornton and Miry yesterday. So here wearereading and discussing, and through the mercyand overflowing goodness of God, enjoying ourselvesnot a little. We seem only too happy. It reallyshocks me to think that the flames of war still rage,and that there are multitudes who do not get off foran additional ten per cent, paid to the tax-gatherer,but who are subject to all its alarms, and dangers,and miseries. Oh be thankful that a gracious Providencehas cast your part in pursuits so different.You are bold people to be thus flying at new game.Yet I give you so much credit for discretion, as tobelieve you would not be too adventurous, and withoutspirit nothing is to be done. I am really muchobliged to you for your kind frankness in calling onme for my debt ; I will send you 50 in a day or two,indeed I have taken measures for it immediately.Poor Mrs. Montagu is gone. It is an awful1800. TO JAMES STEPHEN ESQ. 377migration ! Our friends were indefatigably assiduousin their care of her. Our whole house joins in everykind remembrance to you, Lieutenant-general Patty,and the whole family. May God bless you, guideyou, and keep you. It is the cordial wish and frequentprayer of youraffectionate and sincere friend,W. Wilberforce."What blessings," he says to Mr. Stephen, 37 " dowe enjoy in this happy country ! I am reading ancienthistory, and the pictures it exhibits of the vices andmiseries of man, fill me with mixed emotions of indignation,horror, and gratitude ; and when I look on thewater, and consider that the sea only is interposedbetween me and France . . ! But I am much pressedfor time, and have no leisure for lucubrations ; so tobusiness.You may remember obtaining from your friendan account of the great numbers of slaves which wereimported into the new settlements. But this is intelligenceof which we can make no use. Can youput me in the way of speedily getting any tolerablyaccurate account of the slaves which for two or threeyears back have been annually carried to those settlements.It is an argument to be pressed on those whoare unassailable by higher principles, that the Britishought not to invest much capital in colonies, whichmay probably have to be surrendered on the return ofV Aug. 25.378 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1800.peace. It is requisite for urging this consideration,that we should have the account I desire. Thecustom-house returns with which Irving was furnished,would lead one to suppose, that not above one-eighthof the number stated by your friend had beenimported. But the latter account is clearly right.I earnestly beg you not to lose a moment in the commission;and as soon as you can report progress,whether it be information, or that no information canbe procured, let me have a line from you."Since we have been here," Mr. Henry Thorntontells Mrs. H. More, 38 " we have been chiefly readinghistory, and talking with Wilberforce over manypoints, left short through the hurry of our Londonlife." This rest in the bosom of his family and withthe society of Mr. and Mrs. Henry Thornton, wasmost refreshing to his spirit. " We are all," he says, 39Sept. 1 Hh, " I thank God pretty well, and living morequietly than common, to my no small satisfaction."But this repose was not to last long. " Perhaps,"wrote Dr. Milner, (Sept. 19th,) "these wonderfulsmiles are for some future trial : continue to watch."This very letter found him in the deepest anxiety,which he thus imparted to Hannah More.Bognor, Sept. 27.My dear Friend,I am unwilling you should learn from any otherpen, that it has pleased God to visit my dearest Mrs.K Oct. 1. 39 To Samuel Smith Esq.1800. ALARM FOR MRS. WILBERFORCE. 379Wilberforce with a very dangerous fever. I am toldthe final issue is not likely to be very speedy, but thatfrom the violence of the outset, I have every reasonfor apprehension, though not for despair. But oh, mydear friend, what an unspeakable blessing to be ablehumbly to hope that to my poor wife, death would beatranslation from a world of sin and sorrow, to aregion of perfect holiness and never-ending happiness !How soothing also to reflect that her sufferings arenot only allotted but even measured out by a Being ofinfinite wisdom and goodness, who loves her, I trust !aye, better than a dear child is loved by an earthlyparent. I am sure you will all feel for me, and prayfor me, and for my poor dear sufferer.Mr. and Mrs. Henry Thornton are all kindness andconsideration for us. I am not sufficiently used to sickbeds,and it is extremely affecting to me to hear herwildness and delirious distresses, and sometimes fancies,mixed with her usual kind looks and gentle acquiescence.May we all be ready, and at length all meet inglory ; meanwhile, watch and pray, be sober, be vigilant; strive to enter in, and assuredly we shall not beshut out. I had used to say such words as these, notI hope wholly without meaning ; but how much moreforcibly are they impressed on the mind by the near viewof death to which I am brought ! God bless you all.The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God,and the fellowship of the Holy Ghost, be with tts all.Yours always,W. WILBERFORCE."380 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1800.You will I am sure," he tells another friend threedays later, " hear with no little emotion, that it haspleased God to visit my dearest wife with a verydangerous fever. I had, I own, nearly dismissed allhope. But to-day matters wear a more favourableaspect, though Dr. Fraser, who is with us, (havingmost kindly hurried down on my first imperfect statement,which conveyed to his discernment the idea ofno time being to be lost,) tells us not to he elated, butstill to be prepared for the worst. What an unspeakableconsolation and support is it in such a momentto entertain full confidence that my dearest wife hasmade her peace with God, and is not unprepared forthe awful summons ! I thank God, I am enabled tosubmit to His chastisement (too much, alas ! deserved)without murmuring, and I humbly hope with resignation,I would say cheerfulness and gratitude, to Hisholy will. He best knows what is good for us ; and ifour sufferings here serve in any degree, by rousing usfrom sloth, and urging us to cleave to Him moreclosely, to increase the happiness of eternity, wellmay we exclaim in the triumphant language of theapostle, ' Our light affliction, which is but for a moment,worketh for us a far more exceeding and eternalweight of glory.'<l But I must stop. I am sure you will feel forus. The Dean and the Stephens are come; and theHenry Thornton, who were with us, are all kindnessand assiduity. What a blessing to have such1800. HIS COMPOSURE. 381friends ! Kindest remembrances. Under every circumstance,I am yours affectionately,W. Wilberforce.P. S. My dear wife has been delirious ever sincewe knew she was seized. How little could we haveattended to her spiritual state if it had been beforeneglected, and we had wished to prepare for death !What a practical lesson to us all !"Wilberforce tells me," wrote his friend HenryThornton to Hannah More, " that he has written toyou a few lines on this distressing subject of Mrs.Wilberforce's illness. Poor fellow ! he cleaves now tohis old friends, and he finds a relief in employing alittle time in writing to them, which is what we encourage,and especially as the sick-room is not theplace either for him or for her. He seems more softenedand melted than terrified or agonized, and showsthe truly Christian character under this very severeand trying dispensation."The issue of the fever was long doubtful, nor was itbefore the 14th of October, that he was able to thankGod for any decided improvement. The tone of hisown feelings throughout this painful time, shows theheight to which he had attained in the school of Christ.Truly had he learned to take patiently the loving correctionsof his heavenly Father. " Mr. Wilberforce,"writes Mrs. Henry Thornton, 40 " has behaved greatly, ifTo Mrs. Hannah More.382 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1800.one may so say of a Christian ; he is now very calm,and waiting the event with much submission and quietness."" My mind, I thank God, is very composed.O Lord, take not Thy Holy Spirit from me : take awaythe heart of stone, and give me a heart of flesh ; thatunder Thy chastisements, I may lift up to Thee ahumble, reverential, and even thankful eye, and desirethat Thy correction may work its due effect, and keepme closer to Thee for strength, and light, and warmth,and all things. Much affected and struck to-day inthe address, Rev. iii. to the Laodicean lukewarmchurch, (too much my own condition,) with the wordsof kindness at the close * As many as I love, I rebukeand chasten ; be zealous, therefore, and repent.' " 41"I am much struck," he writes to a friend, 42 withwhom he was soon after called to sympathize, " bythis fresh visitation. Alas ! we go on commonlyin a course of too uniform and uninterrupted comfort.Read St. Paul's list of sufferings. Yet let us praiseGod, and extract good from present evil, and turntemporary suffering into everlasting happiness."Carefully did he scrutinize his own spirit when thehand of God was taken from him, lest he should loseany of the blessing of affliction. " I have heard,"he writes to Mr. Hey, 43 " of all your affectionatesympathy with me in my late heavy trial. God hasin His chastisement remembered mercy; and my belovedwife is spared to me, and is gradually recoveringher health and strength. May I improve from the41 Journal, Sept. 28. To Thomas Babington Esq. Oct. 20.1800. RETURN TO LONDON. 383discipline through which I have gone ; but it is trulymelancholy and humiliating to observe, how thestrong feelings of the mind in the moments of sufferingdecay and grow cold after it is over. This hardnessof heart towards God, in spite of the uniform and unvaryingdictates of the judgment, is a sad proof ofcorruption."His stay at Bognor was not much prolonged. Ascanty harvest had increased the general discontent ;and parliament was summoned to meet for the despatchof business on the 11th of November; "ministry,"he says, 44 " being, I fear, influenced not merely by thescarcity, but by a warlike disposition. My heart issick at so much misery and sin, and when I considerwhat chastisement we deserve at God's hands on theone side, and contemplate the storms I see brewingon the other, I begin to tremble."I will follow your advice, and read Adam Smithagain. I have already sent for him ; meanwhile letme beg you to learn for me in your circle what wasthe produce of the last harvest compared with commonyears, and what quantity of grain was unconsumedwhen this year's stock came in. I shallendeavour to obtain similar information from differentparts of England." These inquiries he now madein every quarter. " I wish you would give me yourthoughts concerning the high prices of all the articlesof life, and of the effects of forestalling, regrating, andmonopolizing, &c. to which such a powerful operationTo Thomas Babington Esq. Oct. 17.384 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1800.is ascribed by many, I cannot think justly, but I wouldform no hasty opinion, and shall be glad to hear fromintelligent friends in different places, and then drawmy own conclusion." 45He was soon afterwards in London, earnestlyendeavouring both in private and in the House ofCommons to obtain some effectual relief for thesufferings of the working classes. " I have not," hetells Lord Lancaster, 46 " for one morning omittedto take my place at the committee, and that cutssuch a solid lump out of the day as to leave the restcomposed but of fragments." " Our first report ismade ; alas ! it does not go far enough ; I wish that weshould gain the hearts of our people by declaring ourdetermination to abridge our luxuries, and comforts,and superfluities, not merely our bread. This way ofestablishing a distinction between the poor and richin times like these is neither prudent nor feeling. Theycompare our situation to that of a ship at short allowance; but then officers are at short allowance too, notthe men only. The Duke of Portland's letter haskindled a flame, or rather a secret spark, which nowperhaps is smothered, but will hereafter show itself bybreaking out into a conflagration Your friendPeter Porcupine is a red-hot Anti-Jacobin, mostabusively loyal, and most uncharitably orthodox." 47I have been using my utmost endeavours to impressthe minds of ministers, and of my brother W. Hey Esq. Oct. 20.46 Dec. 6. To Mrs. Hannah More, Nov. 23.1800. SCARCITY. 385hers, with a sense of the necessity of taking effectualsteps for the relief of the lower orders : and thoughthinking their measures too weak, I am by far themost urgent in pressing forward those very weakermeasures, to the execution of which they proceed languidlyand lukewarm. It is really beyond expressionvexatious to experience such indifference. Thoughthe House of Lords concurred with us on FridayNov. 28th, in addressing the King to issue the proclamation,it was not issued until Thursday last ; andnothing is yet done in consequence of it, though Ihave been daily pressing the extreme urgency of ourcommunicating the disposition to economize, like anelectric shock, by the promptitude and force of ourproceedings." 48 " All this wears an aspect of exhibitinga show to the country. But we should eitherdo less or do better."The political horizon is sadly clouded in the north.No one will venture to predict what will happen, butthere is reason to fear we shall have a conflict : allseem to agree that the assertion of the right ofsearch is absolutely necessary to us as a maritimenation. Bailey's son is lately come from Peters-burgh,and from his account nothing can exceed thefolly of this same Paul. He is indebted for his continuanceon the throne to the filial piety of his son.But if he is as wild in his vagaries as he has been, hewill be presuming too far upon the servility of hisgrandees. Alas, my friend, Providence has not doneTo William Hey Esq. Dec. 6.VOL. II S386 LIFE OF Wilberforce. 1800.with us I fear ! Not a word or a thought about God.We seem in general to recognise Him as little in Hischastisements as in His mercies. How little does allseem, compared with His favour ! May you and I,my dear friend, possess a share of it." 4gA few days later he again applies earnestly to Mr.Hey for accurate intelligence upon the state of thingsin Leeds. 50 " I am assured by many of my northernfriends that the distress of the manufacturing part ofthe West Riding has been much overstated to me, andthat my ideas are more melancholy than its real conditionwarrants. I am very desirous of knowing thetruth. This indefinite way of softening down andweakening the force of representations of distress andpenury entirely takes off their effect much more thanit ought. Supposing the distress to be overstated, theremay be much real misery. But such is the constitutionof the human mince, that if persons are toldthat any set of men are in great distress ; if particularsare specified, and some impression is made on theirfeelings and then some one steps in and asserts thatthe facts are greatly exaggerated, and obtains creditto his assertion, all the impression on the hearer'sfeeling is done away.Suppose you were to desire some person on whoseaccuracy you can rely, to inquire into and actuallyinspect the state of the lower orders. What thinkyou of its being said to me publicly in the committeeby the first man in the country, on my stating the49 To Lord Lancaster, Dec. G. *> To W. Hey Esq. Dec. 10.1800. TO HANNAH MORE. 387extreme importance of our endeavouring individuallyto introduce and diffuse agreements and resolutions,not concerning wheat flour and bread only, but alsoconcerning oats, barley, &c. and on my adding thatI knew one gentleman in Yorkshire who had resolvedto brew no ale, and was striving to prevail onhis neighbours to form the same resolution ' Iam very sorry for it.' This was with no regard tothe revenue, for that consideration had been expresslydisclaimed ; but from a belief that there was no necessityfor going so far, that the pressure was not sogreat as I conceived. This last anecdote is for yourprivate ear only, and I give it to whet your dispositionto obtain for me accurate intelligence concerning thestate of the lower orders."The year closed upon him in these employments ;and early in the following spring he tells Mrs. HannahMore that he still has on him " the heavy burthen ofobtaining relief for our starving manufacturers in theWest Riding of Yorkshire. The callousness, thenarrow and foolish wisdom of servilely acquiescing inAdam Smith's general principles, without allowancefor a thousand circumstances which take the case outof the province of that very general principle to whichthey profess allegiance, is producing effects as mischievousas the most determined and studied cruelty.This is rather too strong, but not much. However, Imust leave this topic or I shall never have done. Isend you half a bank note for 50. I beg you, besidesmy ordinary debt, to regard me as your debtors2388 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1800.for any sum you may call for, on account of the peculiardistress of the present times. I thank God thatI am able, without inconvenience, to make an extraordinaryexertion ; and as to keeping strictly withinone's income at such a season as this, it is as unreasonable(not to say any thing of its wickedness) asit would be for a man to keep determinately to hisordinary rate of walking, when a hungry lioness wasat his heels ; but we feel for our own safety more thanfor others' sufferings.Mrs. Wilberforce, thank God, regains strengthgradually. You hold out better than I expected;but the tenement gives indications (mine also) thatit will ere long fall to pieces, and enforces on thespirit within, the duty of providing a surer andbetter habitation. Farewell, I am too much indulgingmy disposition to chat with 'you. Kindest remembrances.Ever yours,W. WILBERFORCE."APPENDIX.APPENDIX.Vid. page 10.My own. Political, Dec. 11, 1823. French War.I AM myself persuaded that the war with France, whichlasted so many years and occasioned such an immense expenseof blood and treasure, would never have taken 'place but fromMr. Dundas's influence with Mr. Pitt, and his persuasion thatwe should be able with ease and promptitude, at a small expenseof money or men, to take the French West India islands,and to keep them when peace should be restored : in truth, butfor Mr. Dundas's persuasion that the war would soon be over.Mr. Burke had formed a very different judgment ; and when,being present with Mr. Pitt and Mr. Dundas, the latter exclaimed," Well, Mr. Burke, we must go to war, for it will be avery short war," Mr. Burke replied, " You must indeed go towar, but you greatly mistake in thinking it will soon be over ;it will be a very long war, and a very dangerous war, but it isunavoidable." The British minister had no intention whatever,at that time, of dispossessing France of any of her continentaldominions, and as for conquering France, Mr. Fox himselfcould not more consider it as an utter impossibility than theydid. They by no means shared in Mr. Burke's persuasionsconcerning the proper object and nature of the war.392 APPENDIX.Vid. page 24.East India Clauses proposed by Mr. Wilberforce, A. D. 1793.AND whereas such measures ought to be adopted for theinterests and happiness of the native inhabitants of theBritish dominions in India, as may gradually tend to theiradvancement in useful knowledge, and to their religious andmoral improvement ;Be it therefore further enacted, that the said Court ofDirectors shall be and are hereby empowered and requiredto appoint and send out, from time to time, a sufficient numberof fit and proper persons for carrying into effect the purposesaforesaid, by acting as schoolmasters, missionaries, or otherwise; every such person, before he is so appointed or sentout, having produced to the said Court of Directors a satisfactorytestimonial or certificate from the Archbishop ofCanterbury, or the Bishop of London, for the time being,or from the Society in London for the Promotion of ChristianKnowledge, or from the Society in Scotland for PropagatingChristian Knowledge, of his sufficiency for these purposes.And be it further enacted, that the said Court of Directorsare hereby empowered and required to give directions tothe governments of the respective Presidencies in India, tosettle the destination and to provide for the necessary anddecent maintenance of the persons so to be sent out asaforesaid ; and also to direct the said governments to considerof and adopt such other measures, according to their dis-eastINDIA CLAUSES. 393creation, as may appear to them most conducive to the endsaforesaid.Provided always, and be it further enacted, that if anyperson so sent out as aforesaid shall at any time prove to beof immoral life and conversation, or shall be grossly negligentor remiss in the discharge of the duties of the station to whichhe shall have been so appointed, or shall engage, directly orindirectly, in any trade whatsoever, or shall accept of andhold any office or employment, public or private, other thanthat to which he shall have been so appointed, the governmentsof the respective Presidencies shall be and they arehereby required to, remove him from his employment, andsend him back tb Great Britain; and the act of governmentin so doing shall be final and conclusive, and shall not beexaminable in any court of law whatsoever.And that due means of religious worship and instructionmay also be provided for all persons of the Protestantcommunion in the service or under the protection of the saidCompany ; Be it enacted that the said Court of Directorsshall be and are hereby empowered and required, from timeto time, to send out and maintain in their several principalgarrisons and factories a sufficient number and supply offit and proper ministers ; and also to take and maintain achaplain on board every ship in the service or employmentof the said Company being of the burthen of 700 tons orupwards : and that every charter-party to be entered into bythe said Company for any ship of the burthen aforesaid, orany greater burthen, shall contain an express stipulation forthe said Company to nominate and send on board such shipa chaplain for the purposes aforesaid, at their nominationand expense. Provided always, that no such minister orchaplain shall be so appointed or sent out until he shallfirst have been approved of by the Archbishop of Canterbury,or the Bishop of London, for the time beings3394 APPENDIX.Vid. page 185.My own. Political and Religious, March, 1827.AMONG the various reasons for which our Saviour thoughtfit to forbid our judging each other, it was probably one, thatwe are most imperfect judges of the merit or demerit of theactions of others ; still less can we estimate degrees of virtueor of vice, of the strength or weakness of the moral principle.Much depends on the force of the temptation to which wearesubjected; and this force must obviously vary according tothe different temperaments, characters, and principles of differentindividuals. That may be to one man a severe trial ofthe strength of the moral principle which to another wouldbe none at all. One of the severest trials of the minor order,which I myself ever experienced, was on the occasion ofGeneral Fitzpatrick's motion for an Address to the Crown, inbehalf of M. de La Fayette.As the incident may have faded away from the memory ofthe present generation, or be lost in the multitude of theinteresting occurrences of the last twenty years, it may benecessary to relate the circumstances which gave occasionfor the motion in question. There is no man whose characterhas been painted in more different colours than that of M. deLa Fayette ; but it can scarcely be denied, that while many ofthe aspersions on his reputation owe their origin to rumour,and perhaps to party prejudice, his life exhibits many traits ofa generous and patriotic spirit ; not merely of an ardent loveDE LA FAYETTE. 395of glory, but of a mind zealous for liberty. And when weconsider his youth, his rank, his connexions, and the universaldissoluteness of morals and manners which then too commonlyprevailed among the French nobility, it gave indicationof a truly noble spirit, to quit the luxury and frivolity of aCourt, and to plunge into the hardships, privations, anddangers of war in the cause, as he conceived, of an injuredand oppressed people. Again, whatever may be reported ofhis behaviour to the royal family of France, whenever thatis considered it should be remembered that he well knewthey reposed no confidence in him, but that they suspectedand hated him ; while he knew but too surely that had theyescaped out of France, which was their settled and but toonatural purpose, it would have been declared by the demagoguesto have been effected by his connivance. It is notorious,that when the wretches who excited and directed thepopular fury at Paris, manifested unequivocally their purposeof destroying the King and Queen, he exposed himself togreat personal obloquy and danger in their defence. Oncehe quitted the army and came to the bar of the Convention,endeavouring in vain to stem the torrent of popular fury ; andhe was endeavouring to prevail on his soldiers to march toParis, to rescue the royal family from the extremity of dangerand degradation, when the Convention, well knowing his purpose,sent commissioners to treat with the army, and to prevailon them to arrest their commander. In vain did M. deLa Fayette endeavour to call forth a better feeling. He wasbut just able to effect his own escape, accompanied by a fewof his officers, and protected by a small party of cavalry ; intendingto find a refuge in some neutral territory. Passingthrough the Prussian territory, he with his companions wasarrested, and shortly afterwards lodged in the dungeons ofthe fortress of Olmutz. Madame de La Fayette, a member ofone of the most ancient and noble families in France, petitioningto be permitted to cheer the desolateness of hisimprisonment, her request was granted only on the conditionthat she herself should become equally a prisoner ; a stipulation,which, though she willingly submitted to it, does not onthat account reflect-less dishonour on the government whichrequired such an engagement.396 APPENDIX.His harsh and cruel imprisonment had now lasted for fouryears, when, this country being then in close alliance withAustria, it was hoped that the influence of the court of St.James's might be exerted for the humane purpose of prevailingon our confederate to release M. de La Fayette from his prison.Indeed the bitterness with which some of our leading politiciansthen publicly spoke of the leaders of the Revolutionary party,might not unnaturally cause it to be supposed that our court wasimplicated in the cruelty and disgrace of his unjust detention.All therefore who were anxious to exonerate their countryfrom the imputation of participating in such unworthy counselshighly approved of General Fitzpatrick's Address ; but it wassupported by others on deeper and more general principles(broader grounds). Considering the mitigated spirit and practiceof modern warfare as one of the most marked and trulyadmirable improvements effected by Christianity, even amongthose over whose personal character and conduct its principleshave little or no influence, and knowing but too well howeasily the spirit of hostility, and the pretence of retaliation,might lead to the universal prevalence of the ferocious principles(maxims) and practice of ancient warfare, they dreadedthe first deviation of a professedly Christian court from themilder regimen of modern times. Many therefore who commonlytook no part in politics, nay many who had been amongthe foremost in condemning the wickedness and cruelty ofthe Revolutionary party, took a lively concern in M. de LaFayette's fate, and were warmly interested in the success ofGeneral Fitzpatrick's motion : but it was opposed with extremebitterness by Mr. Burke and Mr. Windham, who charged onM. de La Fayette the abundant harvest of crimes and miseries, ofwhich they alleged he had sown the seeds. They argued thereforethat his sufferings, however severe, were no more than the justretribution for his early offences. Others again who in no degreeshared in these vindictive feelings, and who it is no more thancommon charity to suppose would have been glad to accede tothe motion, were probably afraid of disgusting an ally, andthereby weakening a confederacy, which was not united byany very strong principles of cohesion. Not liking to take Mr.Bankes's ground, they therefore, and more especially Mr.Duncan, afterwards Lord Melville, adopted a tone of ridicule ;DE LA FAYETTE. 397for even then, though much less I think than now, we had begunto be a set of very merry legislators.In proportion therefore to the degree in which little was to besaid against the motion, it would be cried down by party violence.It was late in the day before I had an opportunity of deliveringmy sentiments, and when at last an opening did present itself,it was towards the close of the debate, when the patience ofthe House was exhausted, and when it was obvious that anyonewho should get up to defend the motion, especially anyonenot having the cry of a party to support him and theplea of sticking to a party to justify the part he should take,would experience a very sorry reception. It may be perhapsa confession, but I must frankly acknowledge, that the performanceof an act of duty has seldom been set about at agreater cost of present feeling than by myself, when underthese circumstances I rose, conscious that I should immediatelydraw on me the loud derision of a vast majority of a very fullHouse of Commons. I was not deceived in my expectation ;and a rather felicitous expression of Dundas's, that the motionwas chiefly to owe its support to straggling humanity, (theeffect of the words enforced by his peculiar tone and pronunciation,)produced a roar that has seldom been equalled. I amthankful that I was not weak enough to be deterred by foreseeingthe consequences that were to ensue : but trifling asthe occasion really was in the actual circumstances of the case,it was at the moment a severe trial of principle. . . . Transientas on reflection I must be conscious would be the feelings ofthe persons present, however^strongly expressed, and little asI must have known I should permanently lose in reputationby the part I was about to take, it was nevertheless a greattrial, &c. &c.It is one of the many instances in which an attentive readerof the New Testament will have occasion to remark that itwas written by an accurate observer of the nature and feelingsof man, that so much stress is always laid upon the feeling ofshame ; and the strength of its influence on our nature is continuallynoticed, not only in the epithet, cruel, attached tomocking, and the trial put on a level with the greater sufferingsthat could be endured but on many occasions in which itmight have been expected that feelings of another sort would398 APPENDIX.be specified, shame is that which is mentioned. Thus of ourblessed Saviour it is said, He endured the cross, despising theshame. (See also other passages.) * I am not ashamed ofthe gospel." " House of Onesiphorus, he was not ashamed ofmy chain." Another instance in which the word that is useddeserves attention, is afforded by the word, able, as if no doubtcould be entertained of willingness ; e. g. " Christ is able tosave to the uttermost." " Now to him that is able to keep youfrom falling," &c. &c.FOR AND AGAINST PUBLISHING.Fid. page 199.Reasons for delaying the publication of " PracticalChristianity," Sc.For publishing (with name).1st. Some careless peoplealarmed, credit of my name,and general operation.2nd. Even to the carelesswhom I know, I can hardlyopen myself at least with sufficientplainness, in private.3rd. The really well-disposedtaught the difference betweenbeing almost and altogetherChristians.4th. Things may be said tothose in high stations, bishops,&c., which could hardly bepersonally said to them inprivate.5th. My way cleared of manydifficulties by this explicitavowal of my sentiments ; unjustconclusions will no longerForncett, Dec. 6th, 1789.Contra.1, 2, 3, 4. I can now speakto my private friends, both ofthe careless and well-disposed,and even of the bishops.A. The dread of an over-righteousman would deterpeople from co-operating withme for national reform.B. My influence with P.Chancellor, present and future,and other great men, even G.himself, would be lessened:few if any livings obtained:few great men would attend tomy recommendations in all theways wherein I have nowinfluence : few private men,&c. I should be looked onas morose and uncharitable.Bishops would fear me.5th. I may effect this withoutsuch a publication by privateconversation with friends, andby public declarations.APPENDIX.be drawn from my cheerfulness,or my not making religionthe matter of frequent conversation.6th. Perhaps an associationof serious people produced,labouring for the national reform.I resolve on the whole notto publish, but I may at myleisure write, and leave an injunctionto publish if I die.Then much of the good maybedone by the work, at leastsome of it, and none of theevil accrue.Meanwhile let me rememberto clear my way more, withdue regard to preserving of influence,and to speak to friendsof all sorts as plainly as I cansafely; distribute proper books,&c.6th. Such an associationwould not now do good; thetimes would not bear it thecourts of law would set theirfaces against it.C. To publish in defence ofreligion not my particularprovince.D. Were I to express all Ithink I should be deemed anenthusiast, and were I to withholdI might mislead. Formmight be substituted in theplace of religion.E. My connexion with P.and my parliamentary situationput me into the capacityof doing much good in the privatewalks : I may carry bills ofreform, I may get a bishop.HEADS OF A RELIGIOUS WORK. 401Vid. page 169.Hints either for a new work on religion, or for some chapterssupplementary to his work on " Practical Christianity."My own. Heads. Miscellaneous (religious). Oct. 8, 1824.MUCH nominal Christianity is naturally to be expected in acountry circumstanced as ours is, in which Christianity theestablished religion of a country, holding out prospects of temporalpreferment and provision for all denominations. Manytoo indulgent, many too timid, many too much occupied, manytoo self-indulgent, [dilate each,] to scrutinize sufficiently evento have their assent given on grounds of intellectual conviction,much less sufficient to dispose them to prepare and measureout their degree of assent so as to adjust it to the precise pointof their judgment and conscience.This indeed foretold by our blessed Saviour in the parableof the sower. [Consider Sumner's remarks on this head.]Such is the condition of human things : each has its advantagesand disadvantages. So church establishments. Theyprovide religious instruction for those who are too poor to payfor it for themselves. Besides, it is the disease of men's natureto be insensible of its existence, and still more of its virulence.Hence religion must be offered to men : must go in quest ofthem.Again, From the nature of things it often happens thatthe religious principles of an establishment have been formedin the nation's best times, when men's minds more under theinfluence of religion ; and those sound principles preserveduniform through successive generations, and the fluctuations402 APPENDIX.and liabilities of human opinions and tastes. The evil necessarilyis, that men led by various motives that influencehuman conduct to profess adherence to an Establishment ofwhich the principles have little hold on their heart. Besides,Christianity is of two kinds, external and internal, and theformer may apparently exist in due decorum, while the latter,alas ! is not to be found.Hence a decent observance of moral duties, more especiallyof such as are of the negative sort, is deemed a necessary ingredientin a good character. But then the defective interior,the false principle within, betrays its spurious nature wheneverthe religious or moral duty does not happen to coincidewith the world's standard of morality. And there are toooften particular things which are tolerated, or are even popular,and particular Christian virtues and graces which are unpopular.Meanwhile by a conventional courtesy, whenever the exteriorconduct and manners are not contrary to the Christianmodel, or where, by a moral balancing of accounts by which apositive amount of any Christian grace is to be set against adefect in another particular, the character may pass musterthe interior is to be presumed to be all complete, or at least,if not complete in degree, to be right in kind : and by a toonatural self-deception, men are led into granting to themselvesthe same indulgent measure which candour requires them tomete out to others.By an easy transition, inasmuch as the due performance of theduties of life may be compendiously stated to be a summaryof religious and moral character, an appropriate set of principlesand practices is considered to belong to each professionand department in life : and it is held to be enough if a mandischarge these virtual engagements to society with adequatepunctuality : and there again, what it may be only candid toconcede to others we too easily are seduced into admitting as astandard for ourselves. . . . Under head, Establishment's benefits,observe, that even dissenting sectaries themselves benefited bythe Church Establishment party : by the necessity under whichthe supporters of each minister lie to maintain and educate himin some decent equality with the ministers of the Church ; theprinciples also serve like the standard weight and measure inHEADS OF A RELIGIOUS WORK. 403the Exchequer, as a test to which all religious opinions mustin some measure approximate.But Christianity is a system of a far higher order ; it requiresthat its throne should be set up in the heart, whence it shouldprompt and control all the various movements of the entiremachine. Its very essence and being is the formation of apeculiar character.Another great evil resulting from this natural habit of beingsatisfied with the exterior, is, that we fall into the practice ofconsidering any real existence of the interior of religion asconstituting a peculiarly eminent measure of moral excellence ;as being more than the generality can be expected to attain.They may rest satisfied with a far inferior degree : and unhappilythe abatement which we are insensibly, partly even fromhumility, led to admit, as from the imperfection of our natureto be expected in the completeness of our moral character, isadmitted in the abatement of the purity and simplicity of itsprinciple, of the main-spring or corner-stone of the machineor edifice : whereas there must be no such allowed deficiencythere ; and therefore Christ commands us to " be perfect asour heavenly Father is perfect." We naturally say, "Whois sufficient for these things ? " And our Saviour suggests thereply, " With man it is impossible, but not with God." Herecomes in the need of being born again of the Spirit. There isto be the formation of the new creature which St. Peter callsa divine nature. . . . Head, Establishments. From the existencetoo of an Establishment, orthodoxy, or holding right doctrinesin their established mode and degree, becomes a ground forzeal, and for credit with others. And much room for self-deceptionhere. . .Suppose then a man eminent in his profession, and so far a ~lbenefactor to mankind ; universally esteemed and admired, andnot without a fair claim to esteem and admiration. The manhas been in the habit of receiving marks of respect on allhands. How difficult must it be, even leaving out of our calculationthe natural corruption of man, for such an one to feelhimself a lost, and guilty, and helpless sinner, a slave to sinand Satan ! To feel himself such, sufficiently to dispose himto come as a weary and heavy-laden sinner to the cross of [Christ.404 APPENDIX.Besides,Here another difficulty occurs. The morality of Christianityis so pure and elevated, that being a true Christian is becomesynonymous for leading a good life. Now the eminent professionalman of whom we have been speaking is conscious thathe is approaching to the term of his continuance in this world ;consequently his life, be it good or bad, is already spent. Onthe principle of having so many talents committed to him, hehas employed them diligently and creditably, and his accounthe considers as ready to be given in. Whatever thereforemight have been to be wished, had he originally heard of thenecessity of more attention to the doctrines of Christianity, andto the dispositions and affections of the heart, it is now too latehe thinks for him to change the whole principle of the account.To use an every-day phrase he is in for it, and the idea ofbeginning as it were to live his life over again appears to himutterly inadmissible. He has been in the habit also of takinghis religious opinions upon trust ; of adopting his religiousprinciples from some writer or some living authority in whomhe has been used to confide. He has very little acquaintancewith the Holy Scriptures, and if he reads them at all, it is as areligious duty to be performed, but not for the purpose of inquiringinto and ascertaining their nature and force. Theconsequence is, that he remains ignorant of the gracious offersthat are made to him ; destitute of the high and gloriousprivileges that are offered to his acceptance. He knows notthe infinite mercy and inexhaustible love of his God andSaviour. Oh, how often have such characters made the heartof real Christians to bleed for them! How often have theydrawn tears from their eyes !i Address to these various classes of people. Reason withthem from the plain declarations of Scripture, and askthem if they can conceive that their state corresponds withthe description given, and urge them on every ground of prudenceor folly, of misery or happiness, to attend to your call.A separate chapter may well be given to the case of thosewho do not even endeavour to find joy, or even peace, from religion,but who think it enough to be safe.FRIENDS' PAPER. 405Friends' paper.To be looked at every Sunday. Jan. 12, 1794.S and Mrs. What books reading? To give them goodones Walker's Sermons. Call on Mrs. S. and talka little. Lend her Venn's last Sermon. Educationof their children, to inquire about. Prayer, &c.Their coming some Sunday to Battersea Rise to hearVenn. Call often, and be kind.The J 's. Call and sound them on religion. Give themmoney to give away, &c. Little presents.Lord and Lady J. See them. Get at them through G. Discoverwhat books reading.S and Mrs. Call Civility, &c. S n to dinner withlawyers of the more decent sort. Countenance themwith their relations. Query, Maclaurin for him ?J and G S . More civil to.Dr. and Mrs. W. Civility Him to dinner, &c. Call on her,and find what books proper, and give them. Query,family prayer ?W. B . Present to, and try and talk with her.H. M. and R. B . More civil to, and inquire.A and Lady. Try degree of knowledge Walker's Sermons.Get her friends.Lady M . Try to get her to give books to young ladies, &c.Lady E . Speak pretty openly, yet tenderly.406 APPENDIX.Lady A and Sir R. Has he read Doddridge ? Be opento her, &c.Mr. and Mrs. M . Encourage to family prayer, &c.Mrs. R. S and R. Kindness and attention. Hints toher, and showing that more within, if I durst let itout. Tell her my own story.J. E . Talk with, to give him favourable impressions ofhis brother's religion.W . Find occasions of conciliating.S . His illness.G . Honest appeal to Scripture, if admitted true.V . Try what he believes, and speak home truths.RELIGIOUS EDUCATION. 407On the necessity of making religious instruction a part ofeducation.My own. Misc. Oct. 14, 1825.ANOTHER strong argument in proof of the urgent expediencyof instructing our youth in the evidences of the Divine originof Christianity arises out of the consideration, that all thosewho in our two Universities carry on the work of educationare clergymen ; and although the subjects on which they givetheir various lectures and their private instruction be not of atheological nature, yet there will be nothing contrary toChristian principles taught by those who themselves arechiefly devoted to the service of the Christian church ; whilethere will be an universal influence of an ecclesiastical kinddiffusing itself throughout all the intercourse of what may becalled the head-quarters of our Established Church. Andwhen the various branches of philosophy, and ethics, and thearts and sciences, and what may be termed the education ofyouth in general, shall be conducted by laymen ; the moralatmosphere, if it may be so termed, will be altogether of adifferent nature.Is not the conclusion to be drawn from this considerationin some measure confirmed by comparing the state ofthe higher orders of Scotland with those of England. Ourbishoprics, deaneries, and great livings, afford sufficientinducements to our nobility, and much more to our affluentcommoners, to train up their younger sons for the Church ; andthese associating on equal terms of social intercourse with408 APPENDIX.their elder brethren, a general respect for the ecclesiasticalorder is diffused throughout the highest classes of the community.From treating the professors of religion with respectthey habitually contract a reverence for the principles whichthey profess, and even become better acquainted with them.In Scotland, on the contrary, the revenues of the ministers,though sufficient for the moderate wants of a clergy whosepiety and attention to the duties of their profession obtainfor them great personal respect, are not sufficient to temptthe higher orders to devote their children to the ministry(to the service of the Church). Therefore we should expectto find, and if I mistake not we do find, that though thebulk of the people, and more especially the lower orders, inScotland, are much more under the influence of religiousprinciple, and have more reverence for its forms, than the sameclasses in this country, yet in the instance of the higherorders the case is not only different but is reversed.EVIDENCE ON THE SLAVE TRADE. 409Inquiries concerning the Slave Trade. Letter from Williamwilberforce Esq. to Zachary Macaulay Esq. Governor of SierraLeone.WILLIAM WILBERFORCE TO ZACHARY MACAULAY ESQ.Aug. 23, 1793.THE perusal of your long letter has impressed on mymind with increased force the persuasion that your situationaffords you the opportunity of rendering the most importantservices to what I will call our common cause, the Abolition ofthe Slave Trade, by collecting evidence for the House of Lords.In spite of all that has been written and said on the subjectthere are still many sufficiently prejudiced, or ignorant, or inconsiderate,to maintain that all we have asserted concerningthe effects of the Slave Trade on the state of Africa is mererant and rhapsody, and that in reality it has rather a beneficialthan an injurious influence, by preventing human sacrifice, &c.&c. If we could bring before the Upper House such " damningproof" to the contrary that no honest man could resist theforce of it, I have no doubt whatever of our being able to carryour question there ; and not only so, but I believe it would notbe difficult, or at least impossible, to obtain considerable assist-vol.II. T410 APPENDIX.ance out of the public purse for repairing in some degree thewrongs of Africa, and promoting the civilization and instructionof that desolate country. This must of course not betalked of : I only throw it out because I have some notion froma recollection of your sentiments that your conviction of thefacility of smuggling negroes into the "West India islands hasled you rather to undervalue a British act of parliament prohibitingthe Trade in Slaves.You are so well acquainted with the whole of the subjectthat it is needless for me to enumerate the propositions Iwish to establish, and consequently the points to whichyour attention should be chiefly directed : every thing iscomprehended which tends to prove-that the Slave Tradehas obstructed and continues to obstruct or retard the civilizationand improvement of the natives of Africa, or that it isproductive of misery, cruelty, or wickedness : every thingagain which refutes the assertions of our opponents thatthe Africans are an inferior species ; that they are incapableof civilization, either from intellectual or moral defects ; thatthe Slaves are only prisoners, who would otherwise be massacredtaken in wars, which the Slave Trade rather preventsthan causes, or victims redeemed from their superstition, orconvicts justly condemned, &c. ; that kidnapping and village-breakingare not only imaginary, but impossible ; that justice isno where more fairly administered ; that could even the nativesbe in some degree civilized, it would be impossible to institutewith them any thing like a commerce unstained with blood,partly on account of their insuperable indolence, partly becauseof the want of navigable rivers, the high surfs, the sterility ofthe soil, the insalubrity of the climate, &c. &c. But I am runningon unnecessarily, and will forbear ; your own understandingwill suggest to you on consideration, how it will be best toproceed for the attainment of the end I have in view. I havenot yet thoroughly revolved the subject, but I design so to do,and to talk it over with some intelligent friends ; meanwhile, Iwill drop one or two hints they would I dare say occur to you,but it will only be the trouble of dictating them thrown away.EVIDENCE ON THE SLAVE TRADE. 411First, it seems to me advisable that Mr. Dawes, Mr. Watt,Mr. Home, or any other gentlemen you should deem proper,should be furnished with a clue to direct their inquiries, andbe desired to search out for information, wherever it is mostlikely to be procured. (Could any of the Blacks be safely employedin such a commission?) What any one learns should becommunicated to the others, and when any one is coming toEngland qualified to give evidence at the bar of the House ofLords, he ought to be made acquainted before his departure withthe intelligence that may have been obtained : indeed the objectis so important that I should not hesitate to say it wouldbe worth while to send over a person to Africa, in order to bringback the intelligence you might have collected, if no suitableone were coming from the settlement. I am rather afraid Mr.Home will have left Sierra Leone before this letter reaches you ;if not, I cannot doubt of his gladly lending himself to thisscheme to the utmost of his power. Parliament will I supposesit from January to June next, and in any part of that time wecould be able I think to bring forward our witness; but formany reasons, I should prefer the middle to the earlier part ofthat period. For obvious reasons, the less I am seen in thisbusiness the better; and particularly it would be desirable,that the person who should give evidence should be able todeclare he had not known it was collecting at my desire.It is Superfluous to state to you the proper constituents of agood witness, of which clearness, temper, and presence of mindare certainly the chief : however where these requisites arenot to be found so abundant as we could wish, a witnessmay still be valuable. Could young Naimbana be fitted for thetask, his colour in some respects would be advantageous ; orcould you find any one sufficiently intelligent ana accurateamongst the settlers. Perhaps even some of those who hadbeen concerned in some of the nefarious transactions mightbe willing to satisfy their consciences by accusing others, ifassured that their own enormities should not be broughtinto question : Graham for instance might relate Calker'sravages if promised he should not be asked of those ofT 2412 APPENDIX.Cleveland: you will understand me not to mean to give anopinion, but only an illustration of my meaning.Your story of the poor man whose child had been killed bythe bursting of the shell, is an example of true magnanimity,and involves many important inferences. I should really beglad to have it authenticated, if in no other way, (which howeverI conceive not difficult,) by its being sent over attested onoath. I cannot help being unreasonably impatient for yourestablishing an intercourse with the interior country, and diffusingas deeply and widely as possible the knowledge of yoursettlement, and of your readiness to treat with kindness anypersons, whether children or adults, who are sent to you forinstruction. Could you not spare any proper man amongstthe surgeons who might be disposed to undertake a journey upthe country? I have understood a white man may travelsecurely in Africa under the convoy of a Mahometan or otherpriest ; and no qualification renders a stranger more acceptablein a barbarous country than medical skill.Great prudence however may be requisite to avoid awakeningthe jealousy and to elude the vigilance of the slave dealers,particularly the European, or coast factors. The principleof cantabile vacuum coram ladrone viator, ought also to beadverted to. This topic, and the important one of discoveringif possible some valuable drugs, dyes, spices, &c. were suggestedin a letter to the council about two months ago ; there isno way wherein we might rise into more eclat and arrive at moresolid advantages than this last, and I shall press it very stronglyon Mr. Buckle, whom I expect to see before his departure.You must neither smile nor be angry at my issuing these directionsfrom the quiet and security of my country study : Iam fully aware of all the difficulties and dangers which mayattend the execution of them : but as it is your part to act, soitis ours to speculate, and therefore without reserve I will communicatewhatever may be likely to be in the smallest degreeuseful.TO ZACHARY MACAULAY ESQ. 413P. S. I shall send a duplicate of this letter by another ship.Pray tell Mr. Dawes that a very worthy young man is goingout chaplain to second Mr. Johnson's efforts in New SouthWales. Could you not multiply bees almost to any quantityat Sierra Leone ? I think it was at some Moravian settlementI remember hearing that great profits had been derived fromthe industry of these free labourers. Were honey sufficientlyplentiful, sugar might be made from it.414 APPENDIX.7 ite following queries were sent by Mr. Wilberforce in January,1796, to a large circle of private friends ; and the informationwhich he thus acquired, afforded the ground-work of his effortsfor the relief of the poor during the years of scarcity whichfollowed.1 . WHAT mode of supplying the necessities of the poor duringthe present scarcity has been pursued in your part of thecountry ?2. What is now the actual rate of common labourers' wages ?3. What is the ordinary proportion of common manufacturers'wages to those of common labourers ? and how far has theformer affected the latter ?4. Has there been any and what rise in the wages of labour* both summer and winter for the twenty or thirty yearspreceding 1794-5 ? and if any, at what periods and in whatdegrees has it taken place ?5. Have you known in fact unequal prices of labour in placesnear to each other, which may be supposed to have resultedfrom the operation of the poor laws ?6. What rise in the price of the necessaries and principalconveniences of life has taken place during the same period,distinguishing each article as particularly as may be ?By " labour " and " labourers ' is meant agricultural labour, orany other species of work wherein no skill.STATE OF THE POOR. 4157. Is task-work common in your part of the country, andhow much can a man earn per day or week in this way ?8. What appears to you to have been the effect in point ofpopulation of increasing the size of farms and enclosing commons,and has the quantity of land in tillage been thereby somuch diminished as that notwithstanding the improvement ofwhat has continued in tillage the quantity of grain producedhas been less than before ?9. Has the practice of engrossing small farms prevailed withinyour knowledge, and if so, with what effects has it beenattended ?10. What were the habits of living amongst the labouringclasses twenty or thirty years ago, and what are they now ?Do they now live harder than they did then, or than they didat some intervening period ?11. Did the poor twenty or thirty years ago use meat andbeer more or much more than they did till the commencementof the present scarcity ?12. Do potatoes constitute about you a material part of thefood of the labouring class ?13. Do the poor in general appear tolerably contented withtheir situation, or otherwise ?14. What proportion and descriptions of the lalxmring class,when not disabled by age, sickness, &c. receive parish relief,how often and how long ?1 5. Have the poor rates been progressively increasing for someyears past, and if so, in what sums, and in what proportions ?16. Does any, and what proportion of the labouring poorabout you belong to Friendly Societies, Box Clubs, andwhat appear to you to have been the effects of these institutions?416 APPENDIX.17. Were the common labourers' wages sufficient to maintaina man and his wife, and four or five children, before the commencementof the present scarcity ?18. Have the ale-houses increased in your part of the countrywithin the last thirty years, and in what degree, and whathas been the effect of such increase ?19. Do the morals of the lower orders appear to you tohave improved, or to have grown worse, within the last twentyor thirty years ? Are they more or less frequent in their attendanceon public worship ?20. What proportion of the children of the poor may besupposed to have no schooling, and have they more or less ofit than formerly ?21. Would it be politic to hold out additional encouragementsto the growth of wheat ? And if so, what encouragements?22. Would it not be politic to encourage the use of oxen inagriculture, draught, &c. in place of that of horses?23. Have cottages in general less land about them thanformerly ? And if so, what have been the effects on the comfortand morals of their inhabitants ?LETTER FROM RIGHT HON. GEORGE ROSE. 417Vid. page 236.RIGHT HON. GEORGE ROSE TO WILLIAM Wilberforce ESQ.1797.I CAN judge of your feelings, my dear Wilberforce, onyour receiving the account of poor Eliot's death, by my own.Mr. Pitt has I am sure mentioned the event to you, if he foundhimself able to write to any body, because he told me hewould. It was certainly sudden, as Mr. Pitt last night said thelatest information was extremely favourable, and Mr. C ,who returned to town this morning, says the prospect wasmost encouraging.The effect produced on Mr. Pitt was, as you may imagine,beyond description; it has not happened to me to be awitness of such a one, as I saw him immediately after hisgetting Lord Eliot's letter by the common post, and readingit among others, not knowing the writing ; it is difficult evento conceive the impression made by the misfortune, and themanner of hearing of it. To say that from the bottom ofmy heart I lament the loss, is poorly expressing what Ifeel ; I can say truly that in my intercourse with men I havemet with few, very few indeed, such as our poor friend was.The poor little girl was with her father, so was John Eliot ;William is at Bentham.T 3418 APPENDIX.This blow, one of the very severest that could have been inflicted,Mr. Pitt has to bear up against at the moment of therupture at Lisle ; the circumstances attending which I am surewill convince you that on our part it was unavoidable, becauseI know I have the good fortune to agree with you on that subject.I suppose Lord Malmesbury is arrived, or will be herethis afternoon. * * *LETTER TO HIS MOTHER. 419Vid. page 236.WILLIAM WILBERFORCE ESQ. TO MRS. Wilberforce.Bath, Sept. 26, 1797.My dearest Mother,I SCARCE know how it is, but there is no place in whichI find more full employment for myself than at Bath : butthis ought not to prevent my occasionally sending you a fewlines to inform you of our goings-on, and to assure you of ouraffectionate remembrance. Bath is now empty as it is called,but in this its state of emptiness it contains quite peopleenough to keep our knocker in exercise, and our tempers too ;for there are few things more trying than to be interrupted bycommon visitors when engaged in any real business, or even inany pleasant relaxation.You have heard of our proceedings On the road. Thesubject which, in addressing you no less than any to whomit might seem more properly to belong, will enforce itsclaim to be first mentioned, is the death of my excellentfriend Eliot. I believe you and Sally may have heard(Milner well knows, who attended him with the same tendersolicitude with which he always visits the sick and theafflicted) that he had a very alarming complaint ; but it wasimagined he was better, and he had even ideas of joining aregiment of Fencible, into which he had entered from motivesof patriotism, and greatly against the grain so far as comfortwent. I have heard no particulars, all I know is, that he wascarried off suddenly ; but I have the satisfaction of knowing420 APPENDIX.also, that his mind was in that state which one should havewished, had one been aware of the awful change whichawaited him. I heard from him but a short time before hisdeath, and his letter breathed a spirit of the truest Christianresignation and piety. To me the loss is very great. I was inthe habit of consulting him on all occasions, and we were engagedin a multitude of pursuits together. Well, he I trust ishappy, and he is not improbably taken away from much sufferingand sorrow. Do tell Milner about him.I trust my dear mother rather gains than loses ground ; Ineed hardly say that I remember you daily in my prayers. Mayyou, my dearest mother, learn to be at the same time consciousof your own demerits as a sinner, and of the mercy and loveof God, who holds out promises of pardon and acceptance toall penitent believers in Christ. May you learn more habituallyto look to the Holy Spirit of God for all necessary suppliesof grace and consolation ; for a more melting penitence ;for a strengthened faith ; for a more animated hope ; and amore perfect love and acquiescence in the Divine will concerningyou. May you be enabled, my dearest mother, more constantlyto retain a practical impression of that which we allbelieve and know, and that the daily trials to which we aresubjected, be they greater or smaller, do not happen to us bychance, but that they, as well as more important events, arethe ordinations of that gracious Being, who does not willinglyafflict the children of men, and who has promised that allthings shall work together for good to them that love Him.Thus, while your outward man decays, may your inward manbe renewed day by day ; and may your present sufferings,though while they last wearisome and grievous, serve to ministerto you in the end, a more abundant entrance into the everlastingkingdom of God. I make no apologies for writing toyou in this style, because I am persuaded that you prefer it toany other. Alas ! It is much easier to advise others, than toput in practice our own advice.I hope my dearest Barbara and I are both deriving benefitfrom the waters ; though slowly, and by grains. We wereable to pass the first few days of our being here, by ourselves,LETTER TO HIS MOTHER. 421before we were unbarred, and I scarce need say, that it wasquite a luxurious tranquillity. Parliament I believe will meetabout the 2nd of Nov. You will regret the issue of thenegociation. My dear Barbara is endeavouring to be usefulhere in the school way, as we shall probably often visit theplace. Farewell, my dearest mother. Give my kindest remembrancesto Sally, Mary Bird, Milner, and other friends; andbelieve me,Ever affectionately yours,W. Wilberforce.422 APPENDIX.Vid. page 279.RIGHT HON. WILLIAM PITT TO WILLIAM WILBERFORCE ESQ.(Private.) Downing Street.Saturday, 5tb May, 7, P. M.My dear Wilberforce,The most pressing point on which I wished to speak toyou, was the propriety of taking some step in the House ofCommons respecting Fox's speech at the Whig Club. Thereis a very general indignation against it, and I fear we shallseem wanting to ourselves if nothing is done. At the sametime there is a good deal of difficulty in arranging any proceeding.To prosecute the printer, unless Fox disavows thespeech, would be unbecoming. If he avows it, he is clearlya just object of prosecution himself; but with a Westminsterjury, and an inflammatory speech from him versus the Actorshe would have a chance both of an acquittal anda triumph.The best mode upon the whole (if something must be done)seems to be to order him to attend. If he then disavows thesubstance of the speech, to address the King to prosecute theprinter, (which after his disavowal or retraction would succeed,)and if he avows it, to direct the Speaker to reprimand him.He will then probably call an extra Whig Club, and appealto them against the House of Commons ; in that case he oughtnaturally to be expelled ; but we should in that case have aFOX'S SPEECH AT THE WHIG CLUB. 423Westminster election, which would be a punishment on ourselvesand all peaceable householders rather than on him.Instead of expelling, we might send him to the Tower for theremainder of the session, which though doing little in fact,would assert enough the authority of the House.The chief objections to this last measure are, that weak andmoderate men might call it severe and vindictive, and that atthe end of three weeks he might be led home in procession,and have the glory of breaking windows. I have thought itwould save you time to write this hasty state of my case, ratherthan give you the trouble of calling here. I should like tohear from you on the subject this evening, or in the course oftomorrow, as (if any thing is to be done) I must have a meetingof some of our friends on Monday. If you think you canconveniently write from Clapham this evening, the messengerwill attend you. My other two points can wait a little. Onewas, " De Summed Rerum," as to Europe. The other as to theeffect of the tax on exports and imports in Yorkshire.Yours ever,W. P.424 APPENDIXVid. page 338.Sunday Newspapers.LET the people know that these advocates of theirs are infact injuring and enslaving them, and under the false pretextof giving them a new enjoyment, they are about to rob themof the best pleasures they can enjoy. It is always so whenyou propose to gratify the momentary appetite by encouragingthe breach of moral rules. It is thus that the grand seducerflatters men that he is freeing them from the bondage of religion,when he is enslaving them in the fetters of vice.Labourers will get no more for working seven days than six.You are altogether ignorant of human nature and of life, ifyou know not that the poor man's best Sunday enjoyment is inthe offices of religion : granting that you are too enlightenedor refined for this superstitious and gross mummery, yetleave the poor man under a delusion which adds to his happiness,and is at least not contrary to the public welfare.On what principle can you stop other artisans if you toleratethese ?You profess yourselves advocates for instructing the lowerorders ; but how many would have remained unlettered but forSunday schools, which dependent on cessation of ordinarylabour on sabbath !SUNDAY NEWSPAPERS. 425Some friendly to good order, &c. think to promote it by themoral lessons of a Sunday paper ; but how short-sighted arethese men, even though sincere !In a free country men will be interested about politics, andI-should wish them to be so in moderation ; but that incessantcraving after political intelligence, which is still clamorousand never satiated, tends more than almost any other temperto render men factious citizens, and discontented and unhappy.Parisian custom emulated of mounting on a pedestal andpreaching politics instead of religion. Many parts of religionare only between God and a man's own soul. But the sabbathrequires the concurrence and support of civil laws.Sunday newspapers more pregnant mischiefs than any othersabbath profanation, because besides their own breach theytend to produce the same in all the readers ; and though thereading a paper may be thought less than ordinary labour,yet the former produces more alienation both of understandingand heart than the latter.A farce that these Sunday newspapers the enjoyments of thepoor. The poor would find sufficient gratification in a weekday'sor Saturday's weekly paper. It is to pamper the sicklyappetite of the rich, and to add a new pleasure to the multitudesthey now enjoy, that this species of amusement is devised; andjustly may it be said to aggravate the crime, that they whoenjoy so many comforts yet think it much to be deprived of oneexpedient by which they might create a diversion as it were fromreligion, and more effectually succeed in turning away theirthoughts from the grateful consideration and service of theAuthor of all their enjoyments. The rich are here to have thepleasure, the poor are only to suffer the mischief a most unequaldivision. But even this statement false, for on nonemore than the rich or great will the ruin flowing from theseevils ultimately fall.Reward offered by Persian monarch to him who would discovera new pleasure. But are we so circumscribed in ourchoice ? Have we ran the round so completely ? Are politics426 APPENDIX.so necessary to the comfort of every hour ? Much pleasanttopics of speculation offered to us, and superior pleasures tothat we would abridge.Institution of the Sunday connected with the preservationof religion, of social or political and moral order.Prove that decay of religion portends ruin of the state.We wish not to stretch the laws beyond their ancient limits,though this would be highly advisable, but only to rendereffectual the law at present existing.All the ablest writers and profoundest politicians on our side.Rome, above all others, is justly stated to have been preservedand destroyed by observance and neglect of religious institutions.Example of France lately in abolishing the Sunday as thesurest way of extirpating religion.ON THE CONDUCT OF OPPOSITION. 427Vid. page 181, 318, &c.The following remarks, dictated by Mr. Wilberforce about theyear 1798-1800, are taken indiscriminately from a miscellaneousnote-book of that period.On the conduct of opposition about the years 1796-8.IP the system of repressing Jacobinism at home be condemned,it is you, the fomenters of faction, who by encouraging andcountenancing men avowedly disaffected to King and countryhave rendered the two bills necessary the Habeas Corpussuspension, &c. As well might the invaders of the property ofothers complain of those infringements on the liberty of thesubject, which are rendered indispensable by the enormity oftheir aggressions. Remember the Maidstone trials ; rememberthe declarations made in France concerning the friends theyhad in England. The hope of co-operation excited by thefactious language of opposition (vide theatre and play story,mentioned by Gifford, when Grey was introduced) was notalittle instrumental in bringing on the war.I contend not for the truth or reasonableness of these declarations,but only I contend that the conduct must have beenambiguous which was liable to such a construction. Surely itis strange that they who assert that they were eminently thefriends of the country, and the enemies of the system of licentiousness,which, under the sacred and abused name of liberty,has tormented the world in our days, should be so misunder-428 APPENDIX.stood by those who . . that with advantage which belongs toby-sanders speculating on the conduct of our political parties,and being deeply interested to form right judgments, beingalso unlikely to wish to calumniate them, or to create an impressionto their disadvantage . . yet drew this inference fromtheir conduct, that they were the friends of French liberty.This, by wearing the appearance of sarcasm and personal application,may have less effect than if it could be related in allthe nakedness of abstraction. Fairly ask yourselves, and seriouslyweigh the force of the argument in your closet ; what would bethepresumption concerning that line of conduct respectingwhich such a sentiment had been taken up ? How would itstrike you in any other case of a parallel nature ? What wouldbe thought of that advocate, who by his language and measuresshould excite an idea in the mind of the opponents of hisclient, that he was really friendly to their cause? What ofthat soldier, who should produce such a persuasion in the mindof the hostile army ? And why is that reasoning which inthese other instances is so natural and obvious why is it hereonly to be thought uncandid and illiberal ? Why only in thecase where one would think there is least room for ambiguity,because it is not a single particular or two from which thejudgment is to be formed, but from the infinite variety ofinnumerable speeches, and the decisive testimony of a longseries of political measures.Let me not be mistaken, I impute not any such dispositions.I am in the habit of saying what I think in the House ; a habitI shall continue however blamed for it. I do not believe thisdisposition has existed ; but what I do believe is, that had thesegentlemen designed to injure their country, to foment newfactions, to encourage and enhearten her enemies, they wouldhave spoken and acted, and abstained from speaking and acting,as they have done. This is drawn from me by force, when Ihear these gentlemen talking of each other as if they werethe only patriots. I would say to them, Be comforted. Theworld would not be dark though these luminaries were nomore, &c.ON TREATING WITH FRANCE. 429On treating with France. From the same.ADMINISTRATION may justly claim that we should give themcredit for readiness to treat, in consequence of their perseveringat Paris, in spite of repulse at Basle ; and at Lisle, in spite ofParis in violence to natural pride, and in defiance ofcharges of meanness and pusillanimity made even by theirown party If any disinclination now, you should imputeit to just diffidence in the stability of the new French government; or of its sincerity in offering negociation, or its goodfaith in keeping any treaty it should make On the veryfirst annunciation of the Constitution of 1795, governmenthailed the first streaks of light which relieved the chaoticdarkness which had so long prevailed, declaring that if theday should advance, and this so welcome dawn should not turnouta delusive meteor, they would gladly treat. The Constitutionwas established, and Wickham sounded at Basle, &c.A republic as such, extensive and powerful, abundant inpopulation, resources, &c. with a popular assembly governing,my grand object of terror. Because republics, in their verynature, are restless, turbulent, warlike. Their governors oftencompelled, for their own purposes of ambition or security,for the opportunity of gaining reputation and influence, toplunge them in foreign wars.430 APPENDIX.Mankind are often rendered consistent by consciousness ofwhat is due to their character, by sense of shame, &c. byprevious declarations; but in republics defended numerus.There is no personal consciousness, consequently no shame orremorse, each keeps the other in countenance; the guilt orshame is so divided that each man's share is as nothing.In all our intercourse with republics this should ever bekept in mind, or we do not discharge our duty to our countryor to ourselves. For what is it to have to deal with men voidof conscience and of shame ? In whom, from the peculiar circumstanceof their situation, you have not that common guardagainst injustice, oppression, perfidy, and rapine, which forthe comfort, no less than the protection, of our species, Providencehas provided by the feelings of remorse and shame,a gnawing conscience and a wounded character; by thatconsciousness which the most hardened wickedness can hardlylull asleep ; by that fearful apprehension of future account,that stinging sense of tarnished reputation, and a name and afame which meets in every countenance condemnation andreproach, the frown of anger, or the averted glances of disdain,which they have devised a way of eluding by contriving toescape from personal consciousness by infinitely subdividingresponsibility, and providing against reproach by having alittle world of their own being surrounded with their ownatmosphere, &c. &c.FOR AND AGAINST NEGOCIATION. 431Vid. page 356.Reasons far and against a negotiation with France in theyear 1800.You have no business to inquire who wields the sceptre inFrance, or what the governing power. Whatever it is whichmanifestly and confessedly is at the head of affairs, acknowledgethat as a matter of fact, treat with it as such, and do notpersist in suspending the termination of the war upon the uncertaincontingency of a settled government being establishedin France, which may be to prolong the war for years tocome.Answ. We should not consent to treat, unless we honestlymean to make peace if we can agree upon terms. [The gentlemenwho talk of its being so easy to treat seem to forgetthis, and perhaps the secret of this case is their accustomingthemselves to advise in a loose, off-hand way, when they shouldconsider themselves as gravely counselling ; and compromisingtheir country's interests and character. They who are apt tocontract engagements lightly, are apt not to be very scrupulousin fulfilling them.]Surely it concerns us to know that the party from which theoffer comes, is, 1. really authorized to negociate on the part ofthe foreign kingdom : 2. that it can perform : 3. that it probablytrill perform its stipulations.Even the first condition may properly be specified in an agewherein it has been affirmed, and has not been very satisfactorilycontradicted, that such a thing has happened [as anindividual's taking upon himself to appear, by his agent, in432 APPENDIX.foreign negociations as the representative of his country, asacting on the part of the state, although certainly not acknowledgedor suspected at home to have any share in the managementof its concerns, or any portion of political power.2. Buonaparte's bad character should no more prevent yourtreating with him, than with Louis XIV. &c. &c.Answ. In neither case should we trust to the truth or honourof the individual, any further than as we may reasonably presumehe himself will be governed by truth or honour from aprinciple of interest. The reason why Buonaparte's characterweighs against treating with him, is that you cannot calculateupon his interest, or rather his view of his interest, in thesame manner as you can on that of other monarchs.3. It is Buonaparte's interest to make peace, and keep it.Answ. With some of the allies granted, but probably notwith all of them.4. Buonaparte would probably grant us favourable terms.Answ. This is very doubtful if you take into account, as youreasonably ought, what we may recover in another campaign.Also, 2. Buonaparte having no attached party, and dependingchiefly on the credit he is to get by making peace, this willoperate against his giving us good terms. Every concession hemakes will be so far a diminution of credit, and may be turnedagainst him as being what is sacrificed to his baseless authority.But, 3. It is not a little difference in terms that weighs withme ; my great concern is to finish this war, if possible, withouthaving to dread the immeasurable evils to be apprehended if apower exists in such a country as France, .likely to impart,cherish, and aid the revolutionary, democratic, republican tendenciesin other countries.5. War is uncertain disunion of allies sure from experience.Answ. I wish our allies were more to be depended upon,FOR AND AGAINST NEGOCIATION. 433were more simple in their views, more disinterested in theirmotives, more faithful in performing their engagements. Yetsuch as they are, it is infinitely important to us to retain them,and a satisfaction to think that our true interest and theirs arethe same. Admitting all that can be said against our allies, wehave derived great benefits from their co-operation. But rememberall we say is that under all circumstances we do notinterfere to advise the Crown to treat now contrary to the judgmentof ministry.H. T.'s* two general reasons against negociating now arejust.1. Such a peace could not be expected now from Buonaparte,in point either of terms, or of security, as deserves acceptancewhen compared with the more secure peace we mayhope for from even a short continuance of the war ; partly bylessening French possessions ; partly by overthrowing the presentconsulship, and giving rise to a better government underbetter auspices.2. Merely consenting to treat would probably dissolve thealliance. France would certainly gain time, and Buonapartecredit. Buonaparte's known policy is to divide his enemiesby negociating, neither adhering to engagements made, norbeing moderate in terms offered with remaining enemies.Henry Thornton.VOL. II.434 APPENDIX.From a note book entitled "Private Political Miscellanies"written about 1801.Vindication of my own principles and political conduct. Hardand difficult case of a private member of parliament in timesof war and violent opposition.My opinions and principles have been, that we shall not besafe unless we should wisely use the interval of peace videmy book, where I regret the decay of public spirit, and broadlydeclare the dangerous disease which is preying on our vitals.But still more, I may appeal to the time when in 1795 I arguedfor treating. I fairly avowed that I could not believe peacewith France, without a thorough counter-revolution, could thenor ever give" peace advantage was taken of my concessionagainst myself. He acknowledges, my opponents said, peacewill not give security, &c. I have long thought that the bulkof our nation had no adequate idea of the danger ; nay, onthe debate on the peace of Amiens, while I maintained thatcontinuing the war would only make bad worse, I yet declaredthat I perfectly concurred with Windham as to the real andgreat danger of this country, and I disavowed the language ofLord Hawkesbury, that we had no reason to dread mischievousprinciples now, but only the force of France.I must speak out. In war time often an honest man cannot,because he knows he will or may thereby do much public injury.Suppose him to see abuses. If by pointing them out he shouldwithout procuring a reform of them, lessen as far as his influenceHIS POLITICAL CONDUCT. 435may extend the estimation, attachment, and confidence, whichdifficult times and times of war . . for the energy of publiccounsels and the patient sustentation of unavoidable burthens . .render necessary to be had in government ; will he not be injuringthe public interests ?N. B. Again he may not approve of the mode in which thewar is carried on, of the main principle pursued in it, yet if heknows that the war must be carried on, that the directors ofpublic affairs are men of talents and knowledge far superior tohis own, with means of information, as well as power of turningto account that information, which he does not possess, he isled to doubt whether he may not be wrong and they right ; andhe is sure of this, that by infusing a doubt concerning theirconduct, he shall be weakening their hands at a time of warwhen general principles of established policy require that theyshould be strengthened. But suppose him even to remainconvinced that his own views of the true mode of conductingthe war are just and theirs are mistaken, yet if he knows thatby publicly declaring them, he could not procure their adoption,what would he do ? He would doubtless, if he had opportunity,endeavour to procure for the arguments in favour ofhis conclusions a fair and mature consideration. [Just tributeto be paid to Pitt's willingness to listen, and his candour andfairness in weighing the suggestions of understandings, he mustknow to be far inferior to his own.] But when this has beendone, what remains for him, but if he cannot procure theadoption of the plan he would wish to see pursued, to endeavourto give effect to that which is preferred to it not to thwart,not to impede, not to cripple.All this is the part of a wise man, of a good subject, ofan honest Englishman at all times. But if it be evengenerally and universally true, how much more is such aline of conduct enforced on us under such circumstances asthose in which our country was placed during the lastwar ! There was an opposition, able, vigilant, active, inveterate,powerful from their talents, formidable from theirprinciples, not very scrupulous in their means, and bitter anduniform in their hostility, between whom and myself therei 2436 APPENDIX.existed a difference not merely as to the mode of prosecuting awar of which we all recognised the necessity, but a fundamentaldifference as to the main principles not only of political conduct,but even of moral practice in whom I thought I saw . . thoughneither in private nor in public did I ever impute to them thatthey were not really intending the good of the country, &c. . .that prejudice and passion had so blinded them that they couldsee nothing to be apprehended in those principles and proceedings,which appeared to me likely to sap the vitals of ourcountry, and to produce an explosion in which the whole fabricof our political and social edifice were likely to be buried inone common ruin. If by stating my doubts as to the wisdomof our counsels and the prudence of our measures, I shouldstrengthen the cause of a party like that, how could I havemade amends for the mischief I might have done, while, asbefore alleged, I could not have effected the purpose I hadmyself in view ?Again, supposing me to believe that in the case of our militaryand naval establishments there was need of much alterationand reformation, allude to the impress of seamen to thebuying of commissions in our army, or rather to the not lettinga certain number of commissions be bestowed on principles ofmerit to the requisite care of our seamen's and soldiers'families in order to bind them to their country to the meansof preventing mutiny by multiplying the petty officers, (thusrendering the real British sailor a character of eminence andcomfort,) whereby as is usual in other similar cases, (the clergyfor instance,) honour is reflected on the whole body, and therest are cheered under their hardships, and made to bear theirlabours and sufferings with alacrity in the hope of better daysin the assurance that in due time, they also shall arrive at theheight of eminence to which they see many elevated, who wereonce no higher than themselves to the not punishing abuses,and misconduct in executive servants, peculation, &c. to theappointing to important situations, unfit persons on account oftheir families, connexions, &c. and thus breaking the hearts ofthose who can only hope to recommend themselves by a vigilantdischarge of their official duties to the abuses in thedock yards to those in the hired vessels paid monthly to theHIS POLITICAL CONDUCT. 437abuses still more in our political and municipal economy respectingthe education of our people respecting their moralimprovement, &c. to the corruptions in our judicial systemin our financial ; duties on spirits, and other matters connectedwith the morals and comfort of our people to theagriculture of the country and its improvements to our colonialsystem, especially in the West Indies, &cAll these are general heads ; but they may suffice to showthe difficult situation in which an honest man is placed, whenthe country in difficulties. I appeal to Burke himself, &c.43S APPENDIX.Notes before or during debates.Notes before Speech on the Slave Trade, May 12, 1789.Introduction. Our witnesses.Propositions, humanity not Their witnesses,sensibility.General reasons and information.Inference from evidence.Our witnesses, who.Slaves, how made.General reasoning.General information.Positive testimony.Inferences from evidence, children,&c.B. Edwards's quotation. Motley and other West Indians.Frauds in trade, &c. Governor Parry, and letter.Their witnesses, who.Prejudice expected, &c.Af. me.*Their assertions as to making Miles and Bags.slaves.Pre. Af. me. Af. log. f J. Littleton, Law Atroposwine evidence. pagi.African extortion, too muchfor fish, &c.African medium. t African logic.NOTES FOR SPEECH.Recapitulation.B. Edwards.Rooke, &c. <&rc.Foregone conclusions, &c.Middle passage.(Lloyd's List, &c.)J. K. Wilson's evidence.Caxton's ditto.Opponents' Af. me. ideas.Knox's, 333 to 120 tons.450 to 108.600 to 130150.yet comfort.Who these Africans are.Europe, middle ages.Opponents' inconsistencies.General wish and transition toWest Indies.Natural anger excited by indiscriminatecharges of cruelty.Main point at issue.Statement of argument.Slaves' general state, and inference.Distinctions between generaland particular.Feeding, &c.Medical care.Legal protection.Suicides, and triumphing, &c.Repellents denied, and infer.Yam and hot coal.Disadvantages of being black.About labour, &c.Effects of absenteeship andman, which West Indianswould themselves deplore.Short feeding paper.Salary detected. St. Pitt's records.Ross's fact. Suspensionof law in Jamaica withoutill consequences.APPENDIX.Moral and religious state.Neglect of breeding.1. From their witnesses' confessions.2. Witnesses' selection. Art.3. Admirals, governors, &c.4. General reasoning.Prejudice proved, and W. I.me.*5. Our witnesses' positive testimony.Result, a degraded race.Now rising, &c.Decrease in fact very small,if any ; even according toadversaries' own statement.Population papers.Dr. Anderson's assertion.Proofs that slaves will increase.1 . Gradual and uniform reformbegun.2. Positive testimony (opponents'and our own) of increase.3. Where one or two impedimentsremoved, increase.4. Males and females disproportion,and Creoles' andAfricans' number.Lastly, ship causes removedand native populousness, &c.F.'s paper.Admirals observation paper,Ross's evidence.As happy as people in thiscountry ; not liable to besold for debts, &c. Ross'sevidence. Slaves don't wishto be free, or to return toAfrica. (Funerals, &c.)West Indian medium.NOTES FOR SPEECH. 441Astlcy's Voyages, &c.6. Tetanus, remedy.7. Jamaica 2nd report ; malesto females proportion.8. Dr. Anderson's assertioncompared with Edwards'sinequality.7. Long's positions old settledplantations increase, and proportionof produce to slaves,3 to 2 Hhds.8. Bailie's Hispaniola increase.9. Calling's domestic slaves.10. Sir P. Gibbs,1 1 . Long's free blacks and mulattoesincreasing very fast.12. Americans and slaves.13. Bencoolen increase.14. Botany Bay increase.15. Caribs increase.16. Maroons ditto.1749, 273 men, 211 women.1733, declaration of theiruncounteractable increase.u 3442 APPENDIX.Notes before and during a debate, written on parallel columns on alarge sheet of paper, apparently on Grey's Motion for Reformin Parliament.EXORDIUM. Subject's importance. My idea when I firstheard of a motion; but the motion removed my suspense.Delicacy of the subject.Narration. Former motions for Reform, and new set of reformersstarted up democrats.Proposition. Whether the plan right at all, and if at all,whether now.I. Not right at all. Grey's plan too bold. Unmixed interests,whereas rights various. We not a young country.One looks round for sure footing, and may rest on the groundof a few plain propositions.1. When a country far advanced in political corruption, andpublic spirit languishing, it is generally advisable that powerand property should go together as much as possible.2. That executive government should be rather strengthened'than weakened.3. That changes should be made with infinite caution, andlittle at a time, because the stamina not sound.4. Guard against being misled to ascribe to frame of government,what arising from personal depravity bribery, &c.Grey's plan militates against all these, therefore strongpresumption against it. But what the chief arguments in itsdefence ?Parliament has sanctioned weak and wicked ministers,therefore wants reforming. But, 1. Country and parliamentthink alike. Country against reform. 2. This no argumentto us who think ministers' measures neither weak nor wicked.DEBATE ON REFORM. 443Malady and remedy both wrong. Party spirit vita. Seceding.Influence of Crown, &c.But if plan right, time most improper, and why ? Argumentsanswered. Reproach that this the common pretext ;and arguments answered here also. Pitt's apostacy, and howhardly treated : not the slave of his own character. Misfortunenot guilt.But though both Grey's plan and time wrong, yet myselffriendly to moderate reform at proper time.True policy of this country to conciliate the honest. Moderatereform would not strengthen democrats' hands but neverhope to win the democrats. Ideal grievances and ideal advantages.Cry for liberty, but what they want is power.Cone. Crown's influence excessive, and mischiefs here.Grey wrong, both as to the nature of our national malady,and its cure. Party spirit vita. Seceding. Pitt says we havefared better than they who have taken an opposite course.Grey argues from venality of parliament.From misfortunes which have happened of late years.From profuse expenditure of public money.From treatment of government in Bank business.Hence argues that too little connexion between elected andelectors.From that system the evils flowed, and the remedy obvious.Grey wishes to preserve constitution entire ; leaving countyrepresentation 1 13 for 92. Division into districts. 400 membersaccording to certain proportion. Householders payingtaxes. Expense prevented, and elections at same time.Time argument. Economy necessary, &c. Home. Greytrusts what has passed in France now likely to tend to the diffusionof rational liberty, &c. Ireland. Grey argues for reformand conciliation, and a House of Commons possessing the confidenceof the people.Erskine cone, that wished to bring wanderers home to thetrue constitution, &c. &c. and of our classing all reformerstogether as Jacobins.444 APPENDIX.Misfortunes no proof of guilt or folly. In what a state havewe been ! All stormy and dark, &c. and then a party withinendeavouring to prevent, &c. &c.Middle man's state a heavy heart, &c. I would listenwith candour, &c.Too much government influence, &c.Unfairness of Pitt's being reproached for apostacy, and that Irespect him more for daring to be singular ; not being the slaveof his own reputation. They who bite respect him, and wishthey could attain to the same magnanimity. Despising thevenom of malice, and misconstruction, and the shafts ofcalumny.Effect of Grey's plan . . to throw power into popular hands . .would not exclude monied men. Speaks of situation of electedand electors.Of taking away rights of election from all existing citiesand boroughs.Roman State ruined by voting by tribes and centuries.The nation adverse to Reform.Malady and remedy. What the real state. We talk of thiscountry as if fresh, &c. Party spirit and faction, &c.Exposing himself to insult and obloquy, &c. Despairs ofdoing aught, &c. Of seceding, &c. . . a proof of partyspirit. . . True love would watch, &c. Suffereth long andis kind, &c. Would it desert its country at a time likethis ? Slave trade instance. How have I acted ; how ought Ito act ?Erskine. If Pitt sowed the seeds by beginning Reform ;what does Erskine now ?Pitt. The same reason which makes me condemn Grey's,makes me love moderate reform : Grey's would enable democratsto can their point ; moderation would prevent them.Malady and cure. Grey has some hankering after Frenchprinciples.Burnett. This war an attempt to crush the rising libertiesof mankind.If the people properly represented, the war never wouldDEBATE ON REFORM. 445have happened, &c. Liberty, &c. Toasts, Bastile of Ireland.Hawkesbury. Close boroughs just as well, &c. &e.Sheridan would prefer universal suffrage to the presentsystem of parliaments.Sheridan denies that the French principles produced theFrench disorders, &c.Sheridan believes Grey's plan of Reform better than universalsuffrage, which yet he says he argued (with annual parliaments)to be the unalienable rights of man.Hawkesbury. Can you show that close boroughs worsethan others ? Can you show that bribery bad ? Are the peoplewho bribe worse than those who do not ?Fox. Party feelings. Perseverance.446 APPENDIX.Vid. page 9.Parliamentary Reform.Two ways of reasoning concerning the constitution and electionof the House of Commons ; the one that of studying to excludebribery and all illegitimate motives for giving votes ; theother dismissing all concern as to the manner in which the memberschosen, and reasoning from the state of the House ofCommons such as it is when elected ; this the expediencygentlemen's system. This last system has this grand viceinherent hi it, that national morals of no account whateverin it.Their importance, Dia.*The only just principle in electing members of parliamentis, strictly speaking, that of deciding and voting for, or assisting(with influence, &c.) the person we believe it most conducive tonational welfare should be elected. The intervention of theidea of the voter's interest being promoted in any way, utterlyexcluded ; advice indeed may be given, but all influence,as landlords over tenants, party influence, interest, all personalaffection, friendship, &c. excluded. Still some illegitimatemotives worse than others, both in their own nature and intheir effects consider the degree of their prevalencefriendship, arc. cannot extend far; not so bad as desire ofpersonal profit. . . .Dilate.PARLIAMENTARY REFORM. 447Paley's system vicious, because leaving such broad blots sopalpably condemned by all principle, as to afford advantage todesigning men, calumniators of constitution, &c. Herebyesteem impaired, admiration done away, affection cooled, andmen, who are actually suffering from various causes, naturallyled to refer their sufferings to this cause, which so manifestlyindefensible on constitutional grounds and principles.Nothing so dangerous as for a great, but somewhat blindaffection, which perhaps imbibed in the cradle, to be successfullyattacked. The man's pride takes the alarm when palpablefaults discovered in that which was before deemed all beautyand excellence.Many boroughs now, where interest (often family interest)must either be at once abandoned, or maintained by the mostunjustifiable means. How wrong to reverse the Divine procedure,and make duty and interest incompatible !448 APPENDIX.On the importance of legislative measures for promoting publicmorals.MORALS' importance to a state ; whether in relation topersonal happiness the great end of all government, or tonational strength and prosperity internal peace, &c.A community is made up of individuals, and generally itcannot be denied that to be virtuous is to be happy ; but if thisbetrue of all mankind, how peculiarly so in the lower orderswhich constitute the bulk of every community ! Amongthem the question is not merely between the soul's calm sunshine,the peace within, the moderated desires and unruffledcomforts, the calm survey of the past and anticipation of thefuture, compared with short deliriums of pleasure too dearlypurchased by the misery of ungoverned passions, by a self-accusingconscience, and the consciousness of abused advantages. . while in every face the man reads a condemnation ofhis conduct . . which when he looks within is confirmed bythe reproaches of his mind . . butImmorality in the lower and even middling classes leadsdirectly to temporal ruin ; and while as in the higher classesall the comforts of virtue are forfeited, and all the disquietudesof vice incurred, there is superadded the suffering arisingfrom the loss of hope, the declining condition of life, family jarsand discord, bodily health ruined too naturally leading tothe violation of the laws of the land.Consider in the case of every class, what is given up ofpleasure, and what is incurred of pain.TO PROTECT MORALS A BLESSING TO THE POOR. 449Let it be remembered that the bulk of mankind must maintainthemselves by their own efforts ; consequently, that industry,sobriety, punctuality, temperance, health, regularity, arevirtues necessary to their living in any tolerable enjoyment ofthe comforts of life.Take a man whose irregularities and excesses render hishome a scene of self-reproach and discord, and he is in a finestate of preparation for becoming an ale-house politician a toolof faction. Our natural proneness to acquit ourselves and layblame on others, disposes men to charge on the conduct of theirrulers, or the institutions of their country, those sufferings whichflow from their own imprudence, folly, or vices. He complainsperhaps of the tax-gatherer, when it is from his indolence that themeans of paying his taxes are wanting. In the resorts of dissipationand vice he finds also comrades of a similar stamp. Heloses by degrees a sense of those domestic pleasures, with theactual enjoyment of which his vicious habits are incompatible.He has no fire-side comforts, no little ones or faithful partnerto look up to him with gratitude and affection.These best pleasures of our nature the Almighty has putwithin the reach of the poor no less than the rich, as in thenatural world the best things are the most common.How little then is it true humanity to strew temptation inthe way ; to multiply inducements to idleness, dissipation, andvice ; to draw into and encourage those smaller deviations andtransgressions which infallibly lead to fatal consequences, andbring on a train of vicious habits and sufferings, while all thevirtues with their attendant comforts fly away to seek anasylum in the cottages of the sober and industrious .'How much more criminal this in the legislature, which shouldwatch over the welfare of the state, and guard with peculiarcare the rights and comforts of the poor 1Are not these truths indisputable ? And if so, what cruelmockery is it for enlightened men to pretend to be pleadingthe cause and promoting the interests of the lower orders,450 APPENDIX.when contending against the checks to idleness, dissipation,and vice, and for multiplying the means and increasing thefacilities of giving into illicit gratifications ! Does it not arguean utter contempt for the comforts of those very people forwhose interests they affect to feel ?How criminal then must be the legislature, whose duty it isto watch over the happiness of the people, when it not onlyneglects its office, but even assumes the directly opposite course,and tempts those very persons it should restrain ! There is aselfishness also in this, since we should not tempt to viceswhich were immediately injurious to ourselves ; yet like allselfishness it is short-sighted, for it soon reaches us after destroyingthe family comforts of the sufferer :For the dissipated, vicious man is almost sure to be disaffected.Think then of the difference between having a hardy,contented, domestic people, eager to defend their wives andfamilies, in the place of a set of discontented, factious men, towhom any change would be gain, and whose natural habitsprompt them to take the side of licence and misrule againstlaw and order.The legislators of antiquity were so deeply impressed with allthese truths, that it was their deepest study, and primary aim,to preserve from deterioration the public morals.All this observe is true of morals independently of religion,but religion is also indispensably necessary, and religion is destroyedon the one hand by loose morals, just as, on the otherwherereligion declines the morals will be infallibly corrupted.Sanction of oaths, property, person, life, honour, depend onthem ; the very cement that compacts society together.Romans' care to cherish religion.But the truth is, cases will often arise in which the presenttemptation will be so strong, (importunate,) the immediate interestor gain so powerful, the chance of detection so small,TO PROTECT MORALS A BLESSING TO THE POOR. 451that the virtue of most men would give way, unless sustainedby the consciousness of an invisible Spectator. What check remains,if the man is not aware that though removed from everyhuman eye he is still in the presence of a Being who witnesseshis most secret conduct, and who both can and will call himto account for actions which may escape and elude all humanobservation? It is the habitual effect of this restraint whichstrengthens the moral principle, and the force of this restraintin each particular instance is greater or less according to thepower of habit. Release a man then from this habitual restraint,and you prepare him at once for every degree ofperfidy and crime, without fear or remorse, without pity orcompunction.Morals necessary above all for a free country. The slaves ofa despot may be kept in subjection by fear ; but a free countrycan only be safe from without as it can alone be at peacewithin while it is sustained by the zealous attachment, andaffectionate and patriotic loyalty of its people.The degree of liberty every man possesses will make him themaster of his own actions, and factions will spring up, andliberty will be corrupted into licentiousness.The necessity of religion among the bulk of the people, i. e.the lower orders, is the greater, because that great principleof honour which it would scarcely be too strong to term thereligion of the higher orders does not exist among them.Consider then what the former would be without the restraintof honour, and estimate what the latter without religion. .The immoral man cannot be a good citizen, because not ahappy man. The unhappy wish for change, and impute totheir government the distresses which flow from their ownvices or imprudence.Though the doctrine unpopular, I am always disposed to callin private character and conduct to elucidate the motives ofpublic.452 APPENDIX.On party principles.OUR duty to condemn the first open avowal of these shamelessprinciples, to denounce them as public enemies, to raisethe hue-and-cry as it were of the country against them ascommon enemies to the peace and order of civil society.Nature of these principles. Though they affect a deep andphilosophical origin, they are in reality base in their extraction,mean, and low, and sordid in their nature, as they are mischievousin their tendency and operation. They reject all that hasbeen hitherto respected or admired for its sanctity or excellence,or beloved for its amiableness. It is indeed the sentiment of ashopkeeping nation, reducing all to profit and loss, tare andtret ; taking the ledger for its book of ethics and Cocker'sArithmetic for Tully's Offices moral code, &c.These principles are opposed by all that ever was respectedamong men, whether of ancients or moderns, till a new sectin our days ; even by Machiavel.How inconsistent to talk of national character, if by characterany thing more is meant than being reputed a shrewd,selfish, politic, and powerful people ! If used in a higher senseby this school, it can only be in the sense of Colonel Chartersin Pope.If from considering the nature of party we proceed to inquireinto its effects, they will be found pernicious beyond all measure,sapping the foundations of our greatness and our glory, of ourEVILS OF PARTY. 453strength, our energies, our eternal happiness and comfort ; andif we follow them out into private life they would poison allits charities, &c. The life of such a man must be a mere calculationof interest, a game of profit and loss, &c. Dia.I know its application to private life will be disclaimed, buthow can it be prevented ? The very constitution of the world issuch that neither nations nor individuals can have several differentsets of principles, to each of which they can assign thatdegree of acceptance which they wish ; having a set of selfishprinciples for their own use in public life and transactions, butthinking to have another set for private and domestic currencypaying in counters and receiving in gold.One of the greatest uses and most important benefits of thetwo Houses is, that they are, if the expression may be allowed,the moral mint of the nation, in which moral and politicalprinciples receive their stamp and currency. Whatever is recognisedhere as a legitimate principle of conduct graduallypervades the whole, descending through all the insensiblydiminishing scale of our mixed society hence danger fromfalse principles and duty of repelling them.In cases where it is difficult to escape the influence of partybias, or . . to leave out that contentious word . . to prevent orallow for the effect of personal attachment, what so desirable asto shift our ground, and to watch the effects of the causes andprinciples which are in dispute in the history of other timesand countries ? Try this in the present case and we shall be atno loss as to our conclusions. Carthage, Greece, Rome.Parties more excusable where some broad, intelligible groundof difference, as contested succession where nothing of thiskind, the suspicion infuses itself generally and gains groundmuch beyond the truth, that the one set being out of office, andthe other in it, is the sole ground and principle of dissensionand of union.Party. Association natural, but where truth is the object,and where it is difficult to developed it in complicated and APPENDIX.fore doubtful concerns, where the passions also are likely todisturb the functions of the understanding if men wished tocome to a true conclusion one would think they would striveto banish all needless connexions and associations ; that theymight more clearly see, and more simply follow, the dictates oftheir understanding. This more necessary on account of thedifficulty and complication . . and therefore room for error . . inpolitics.What stronger proof can be afforded of the effect of partyspirit upon the judgments of men, than that on subjects sodifficult and complicated, where therefore there is room forgreat diversity of opinion, all on the same side agree exactly, andyet always differ from administration, all of whom likewiseagree ? This extends even to questions of law. How differentthis from cases where men speculate without prejudice in theirclosets on the transactions and events of life ! Historians,moralists, &c.Let me be forgiven for strong language against party ; it isachieving the ruin of our country. A nation so great, rich,populous, above all free and spirited, like this, never can beconquered from without, unless the foreign assailant be aided bysome internal principle of corruption, which, however unintentionally,does practically co-operate with him, and tnd to thesame effect. This true even of the smaller states, the Grecianrepublics.We know that parties will always exist in a free state, butneed we therefore endeavour to cherish and encourage them,to exasperate their fury and increase their force ? The humanbody must be often the victim of diseases, but should we thereforepromote and multiply them ? Vices and follies and weaknessesbelong to man, but is not that alleged rather as a motivefor resisting or extirpating or at least for palliatingand excusing them ? Do we glory in them, and make themour pride and boast ?I am the more disposed to support government always whennot wrong, because otherwise how would it be possible forEVILS OF PARTY. 455government to go on without corruption, if all opposed andnone supported independently ?It is not that men mean to act contrary to their country'swelfare, but the extreme complication, uncertainty, and consequentdifficulty of political things, not so much in discoveringtrue principles as in applying them, renders self-deceptionthe most easy of all processes. We know how love and friendshipcan blind the judgment and warp the view ; how muchmore then when friendship, and preference, and ambition,and interest, and hostility, and a sense of injuries, and a spiritof rivalry, and various others, all combine.Take an inference from lawyers. The most eminent acknowledgethey almost always think their own cause right.But the decisive proof is the different judgments formed bylawyers before they have taken their side, at least before theirpassions are sharpened by contention, and their judgmentwarped. How differently do different lawyers advise ; yet howmuch more might conformity be expected here than in politics,where we often have to calculate on uncertain data, to proceedon mere contingencies, and to argue from facts which areperhaps wholly disputable !Length to which party principle has now gone openlyavowed and consequences.How are we to know what is and what is not a party question? He is the best party man who is the most steady, andunqualified, and indiscriminate in his support ; and when partyis gloried in, this is a distinction for many to covet.Great difficulty of political questions if we will deal fairlywith our understandings we must acknowledge it, on accountof their complicated nature and numerous relations, also becausethe result involves a number of contingencies, of eventswhich by happening one way or another produce the wholeissue, and turn into discomfiture and ruin plans the most wiselytlcvised, and executed with the most consummate ability.456 APPENDIX.What stronger proof, than that the ablest men, of the greatesttalents, knowledge, and experience, often differ fundamentally ;not in one or two instances only, but in every instance foryears together ?If men are not aware of the probable influence of this biasover them, they are so much the more likely to be blindlygoverned by it.The first manifest effect of party is that half the talents, notto say all the talents, of the country, are employed in thwartingand opposing, instead of promoting, public measures.This especially mischievous in times of difficulty and danger,when every hand and heart required for common defence,when every effort should be used to expel sloth and kindlezeal, when one would wish to make the people forget and losesight of all the blemishes of the government, that they mightbe the more forward to defend it. (Dilate here.) Under thesecircumstances half are employed in the very contrary operations; in searching out blemishes, in aggravating spots, in exaggeratingevils, in trying to persuade the people they are oppressedand unhappy. Thus public spirit extinguished.Will it be said that not the country, but its government, ispresent to the gross feelings of the bulk of people theseare identical, it is the whole of their situation, without nicelydiscriminating from what each particular arises, which producesthe effect ?Thus half the people are employed in the very service whichthe worst enemies of the country would be glad to hire agentsto effect in fomenting discontent, in damping ardour, inchecking public spirit.We are now so used to this that not surprised at it, and whena ministry is turned out, we now expect them naturally to takethe opposite seats the next day. We can calculate on theeffects of being in or out of office, as well as on the productionsof a particular soil or climate.EVILS OF PARTY. 457Ministry's interest the same as their country's j opposition'scontra to a great extent. They would not indeed wish anyirreparable injury, but can they deny that they would wishexpeditions to fail, and ministers to be every where discredited ?They must wish this, if faithful even to their own reasonings ;but there is something surer and more powerful than reason toproduce this effect, viz. the strongest passions of the soul love,hatred, ambition, the love of glory, and the fear of shame.One of the worst fruits of party spirit and of a systematicopposition is, that it renders necessary, and therefore almostjustifies, corruption. The evil here unspeakable gradually-diffusingitself and corrupting the whole community.Party creates and diffuses a false moral system, provides themeans of reputation and acceptance for men not entitled to it bytheir real merits, provides an amnesty for every crime staunchzeal for the party excuses all, defends all, heals all, justifies all.Evils of party spirit in public, but far more in private life.The real use of an opposition is lost and discredited by thisgross abuse and indiscriminate application of it.In times so difficult and dangerous as ours, it can scarcely bepossible that any plan can be proposed which, if it succeeds,would be extensively beneficial, against which many plausibleobjections, .&c. might not be urged. A choice of evils is commonlyall that is now left to us ; the relations of every measureare so numerous and diversified from the complicated natureand parts of our political society.Of how many beneficial plans are we now deprived by itsbeing known that it will be easy to render them unpopular :it too naturally becomes the object of a government to getthrough its business quietly, and, if they can, escape censure,not to be very solicitous to obtain praise : to l>e safe becomestheir grand object.Combinations of men will do what individuals would haveabhorred.VOL. II. X4.58 APPENDIX.A party man no more questions a leader's right than asoldier his prince's.In proportion as the country's difficulties and dangers increase,party commonly more active and clamorous, becausemore hope of driving out opponents. Thus we are most dividedwhen we should be most united. (Dia.)Parliament degraded by the languor with which publicinterests treated, compared with the animation called forth bypetty party and personal squabbles.The people think worse of us even than we deserveby the invariable contrariety of opinions, &c. of the twoparties in law and arithmetic as well as in politics.by rash declarations made by opposition, afterwards forgotten,&c.by the squabbling and bickering of which the publictired the public spirit and feeling of the country being sodisgusted and exhausted as scarce again to be capable ofresuscitation.-by the acceptance of the most doubtful public servants,and the detracting from the best.Parliament's time and attention, much more administration's,wasted on frivolous objects in the most critical times.Projects, measures, &c. withheld both by administration andopposition, and neutral men. Here the sum of loss scarcelyto be estimated.Above all, an excuse for corruption furnished.The check of public opinion in appointments, &c. annulled,and an excuse provided for incapacity and unfitness.The effects of a generous emulation throughout the wholeEVILS OF PARTY. 459community destroyed, and a worse principle, obsequiousnessand blind party zeal, substituted in its place ; and moral principleweakened.Public men less circumspect in their conduct knowing thatno innocence or merit can exempt from censure of opponents,and no misconduct preclude the defence of their own party.The party principle becoming the point of honour, the grandgoverning law where religion is defective, may in time sanctionthe most gross deviations from good morals ; may find itsway into our courts of justice, &c. and triumph over the weaknessand futility of oaths. We now see oaths disregardedwhere not disgraceful. Custom-House qualification, &c.The moral sensibility of party men gradually impaired bythe habit of referring all to the party principle.Party ever in extremes ; a stranger to that moderation whichbecomes human weakness and ignorance.Party's effect on the King pernicious, produces contemptfor patriotism.Party's growth in our law courts favoured by so manylawyers being in parliament.Even party attachments cannot claim the dignity of truefriendship and affection.A party-divided country invites foreign attack. Duke ofArgyle's letter from the old Pretender, 1744. French Play,1793 Invasion of England.Historians' remarks on party's effects on the fall of Greece,Rome, &c. Absurdity of supposing we can have all the goodwithout the evil. Adam Smith's human nature presumption.Peroration. Vita party. I hate it just in proportion as Ilove my country.460 APPENDIX.Notes before meeting for erecting a monument to H. I?. H. theDuke of Kent.THAT high rank is not a property, but a trust, is a truth suggestedby reason, confirmed by revelation, and, as we Britonsshould own with gratitude, inculcated on us by our invaluableconstitution : for this regulated spirit of liberty teaches usthat all the various stations in society have their several appropriateduties, so that the diversities of each is intended forthe benefit of the others, and the common good of all.But this, alas ! is a truth we are all sadly apt to forget, allranks of us ; for it may be equally forgotten by the poor man'sforgetting his appropriate duties, which are no less honourablein the sight of God because they derive their importance fromthe motive which dignifies them, and are productive of thatmoral improvement which is the object of the faculties of allclasses.The higher classes under greater temptations to forget it,and the more to be pitied on this account.When therefore we find an eminent instance of the remembranceand performance of this duty of station, we should remarkand applaud it, and point it out to others, as marshallingtheir path to true honour and glory.Sympathizing with those who think the Duke of Kent emi-notesOF SPEECHES. 461gently distinguished himself, I came to pay my tribute of respect,admiration, and gratitude.Princes of the blood awkwardly circumstanced in all countries.In despotisms, apt to form rebellions ; or, in order toextinguish jealousy, they retire from observation. Some ofthem have struck out paths to eminence. [Prince John ofPortugal.] But commonly waste life in sensualities. Truth,and the Divine ordination of things, will not let me call thempleasures.Even here, princes in difficult and embarrassing circumstances.But here, shall I say the instincts of the heart, andnot rather the lessons of heavenly wisdom, have led our princesfor the first time to strike out for themselves a road, which hasnow become well worn with many tracks on it, all in the samedirection, and all leading alike to esteem, public benefit, andindividual comfort.Public benefits also result. Glare of royalty softened ; attachmentto royal family confirmed ; and new benefits manifestedin the British constitution.Objects in view to point out to imitation, stimulants, &c.462 APPENDIX.Thoughts previous to a speech at a Missionary Society.IT may justly be regarded as a signal instance of the Divinebenevolence, that it has pleased God to render true religionnot only the means of securing our future and everlasting happiness,but also of rescuing mankind from many great andpresent evils which are found to prevail in all countries whichare strangers to Divine revelation. Now this is not the case withregard to our bodily diseases : there the road to health is commonlyby nauseous, painful, disgusting, wearisome proceedings ;but He who made us, and in dealing with us mixed so muchmercy with His justice, doubt! less meant thereby to furnish menwith additional motives, both for receiving the Divine testimonyand diffusing it among others of their fellow-creatures. Thiswas not necessary with respect to bodily diseases, for there thenatural solicitude and earnest desire of health and freedom frompain and preservation of existence, are so strong, that menwill submit for them to the severest discipline : but had thesame painful courses been found in the necessary path to spiritualhealth and vigour, alas ! how would the difficulty andobstacles to the reception of true religion have been multiplied,and their force augmented ! Whereas the temporal blessingswhich Christianity brings along with it, and scatters with alavish hand as it directs its beneficent course over the earth,are quite a premium as it were on their admission ; so that inthe very instances which might be alleged as marks of the Di-notesOF SPEECHES. 4C3vine severity and vengeance, we find fresh proofs of His beneficenceand love. He leaves men to fall into those depths ofvice, and misery, and degradation which are the consequencesof their own departure from Him, but He does it that these veryevils may serve as the many motives for prompting them to receivethe gracious intimations of mercy, by the acceptance ofwhich they will not only secure their escape from future sufferings,but immediate blessings, and deliverance from the greatestof the social and domestic evils they endure.And as if for the very purpose of preventing men's conceivingthat they might find in civilization, and in humanity, anabundant cure for all the diseases of their nature, we find thatall the polished nations, both of the ancient and modern world,that have been strangers to Christianity, have been sunk indepths of vice too shocking for specification, and that this vicehas been attended with at least an equal amount of misery.There is a uniformity also in the state of this civilized, bututterly unchristianized, country;* which, while it is indicativeof a common source of evil, favours also the supposition of acommon ultimate purpose of good. Infanticide, besides horrorsunutterable debased condition of the whole female sex,and ferocity in war.While we congratulate each other on the formation and successof our Society, we must express our wonder at its being solate in coming forward, for Christ's command strong and unlimited; and there was every motive to encourage missionaryattempts, that could be found in the wretched state of men,both barbarous [dia] and polished [dia]. Infidels indeed haverelated wonders of the purity, as well as virtuous knowledge, ofvarious unchristianized countries ; as the Chinese, Hindoo,&c. ; but on closer inspection, this always found fallacious.We see cause to adore God's goodness, in rendering Christianitythus medicinal to the bodies, to the temporal as well asthe spiritual state of men.The meeting had reference probably to India.464 APPENDIX.Also in forbidding them light and happiness from merecivilization.Let us then advance with increased alacrity. We are tooapt to be discouraged. Does not experience warrant ourwarmest hopes ? What if others formerly had been as desponding?END OF VOL. II.JOHN Child AND SON, BUNGAY.