THELIFEWILLIAM WILBERFORCE.BY HIS SONS,ROBERT ISAAC WILBERFORCE, M. A.VICAR OF EAST Harleigh, LATE FELLOW OF ORIEL COLLEGE;ANDSAMUEL WILBERFORCE, M. A.RECTOR OF Brimstone.IN FIVE VOLUMES.VOL. V.Happy is the stateIn which ye, father, here do dwell at ease,Leading a life so free and fortunateFrom all the tempests of these worldly seas.SPENCER.LONDON :JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET.MDCCCXXXVIII/DAJOHN CH1LDS AND SON, BUNGAY.THELIFE OF WILBERFORCE.CHAPTER XXXIII.OCTOBER 1818 TO JANUARY 1820.Hay ti Aix la Chapelle Lord Castlereagh Mr, ClarionChristophe, and his Professors Mr. Babington Thenew parliament Slave Trade, and slavery Eulogium onSir S. Romilly Penal Law Reform Diary SismondiReligious anniversaries Roman Catholic Question Lottery"Busy life Correspondence with his children LadyHolland Prince Leopold General Boyd Bishop ofGloucester Slave Trade Address Summer tour 'jarhamCourt Barley Wood Blaize Castle Wells MalvernElmdon Wood Hall Disturbed state of the countryManchester magistrates Opening of session RestrictiveBills Diary Opposes education not grounded on religion.His summer rambles and the expedition to the Lakeshad not withdrawn the thoughts of Mr. Wilberforcefrom his Hadrian and West Indian clients. Beforehe left the neighbourhood of London he was preparingto make an effort in their favour at the approachingCongress at Aix la Chapelle ; and urged Mr.VOL. v. B2 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1818.Stephen 1 " to prepare something for Lord Castle -reach's perusal while yet in this country, to which wemay refer, and which may predispose him to the causeof Hayti. I cannot help hoping that the state ofparliament is such, that he would not like to shockpublic opinion by not sympathizing with a Sovereignwho is endeavouring to civilize and Christianize hispeople. It would be important to show that Christopheis not himself a rebel, and that the blacks werenot Rabbinical revolutionists, but that they wereforced into independence by the folly and wickednessof others ; and by the way, Alexander's situation inrelation to Poland, may dispose him to admit that aperiod of fifty years is sufficiently long to justify byprescription the not restoring the old order of things."His chief hopes from the Congress rested upon Alexander'sconduct. te Castlereagh will tell you," he writesagain, 2 " and tell you truly, that the Congress willhave nothing to do with Abolitionism in any form.But my idea is that the Emperor of Russia may belikely to come forward and befriend a proposal tomake the Slave Trade piracy after the Abolition ofit by Spain and Portugal ; and oh that we could dosomething for the poor West Indian slaves throughthe same medium, or at least for Hayti !You very much misconceive my sentiments if yousuppose that I do not believe that bringing ourgovernment over to our Hadrian views would be anexcellent service. It was rather that I despaired ofit, conceiving Castlereagh to be a fish of the coldJuly 23. 2 To J. Stephen Esq. Aug. 19.1818. Ain LA CHAPELLE. 3blooded kind. But you have hit on the bait for him,if he be to be caught at all, by the exhibition ofpolitical consideration affecting our own interests,rather than any prospects of general philanthropynot that he would not recognise these. Now I fear hewould dislike our having any agent at Aix la Chapelle.I should be rejoiced indeed if he would suffersome one to go as his travelling depositary of tropicalintelligence ; but I have no notion he would, and itcould not be done without his consent. It would notbe at all proper for you to go, which Macaulay suggested.I fear I could not do it without impropriety.But Clarkson seems formed by Providence for thepurpose." " He is the only man that could go andcarry our representations who may be suffered to goof his own impulse, and not deputed by us : an affairof great importance in relation to the effect to beproduced upon Castlereagh. Then he will be moreacceptable than most to the Emperor Alexander, andwe may depend on his being in earnest." 3 " He wouldbe regarded as half Quaker, and may do eccentricthings with less offence than you or I could. I cantruly say I have no suspicion of Castlereagh. Itwould be most unjust to harbour any such notionafter all his pains arid efforts. But in his public characterhe might be unable without a violation ofdiplomatic propriety to do a thing which might bevery usefully done by a nemo who should apply hislever to the great Alexander." 43 To Zachary Macaulay Esq. July 29.To James Stephen Esq. Aug. 19.B 2I rf-I Q-l QLIFE OF W.LBEB.W not be moved by theBut the Emperor **. WO uld dolever of the "nemo. - - C i at ksononly.nothing for <* ET* an hour and ahaW;our views. consequences most m-ph e's Dependence produced J^ ^ ^to Hast, There w ce in all hi sintercourse W th ^2 le ' st his ow n troops shouldreduce his army. Ws hanker .ieavehim; and I long to-an ^ ^ , )of eing after the rest o s ^^ heuntil his depended ceLet te r & o m M, Parson to W. rce E.- Oc, U, .6 To James Stephen Esq. Sept. 17.o ames .7 To Z. Macaulay Esq. July 18.1818. Hadrian PROFESSORS. 5clans and divines, governesses for the royal daughters,tutors for his sons, down to ordinary teachers of acommon school, and " two ploughmen and theirploughs and families." They went into a land wherethe whole tone of society was utterly demoralized, andvice in no degree disgraceful ; and though he inquiredmost cautiously, scrutinized most closely, and choseat last the best who offered, numbers of these couldnot stand the trial. The professors quarrelled witheach other ; some by open vices disgraced the causethey were designed to further ; some were carried offby dissoluteness and disease; whilst the few wholaboured faithfully found their hands weakened intheir single striving against the multitude of evildoers,and added often, by their desponding letters,to the common burthen of this most oppressivecorrespondence. Still he went on with his labourscheerfully and never fainted in them, so long as theopportunity of service lasted.Those who saw him only when he could properlyallow the overflowing kindness of his heart to takeits natural course, can form no idea of his firmness,when his great objects required a certain measureof severity. " Depend upon it," he says to Mr.Stephen, 8 " is a man of such inexhaustible anduncontrollable absurdity, that it would be highly inexpedientto connect our cause with him more thanis unavoidable. I fear you will think it somewhathard, yet considering the great interests at stake, Icannot suffer his necessities to have any weight ; buteJuly 20.6 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1818.if he is in need I will gladly allow him a little sumannually, and we might send it to him anonymouslyevery year." Of another he says, " We must declarethat his use of our name is utterly unwarrantable heis like some vermin which will infest the most unwillingsubject. It is the nature of things that thefairest trees and the finest fruits should be the prey ofreptiles and grubs." 9When his family party had broken up at Rydale, hehad been compelled to travel in a different directionfrom the rest ; and on the 24th of October he wrote toMrs. Wilberforce from Cambridge " I thank GodI am arrived at this place in safety, making up near350 miles which I have travelled, full 100 of them atnight, without a single accident. How grateful oughtI to be for this protecting providence of a graciousGod ! And I just now recollect in a most naturalconnexion, that tomorrow, the 25th of October, is theanniversary of the day on which I experienced thatnotable escape from being drowned in the Avon, 10when we lodged at Bath Eaton. Praise the Lord,O my soul. I forget the year ; do tell it me if youremember, by a mother's calendar. I have receivedyour welcome letter, telling me of your being to leaveRydale yesterday, and go to Yoxall Lodge. Thetime stole upon me, and I find that I must now directto you at the haunt of so many of my happy days inmy bachelor's state.Sunday. Lest I should not be able to write in theevening, I take up my pen now, (three-quarters past9 To Z. Macaulay Esq. Sept. 7. lo Vol. iii. p. 132.1818. JOURNEY FROM RYDALE. 7two,) though I shall to-day write but little, havinghad very little time to myself this morning beforechurch. My heart would be very sad, but for theblessed prospects that are opened to the eye of faitheven the faith of an unworthy sinner. I hope it willbe the effect of these earthly sufferings to wean mefrom this world, and fix my affections and desiresmore on that better state, where sorrow and sighingwill have fled away. However I will not open anychapter of grievances this day, and I am ready toburn what I have written, on account of its being inany other strain than that of thankfulness. Oh whatcause for gratitude have I : no man surely so great,at least very few ! My spirits are not in themselves socheerful as they used to be, but it is one of my manymercies that they are so good as they are. I supposethe mental sky of every one has its f dim passingcloud that just tempers the ray.' Stephen comes hereto-day. Dear fellow ; his kindness, like that of theDean, is as lively as if it were ever so short an effort,and as persevering as if it were ever so parsimoniouslyexerted. No man could ever have more cause forthankfulness to the Giver of all good for the manykind friends He has vouchsafed me. Farewell. Commendingyou to the best blessings of God,I am ever yours,W. Wilberforce.P. S. I am vexed at having forgotten to make alittle present 11 to our landlady. Do think of somethingand send it in my name."11 "The day he left Rydale," says a friend who was one of his party,8 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1818.A week later he rejoined his family at YoxallLodge, and soon set off homewards. His next haltwas Rothley Temple, whence he writes word to Mr.Hey, " I am very soon returning to the House ofCommons, but in low spirits from having lost thesupport of several like-minded coadjutors, and moreespecially of the dear friend under whose roof I amnow writing. The Almighty, however, can carry onhis purposes by His own instruments ; and when I seein every part of this country new proofs presentingthemselves of the diffusion of true religion, and of itsblessed effects in promoting a spirit of active beneficenceand warm sympathy for the instruction of ignorance,and above all the promotion of Christian knowledge,my spirits rise again, and I am ready to hopethat new and unknown public men will come forwardto occupy the place of those whom we have lost.May our successors be tenfold more assiduous andmore successful than we have been."On the 24th of December he was again at Kensington,surrounded by his scattered family ; and thenew year opens with some striking resolutions of devotedservice, in his usual tone of deep humility. " Itis with a heavy heart that I look forward to the.meeting; so many friends absent, and so many objectsof pursuit, and I so unequal to them ; yet had Iduly used my powers I could do much. O Lord, doThou quicken and guide me. I have resolved to dineout scarcely at all during this season. Health is ahis love to every one, and his desire to do them good, was shown in hisallotting some little present to each, as ' little tokens of my affection tospeak for me whilst I am away.' His affection for his children and hisparting blessing after family prayers were peculiarly touching."1819. CONGRESS AND THE SLAVE TRADE. 9fair plea, and justly so at my period of constitutionarid life, and I shall get more time at command ; mymemory is certainly become very bad, but by expedients,(Finale's, &c.) I doubt not, I could in a greatdegree supply the deficiency. I must make sure ofwhat is really important. But above all, may I grow inlove, and serve and glorify more my God and Saviour."Jan. 15th. What is it to have our views spiritualwhen we are in our closets, unless we also retainand carry about with us the sense of invisible things,and the desire to please our unseen, but present Saviour,looking up to Him for grace and strength ! OLord, enable me thus to live, and may I practise self-examinationmore constantly, that I may watch myselfin this important particular." 12The state of the Slave Trade question claimed hisfirst attention; and he was on the 11th of Januarywith Lord Castlereagh for an hour, when he toldme all that had passed between him and the otherpowers." 13 It was not a gratifying audience. LordCastlereagh indeed had done his utmost, but he hadmet with the most determined opposition. The alliedsovereigns agreed upon a letter to the King of Portugal,urging him to fix a definite and speedy time forthe Abolition of the Trade ; but they declined to makeit piracy, or concede a mutual right of search ; u andsoon after, " both the French and Americans refusedto come into the plan of conveying the right of tryingslave ships to commissioners from each nation, want-diary." Diary, Jan. 11.4 Report of African Institution,B 310 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1819.ing to draw from us some concession of our maritimerights. 5 ' 15What steps to take in this' great cause was nowa most perplexing question. An indignant senseof the wrongs and miseries which were wearing outthe West Indian negroes burned within him, andhe " longed to proclaim the grievances of " his " poorblack clients ;" and was " strongly disposed to bringtheir case forward ;" 16 yet to do so at this momentwould be to give up all chance of the general suppressionof the Trade, and that without any reasonablehope of a prosperous campaign at home. He wellknew that he must rouse the moral feeling of thiscountry before he could enforce the demands helonged to make in behalf of the slave population.The time for this was not come. He sounded the WesleyanMethodists, and they, who would be somethingin advance of others, were still for leaving to theirmasters all improvements in the condition of theslaves. He tried the opposition, whom he had unwillinglybeen forced to think his readiest supporters, 17and even they hung back. 18 The colonial assembliesi* Diary, Jan. 15, 1819.16 Letter to Z. Macaulay Esq. Dec. 15, 1818." I think with you," he told Mr. Bankes, Sept. 23, " that hasacted and is acting very unwarrantably in his opposition ; but that is nobusiness of mine. He supports my African cause in all its extent, andI would not make him my enemy ; the less so because government willnot treat us fairly in West Indian questions. Had they done so, I shouldhave taken a more forward part against opposition. For another importantinterest may fairly make you keep back, though it ought not toregulate the side you take upon a question.">8 Even in May, 1820, the Edinburgh Review declared, No. LXVI.,Without slaves those islands could not be maintained."1819. OPENING OF THE SESSION. 11had passed or were passing registration bills, and thegovernment at home were doing what they could torender them effectual. It was a most unpropitiousmoment for exertion 9 and he could only prepare theminds of men for future measures, while he watchedevery opportunity of present service as when hewent with Lord Gambier to the Admiralty : wecould not see Lord Melville, but I wrote him a letterstating the extreme need of ships of war on the Africancoast, and how much the Slave Trade was increased."* But though less than usual could be donein his own cause he found no time for idleness. Thepolitical calm with which the session opened, affordedan opportunity for bringing forward many differentmeasures connected closely with humanity and morals,in all of which he took an active part.His daily occupations differed so little from those ofthe preceding spring, that the copious transcripts ofhis Diary at that time will render needless any but afew of the most interesting extracts of the presentseason. Some of these throw a strong light upon hischaracter. " I thank you for your truly friendlyconduct," is his answer to a friend who had transmittedto him the censures of another on his conduct,and I beg you to join my dear and excellent brother-in-lawin helping me to correct my own infirmities ;19 Justly did La Fayette write to him at this time, " Vous avez eu parvotre courageous perseverance des success inspires; le plus fort estfait : la victoire sera complete, et nos neveux dans ce cas comme dansbien autres ne compendious pas qu'il y ait eu a combattre." To W.Wilberforce Esq. Aug. 7, 1819.2 Diary, Jan. 15.12 LIFE OF Wilberforce. 1819.as you have so often kindly borne with them. Forthis end the first step will always be to tell me of myfaults, and I trust I can truly say I shall love you thebetter for so doing, and even if I do not think youright I shall be sure that your motive was friendly.You must also flap me and rouse and aid my decayingmemory. Poor dear Babington ! I miss him oftenin this way."These were not idle words. In presenting on the9th of February a petition from the Quakers againstthe severe enactments of our penal code, he expressedhis deep regret for the loss of that greatman who had made this subject his especial study.This warm and feeling language drew on him aremonstrance for having termed Sir Samuel Romillya great and good man." " Had a truly honestand Christian-like letter from Mr. Ponder," is thehumble entry of his Diary, " to which I replied Itrust in the same strain, on my eulogium on SirSamuel Romilly. Perhaps I went too far, thoughthe newspaper made me say more than I did. But,alas, I well know how often I am led away intosaying what I never meant ! How can I but addthe above," he continues, " when I am fresh fromthe House of Commons on Bennett's motion, 21 inthe debate on which most unaccountably, exceptfrom my not having at all meditated before-handwhat I should say, I am told, and I fear justly notwithstandingsome opposite assurances, that I wasextremely harsh against Castlereagh. How strange21 For an inquiry into the condition of the country.1819. PENAL CODE. 13this ! I really have a personal regard for him, havealways wished, and do now wish him well, and didnot in the least mean to be severe, especially againsthim. He had no interest in preventing the inquiry.However, may God forgive me, and enable me to actin a way more agreeable to my Christian character ofpeace, and love, and meekness. I am truly anddeeply hurt by the consciousness, though quite relievedby a few friendly words which passed betweenCastlereagh and me in going out of the House."Yet he adds two days later " Feb. 22nd. House.Tierney's amendment on Castlereagh's motion, thatthe 10,000 " [assigned to the Duke of York as custosof the King's person] " should come from the privypurse, not the civil list. The best debate I have witnessedfor a long time. Castlereagh, Tierney, Peel,Bankes, Solicitor-general, Scarlettt, all did well. Ihad really the plan of a good and very telling speechfrom its taking up some of Peel's points, but, partlyfrom my distress about Castlereagh, I came awaywithout speaking, and government carried it by 95.I voted with the opposition." 22Many welcomed eagerly his connexion with thiscause. Amongst others Mr. Simeon tells him in afriendly letter, 23 " I rejoice that the revision of ourlaws is, as far as the bringing of it before parliamentgoes, committed to you. You have not the legalknowledge of Sir Samuel, but you have (pace tua)more practical wisdom and moderation : nor willyour success in advocating the cause give undue advantageto licentious Jacobins."22 Diarv. *> F e ] x n.14 LIFE OF Wilberforce. 1819.He had too much practical discernment to be enticedinto a service for which his overburthenedpowers would no doubt have proved unequal, and hisspeech of February 9th had been a part of his oldwisdom , in setting others upon a good scent insteadof following it himself." He replies to Mr.SimeonLondon, Feb. 12, 1819.My dear Friend,I must not only have weak eyes, but no eyes,not to return three lines to so affectionate a salutation.But you, I find, like many others, have seen whatI said the other day misstated, for I expressly guardedagainst the supposition of conceiving myself equalto such a service, as that of revising our laws so faras respects capital punishments. I can write butlittle. I can scarcely read at all. That infirmityalone would be an absolute preventative. The fact isthat I called on the House in general, not without ananticipation that my call would be answered by SirJames Mackintosh. He possesses many of the desirablequalities, though combined with some which Iwish did not exist. But, I must check myself, thankingyou for your hint about Mr. Atkinson and theRasp House. Farewell.Yours ever affectionately,W. Wilberforce."Though he would not undertake the conduct of thiscause, his Diary will show that he gave to it whattime he could. " March 2nd. House. Mackintoshon Capital Punishments. He spoke admirably. I1819. DIARY. 15very middling. 4th. With Lord Lansdown to Rush,to talk over Abolition being made piracy by Englandfirst . . United States to follow our example . . or topropose our doing it conjointly. He, as I anticipated,clearly preferred the former. Canistered, 24 and toHouse. Canning's excellent speech on returningthanks to Marquis Wellesley and the army. Gloriouscountry when a reserve in Bishop's case on theground of his not having yet proved the justice of hisexecuting the Killadar. 12th. To Committee onCapital Punishments, and House : Brougham havingtold me he would present New South Wales petition.13th. General Hall, late Governor of Mauritius, withus to breakfast. He opened a world of villany inSlave Trade, peculation, &c. 15th. To the House.Heard confess that he had wrongly deniedthrough defect of memory, &c. ; that his memoryrefreshed, &c. I may recollect my own decayingmemory, and pray to be kept out of such circumstances.Heard preach. Very clever, but wantingtenderness and flow. Too jerking and popping. Inthe evening Gerard Noel preached on ' Then theythat feared the Lord, 5 &c. a subject congenial withhis own nature and dispositions. It was quite balsamic.19th. Bill on Game System second readingcarried, 110 to 83. I. spoke pretty well, wholly withoutpreparation. I get scarcely any time for study.I divide my time between such a variety of objectsthat I never prepare for debates. This must be84 Another entry may serve as a comment upon this expression. " Eatcold meat from canister ; as good a dinner as can be desired."16 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1819.amended. 24th. African Institution. Stephen spokebeautifully on Sir S. Romilly. Canistered. House,The case of the London Fire Act clergy spoke." MI cannot hear' he said, "without disgust honourablegentlemen declare their attachment to the Church,and then propose to pay the clergy with a miserablepittance which they would not deem a fit provision formen of education in any other line of life whatever."April 2nd. Saw various characters in the morning.Then to Committee on Criminal Law. Then toGrattan's about three Plunket, Newport, Tierney,Abercrombie, Brougham, Mackintosh, &c. Weagreed about Roman Catholic Motion then to ameeting of the Berbice Commissioners. 6th. Dinedat Duke of Gloucester's. I felt awkward about cards,though I declared I did not make a point of conscienceof not playing. 7th. Bennett's motion forstopping the sailing of a vessel with female convictsto New South Wales. Never was there a clearer case.I seconded in order to soften, and to induce them tostop the ship, by stating that its being thought thatsome remedy might be devised for the evils of themiddle passage, and of New South Wales, was a reasonsufficient. Greatly beat, alas ! 16th. Mr. Pictor,an American gentleman, introduced by Southeya good federalist near four years in Europe travellingat Gottingen some time the professorsthere quite sceptical. Schlegel become a RomanCatholic. In Spain the commonalty can generallyread ; he asked them a thousand times to try, andDiary,1819. DIARY. 17found they could. Inquisition had begun to fulminateagainst the damnable errors of Luther. No safetravelling except under protection of contrabandistshe travelled safely guarded by fourteen of themthe Seville merchants give their bills of exchange tothem they smuggle dollars out of the kingdom. TheSpaniards a fine people ; with respectful and kindwords you may get any thing done by them. Thisshows why they disliked their deliverers and payers,the English, more than their squeezers, the French ;the former overbearing, the latter courtly. 19th.Sismondi called for an hour or two in the evening,and showed himself a man of first-rate talents.May 2nd. Sunday morning, Gerard Noel evening,Mr. Matthias from Dublin, a most strikingpreacher. Lady O. and M., and an infant schoolmasterdined the Barry s with us. Alas ! I quiteshrink from the week that is before me. Well, Godhas graciously supported me hitherto, and still let metrust in Him. I know not what to make of thishurrying residence ; my continuance here claims mymost serious consideration."It was from the prominent part always allotted himon these occasions that he so greatly shrunk. No manever attended them with a simpler or more ferventspirit, or entered therefore with more feeling into alltheir true excellence. " There really is in such ascene," he writes to a friend, 26 " a moral sublimity,which, if duly estimated, would be worthy of thetongues of angels ; and indeed, I doubt not, they whoTo the Rev. J. W. Cunningham, May 17, 1832.18 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1819.are declared by our blessed Lord to sympathize withthe poorest, repenting, earthly sinner, do participatein the joy and thankfulness which are called forth inour Christian assemblies, in hearing of the generaldiffusion of the word of God, and of the labours, andsufferings, and blessed be God the triumphs also, ofthose zealous missionaries who are devoting theirlives in distant lands to the service of their DivineMaster."Never perhaps was his eloquence more winning thanwhen on these subjects it flowed fresh from his fullheart and many a stranger to the ordinary excitementsof the town returned at the week's end intothe country nerved by it afresh for his path of solitarylabour. " I shall never forget," says one who thusheard him, " the effect of a short speech of his uponmy own mind. He was alluding to some natural difficultieswhich had impeded the success of missions,which ought not to discourage us ; for nature seemedoften, as well as man, to fight against St. Paul. Hewas not merely ' scourged with rods,' but ( thricehe suffered shipwreck.' The tone, the manner, thevoice in which he brought out this simple thoughtwas so overpowering, that I went home with it ringingin my ears for days. It was the hope of beingthus useful which reconciled him to what he wouldhave shrunk from otherwise as a needless display.In the country he made it an invariable rule, to takeno part at such meetings unless he was peculiarlyconnected with the place. Thus in the precedingautumn he went with Mr. Wordsworth to a Bible1819. RELIGIOUS ANNIVERSARIES. 19meeting held at Kendal, " because it falls within myrule, being now my market town." But in Londonhe would not churlishly refuse this service. " I reallyknow no way in which you do so much good in solittle time, as when by a few words of congratulationon an anniversary, you give action and efficiency tothose who bear the labour and heat of the year." 27This ready sympathy with the feelings of others wasa beautiful feature of his mind. " To give pain," hesays, " to a man who lives quietly, and whose spiritsare not naturally high, is a very different thing frominflicting the same stroke on any one circumstancedin all respects as I am, when it is only like a shovereceived in a crowd ; you forget it in a moment as itis succeeded by another." 28The bustling week to which he was looking forwardbegan upon the 3rd of May, with " Breakfasted Dr.Hamilton (Irish) Owen, Mons. Heifer from Paris,Mons. De Colles, (stating the friendly disposition ofthe present French government to our Bible Society,)and to Methodist Mission Society, where a full meetingafterwards Church Missionary House eat coldmeat and House Catholic Question. Grattan long,and very inaudible. The debate went off quite unintentionally; Peel and Plunket waiting for eachother so that only Grattan, Croker, (very cleverly,)Leslie Forster, Lord Normanby, Brownlow, andBeecher, and I lost my opportunity with many others.4th. Church Missionary anniversary. Dear27 Letter to J. Stephen Esq. May 12.s 8 To Mrs. Wilber force, Aug. 23.20 LIFE OF Wilberforce. 1819.Lord Gambler in the chair, and closed with a hymnafter opening with a prayer. I spoke warmly, and sopretty well. Mr. Matthias from Dublin very good.Delightful meeting. Lodgings and writing, when Irecollected Lottery Resolutions. Hurried down tothe House, and found Van. concluding his defence ofLotteries against Lyttleton, who I heard had spokenlong and ably. I drawing up Canning, the debatebecame lively and warm. Castlereagh, Huskisson,and Tierney, Plunket and others beat by 183 against88 ; but the real opinion of the House and countryclear, and rendered more so by Tierney having spokenout plainly and honourably; yet I grieve for poorVansittart, who not having had nerves enough to resolveagainst it, perhaps not feeling his strength sufficient,heard himself defended on grounds which musthave been most offensive to him. Poor Canning toohow grievous it is to hear him so unjust to his ownreal kindness of heart, as to attempt to turn into ridiculethe story of distress told by Buxton with great effect !5th. Several breakfasters. Bible Society anniversary.Charles Shore spoke with fascinating tenderness.I was called on suddenly, but D. G. didpretty well. Then cold meat and Downing Street.Then House on Irish Window Tax, and supposed Ishould vote with Shaw and Parnell, but though supportedby all Plunket's forces, really government'scause so good that I was bound to support them.11th. Naval and Military Bible meeting. House.Lord Camden's generous gift to the public, andTierney acknowledged it very handsomely. It is a1819. PUBLIC MEETINGS. 21sad proof of the low moral tone of the world, thatpeople in general say, ( More fool he.' Then Bill forprotecting the New Zealanders and Otaheitans.15th. British and Foreign School Society.Duke of Kent in the chair. Oh how glad I am thatthe tenth meeting is this day over ! The consumptionof time is really too great." " Would it hadbeen my favoured lot," writes Hannah More, 29 " tohear one of twelve speeches in ten days." The wonderis how with his feeble health he stood such constantfatigue. A house crowded with " inmates " . .their number swelled every morning by a tide ofbreakfasters " . . then a throng of " callers " acrowded meeting at which he made often a long,always an animated speech then a budget of lettersto be read and answered his only rest or food acantered " dinner ; and then the House, where hesat long, and sometimes spoke again, not gettinghome till " all were gone to bed." It is not a littlestriking, to turn to some of his letters to his children,written in the midst of such a life as this ; often athurried intervals when waiting for an audience at anoffice, or some such scrap of time ; (" for I always takethe raw material with me to such places, and work itup into the manufactured article as opportunity permits;") but showing even in their fair and legiblecharacters how much he consulted the feelings of thoseto whom he wrote. A sample or two of this correspondence,maintained once a week at least with each ofhis absent children, will best show his tone of mind.June 26.22 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1819.My dear /I stop at a friend's house in London solelyto write to you a few lines ; sincerely concerned at myhaving been so engrossed by a host of callers, as notto secure a single quarter of an hour secure from interruptionto converse by pen and ink with my verydear absent child. Yet as when you were a little boyI used to delight in taking a passing kiss of you, so nowit is quite gratifying to exchange a salutation with youon paper, though but for a minute or two. The sightof my hand writing will call forth in my dear affectionateall those images of parental and family tenderness,with which the Almighty permits us to be refreshed,when children and parents are far separatedfrom each other. You have a heavenly Father too,my dearest boy, who loves you dearly, and who haspromised He will never leave you nor forsake you, ifyou will but devote yourself to His service in Hisappointed way. O my dearest boy, pray in earnest ;guard against formality in prayer. Endeavour toplace yourself as it were in the presence of God whenyou call upon Him. Again and again, may God blessand preserve you, and grant you His Holy Spirit, anda disposition to deny yourself. But I must breakoff : somebody has been talking to me almost all thetime I have been writing, so if there are mistakesexcuse them ; and believe me ever,Yours most affectionately,W. Wilberforce."30 Aged 13.1819. LETTERS TO HIS CHILDREN. 23TO THE SAME.My dearest ,The last letter from home communicated toyou the death of one young friend, my present letterwill convey the account of an event still less to be expected; that of the death of poor B. Poor young man,he sadly disappointed all his real friends, not only byfailing in his studies, but also I fear by a licentiouscourse of conduct. Suddenly he was thrown on abed of sickness. Mercifully God gave him some daysfor repentance, and we are not without hope he mayhave found mercy, for he was very penitent. But,alas ! dependence on a death-bed repentance, is a saddependence indeed ! O my dear boy, may you rememberyour Creator in the days of your youth ; thenwhether you live or die, all will be well. Farewell,my very dear , I am sadly hurried, but I wouldnot omit writing to you to-day.I am ever your affectionate Father,W. Wilberforce."TO THE SAME.My very dear ,I cannot tell you how much I am gratified byyour affectionate letter received this morning. I amvery glad that you like your new situation one of thegrand secrets to be remembered in order to enableus to pass through life with comfort, is not to expecttoo much from any new place or plan on the whole24 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1819.the report I have of you is gratifying. But there isone quarter of my prospect which I hope my belovedchild will endeavour to brighten. I fear you do notapply to your business with energy. This rememberwas your fault before, and you alleged that it arosein a great degree from your wanting spirits, throughhaving no play-fellows for your hours of recreation,no schoolmaster for your seasons of business. A horsenever goes so cheerfully alone as when animated bythe presence of a companion, and a boy profits fromthe same quickening principle ; but my dearesthas not now this damper to plead. Another greatbenefit to be derived from being with other boys is,that of learning to give up our own will and way withgood humour. * Farewell, my beloved, I believe you will be the comfort of yourold father's declining years.Ever your most affectionate,W. WILBERFORCE."TO THE SAME.My dearest ,I have not either time or eyesight to-day sufficientto send you what from its size, may deservethe name of a letter ; but a lettering it may be called,and you know the old passage, Finest sua gratia parvisa maxim which from my not being myself of extravagantlylarge dimensions, I may be supposed to considera very reasonable proposition. I am glad to find (andit is quite a drop of balm in my heart when I hear of1819. LETTERS TO HIS CHILDREN. 25my dear boy's going on well) that you are setting towork doggedly, as Dr. Johnson used to term it ; but Ilike neither the word nor the idea. I hope my dearboy will act from a higher principle than one which Ihave seen in a poor animal in a team, when the taste ofthe waggoner's whip has made him resolutely set allhis muscular force in action, and pull up a steep as ifdetermined to master it. But my dearest will beprompted by a nobler set of motives ; by a desire ofpleasing God and showing his gratitude to his Saviour,and not grieving the Holy Spirit ; of giving pleasure toa father and mother who are watching over his progresswith tender solicitude. I have been looking oversome old papers till my heart is not a little affected.How year passes away after year, and first one person issnatched away and then another ! Little did I expect Ishould outlive so many much more robust, and manyof them younger than myself. But to persons of yourage as well as mine, the lesson is read, t Be thou alsoready.' And then, my dearest boy, we shall neverpart, if we have made our calling and election sure ;we shall never again be in the storm, but remain foreverin the enjoyment of the pleasures which are atGod's right hand for evermore. I remembered thatyou would receive this on a Sunday, and thereforepermitted myself to fall into a serious strain. IndeedI am always tempted to sing in this key when I amaddressing one of my absent children, because lovingthem so dearly I am naturally drawn into the discussionof those topics in which their best interestsare concerned. Above all things, my dear , at-vol.v. c26 LIFE OF Wilberforce. 1819.tend to your private devotions. Beware of wanderingthoughts. If you do but pray in earnest, I amsure all will be well. May God bless and preserveyou. Poor has suffered grievously from thebite of a gnat; her arm from the shoulder to thefinger has been greatly inflamed, but D. G. she is nowgetting better. I remember Dr. Clarke says, theRussian soldiers often die from the bites of the gnatsin the country bordering on the Crimea ; and yet itused to be said, that f You flay a Muscovite to makehim feel.' God bless you, my dearest .Ever your affectionate Father,W. Wilberforce."But to return to the Diary. " 1 7th. A very largeand miscellaneous party of breakfasters. Afterwardscalled on at Holland House. Shown up to LadyHolland under the name of its being Lord Holland."She pressed me to come to breakfast. I see plainlythat and pay the price of civility to her fortheir kind reception at Holland House. But it maybeout of good will to Lord Holland who is truly fascinating,having something of his uncle's good humour.18th. Early with Lord Liverpool about Boyd's business. . 6000 the sum fixed on. House, on Tierney'smotion 31 till all over. By far the largest number thatever was known; 354 (amongst whom I myself) against178, about 24 paired off, 4 Tellers, and Speaker.24th. House on Secret Committee. Report about thecurrency. Tierney very bitter. Peel very good all31 For a committee on the state of the nation.1819. DIARY. 27but at the last, excellent. Adjourned 25th. House.resumed debate, and at last opposition persuaded to bequiet. 26th. Canistered, as I went to the House. SirC. Monck about Parma. A horrid story. Castlereaghgives the papers, but no hopes of preserving from theTurks a place which they will give Ali Pacha, thatbloody tyrant. 27th. Large party. Breakfastersstrange assortment. Lady Holland sends me O'Mea-ra's book."June 1st. I was doubting to-day, whether or notto give up a whole day to praying for , but we areso plainly told mercy is preferred to sacrifice that I believeI am pleasing God most by only spending a partin prayer and the greater part in business. Blessedbe God mine are labours of love. 10th. House.Foreign Enlistment Bill. Sir James Mackintosh madea splendid and beautiful, but not convincing speech,for he almost skipped over the treaty with Spain,which is to me the decisive part. 11th. Committeeon Criminal Law. Resolved to put off bringingforward a bill this year, as too late ; the new law-officersopposing ; treading in the Chancellor's steps.24th. Gloucester House a committee of the AfricanInstitution. They assented to my motion, that nowtoo late to go on with the Piracy Bill this year.House. Red River business. Sir James Montgomery,Ellice, Scarlettt, William Smith, Bennett, andGoulburn, all did well in their several mannersSmith very acute ; Montgomery singularly attic, simple,and clear. Ellice manly and strong." " I understand,"writes Lord Selkirk, shortly afterwards, " thatc 228 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1819.you had an intention of expressing your sentiments ;but that the turn which the debate took did not afforda good opportunity. I regretted this much at thetime, being persuaded that even two or three sentencesfrom you would have been of material serviceto our cause. "f28th. Breakfast a numerous one, and several callersbesides. Kept till full late, but just in time to meetStephen, and Lord Teignmouth, and Macaulay, forinterviews with Lord Liverpool and Bathurst about thenew Slave Trade Bill then House. General Boyd'sbusiness. Marryatt's ill-natured and well-arrangedspeech. I found Castlereagh quite ignorant, and disposedto take against me. Sir James Mackintoshdid us much good, and Vansittart. July 1st. House.Burdett on Reform of Parliament. I had meant tospeak if good opportunity, but was over-fatigued."He closed the labours of the session by moving onthe 7th an address to the Regent on the suppressionof the Slave Trade, by which he hoped to quicken theexertions of our government, and produce some effecton France.Various considerations prevent our taking a verydistant flight," he tells Dr. Chalmers, at the beginningof the holidays, " we therefore shall hover roundthe metropolis, our greatest distance being 100 miles,to visit Mrs. Hannah More, the Bishop of Gloucester,and two or three other friends. But, my dear Sir,though with so much reason to be thankful for theassociates whom a gracious Providence has given me,To W. Wilberforce ES(I. July 22.1819. BARHAM COURT. 29I cannot but covet Dr. Chalmers ; and there is anothergentleman (Southey the poet) whom also I long to seeagain, having enjoyed some of his society last year.Perhaps if we should all live till next year, and againset our faces northwards, you would meet us in ourEnglish paradise, for that name I must give to the Lakecountry." One of the first amongst these visits wasto Barham Court, " which," he says to Mr. Stephen, 33is now in full beauty, I never saw it in greater. Wearrived late on Wednesday, and you would be pleasedto know how much I have walked about to-day. Youknow the Noels : could you not come here from Saturdaynext to the Monday following. How you wouldrevel in the walks of this fruitful scene of multiformproduction, farm, woodland, corn-fields of all kinds,meadows, garden, orchard ! Never did I see a placeof such varied forms of beauty and fertility. Comeon Friday after your business, I beg of you, that youmay have all Saturday for your rambles. I shall likethe place as well again, when I shall have witnessedthe raptures which I am sure it will kindle in you.To be sure, it does forcibly impress on me Cowper'sfamous line, borrowed however from some precedingpoet,1 God made the country, but man made the town.'But I must say farewell. God bless you. Ever yourmost affectionate friend, and especially in my quietSundays,W. Wilberforce."33 July 24.30 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1819.TO THE SAME.Blaize Castle, 34 Bristol, Sept. 15.My dear Stephen,Though you had not dated your letter fromany place, I could have pronounced it to have beenwritten from a high elevation, where you were breathingmore freely, and striding more confidently, thanin the vale below. Really it quite gratifies me to seeyou with my mind's eye so much at your ease. Weareall well after paying an eight days' visit to Mrs.H. More, and having been three or four in thishospitable mansion, I really think the sweetest residenceof a private gentleman to be found in England,except perhaps, though I doubt if it be to be excepted,Morritt's of Rokeby. It is also as well providedfor a rainy day as a fine one, having a goodlibrary, and many beautiful works of art, both insculpture and painting. The young ones being nearthe Wye were so desirous of seeing it that I did notlike to refuse them so innocent a pleasure, andaccordingly we are going off early tomorrow morning.For myself I own I seem past such schemes,if I were to consult my own pleasure : and I amgrieved to neglect my business. I have a sad accountof the Slave Trade from the man whose letter yousaw. I am writing to Castlereagh to send a person toascertain the truth or falsehood of the statement.Farewell, my dear Stephen. I can quite rejoicein the idea of your stalking along your hills, and34 The seat of J. S. Harford Esq.1819. HAYTI. 31spouting, or musing, or talking to yourself. I wish Icould join you.Ever affectionately yours,W. Wilberforce."-.1At the Deanery at Wells, where he staid 35 sometime,his attention was much occupied by the affairsof Hayti. " I understand that the Ces have resolvedto go there, and I own I am glad of it. It absolvesme from all responsibility, while it obtains for Haytithe services of people, who I hope may be useful,though I dare not in conscience rely on the morality ofpersons in whom I have no reason to believe there isa deep principle of religion, when they are going intoa country where vice is not discreditable. But, mydear Stephen, I cannot tell you how deeply I feel thenot having taken more pains to promote the religiousand moral improvement of that interesting people.In this instance, as, alas, in so many others, I find myselfat once comforted by the blessed assurances ofpardon from God, who delighteth in mercy throughthe atonement and intercession of our great Mediatorand Advocate, while I am at the same time suppliedwith the most powerful of all motives, gratitude andgenerous shame, to exert myself witri augmentedearnestness for the time to come. I wish beyondmeasure you could help me in getting some school-mistresses,and also some missionaries, though thelatter must be men of uncommon prudence and moderation.3* With the Bishop (Ryder) of Gloucester.32 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1819.We stay here D. V. till Monday sennight, andthen I believe shall fix for a week or so at Malvern.Oh how I wish I could yet do any good before I amcalled away ! Of the uncertainty of life we have justnow had a fresh instance in the death of Mrs. PattyMore. Never was there a more generous, benevolentcreature, more self-denying to herself, or kind toothers ; and her natural tempers, blessed be God,were sanctified by just views of religion, or rather bythat Divine Spirit which produced and confirmedthem." 36 " Patty sat up with me," he says in hisDiary, ee till near twelve, talking over Hannah's firstintroduction to a London life, and I, not she, brokeoff the conference ; I never saw her more animated.About eight in the morning when I came out of mybed-room I found Hannah at the door ( Have younot heard Patty is dying ? They called me to her ingreat alarm,' at which from the ghastliness of her appearanceI could not wonder. About two or threehours after our parting for the night, she had beentaken ill." 37 She lingered for about a week.His various wanderings are pleasantly retraced inaletter to another friend. 38 " My summer, which beganlate, has been spent almost entirely with variousfriends; the Noels, at my old haunt of BarhamCourt, near to which you once endured the labours, ifnot the dangers of war (on Cox Heath) ; my valuableold friend, Mrs. Hannah More, whom we the rathervisited, because we deemed it but too probable that if3 5 To J. Stephen Esq. Sept. 19. ^ Diary, Sept. 9.38 Ralph Creyke Esq.1819. SUMMER WANDERINGS. 33we should not see her this summer we might neversee her alive in another ; and such is the uncertaintyof life, that we witnessed the death-bed, and nearlythe actual departure, of her younger and strongersister then we spent a few days at the romantic andbeautiful seat, Blaize Castle, of my friend Mr. Har-ford; and afterwards a fortnight with the Bishop ofGloucester, whom I heartily wish you could hear andsee both in his public ministrations and in his privatelife ; he is really what a bishop should be for humility,industry, zeal with sobriety, hospitality, andabove all for love in all its kinds and directions, he isreally a bright specimen; and the veneration andaffection that are felt for him by all who know him,even by those who do not entirely concur with him inreligious principles, are seen beaming from everycountenance, and sparkling in every eye. He practicallyremembers the motto of old ArchbishopUsher's seal ring Vae mihi si non evangelizavero.On the week-days he visits different country parishes,whence the income of his deanery is derived, andcollects round him as crowded congregations as areusually found in a well-frequented church. Then wewere seduced into spending near a fortnight at Malvern,having visited it with the intention of merely atwenty-four hours' cursory survey. For the recoveryof an invalid, or for the means of enabling an oldman to toddle up the mountains (not quite Himalayas)without fatigue or even effort, it is by far thefirst of all English elysium. Then we spent a littlec 334 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1819.time with Mrs. W.'s widowed mother, whence I paida second short visit to a sweet lady friend to meet, byhis and her urgent desire, the Duke of Gloucesterfor a few days en ami, (must I not be an inch or twotaller for the distinction?) Then I was for but fouror five days with my dear and most excellent friendBabington, and am here paying a pop visit to mykind friend and relative, Samuel Smith, whose largefamily now occupies a palace which might be supposedto be graduated high in the scale of edifices asthe residence of Humboldt, when it was raised at leastten degrees higher by becoming the habitation ofPaul Benfield, and now I am crawling like snailunwillingly to Sutton.It is really true, that seldom has a boy returned ona black Monday with more reluctance than I to St.Stephen's. I believe we think pretty much, perhapsquite, alike as to the course required by the presentstate of the country. On the whole, I cannot buthope well for it, though I dare not be too confidentthat we may not witness scenes of something nearerto civil war, than this land has exhibited since 1646 ;and if it should come to such extremities, the bitternessand cruelty with which the contest would becarried on, would be far greater than in that sadstruggle ; as much more so, as the disciples of irreligionwill be commonly more cruel than the misguidedreligionist." Such apprehensions filled the minds ofall reflecting men. Upon the anniversary of thedeath of his sister, he writes to Mr. Stephen.1819, MANCHESTER MAGISTRATES. 35Oct. 18, 1819.My dear Stephen,I cannot suffer this memorable day to passoverwithout assuring you that while I call to mindher whom we lost three years ago, I am still moreforcibly impressed with the sense of that long anduniform course of unvaried kindness which my dearsister, as well as her brother, have experienced at yourhands. Hand is a common phrase, but very inadequateto express my meanings for I am sure yourfriendship has appeared in heart, head, feet, arms,hands, whenever they could contribute to our benefitand comfort.I have received a letter from Morritt, stating thatthe West Riding of our county is in an alarming fermentationthe lower orders too generally corrupted,and the merchants and higher manufacturers scarcelydaring to resist the tide of blasphemy and sedition.You may remember the assassination of a merchantthree or four years ago near Huddersfield, when itwas said that at the time the fatal shot was fired,there was a general shout of triumph from the tops ofhouses, hay-stacks, and other elevated situations.The Whigs have called the county of York togetherby a requisition, specifying as the objects for consideration,the conduct of the Manchester magistrates,and whether the constitutional rights of thepeople had been invaded. Lascelles and my oldfriends met and agreed to offer to attend the meeting,and to join in an application 1o the Regent to call36 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1819.parliament together, if besides the Manchester businessthere might be added an allusion to the disturbedstate of certain districts, and a declared resolution toresist all attempts to subvert the constitution. Thishowever was refused. I own, to you I may say itsafely, that I am afraid of alienating the minds of allthe opposition, and disposing them to the supportof our West Indian questions. Still, in the presentstate of the country, I believe it will be right tolook with a single eye at the object immediately recommendedto my attention by the actual situationof affairs, and to pursue it with steadiness and zeal.I must lay down my pen. Farewell.Ever affectionately yours,W. WILBERFORCE."All his letters were now tinged by this subject.Let me beg you," he asks a friend at Sheffield,when you write to give me all the information youcan concerning the state of mind of your lower orders,and particularly whether the religious part of yourcommunity has in these trying times been actingworthy of its high calling. I declare my greatestcause of difference with the democrats, is their laying,and causing the people to lay, so great a stress on theconcerns of this world, as to occupy their whole mindsand hearts, and to leave a few scanty and lukewarmthoughts for the heavenly treasure. Itreally provokes me to a degree of indignation greaterI fear than Christianity warrants, to look forward to1819. FIFTH OF NOVEMBER. 37what may happen to this highly favoured countryfrom our internal divisions. Party, party is our bane.I feel I think much as Lord Falkland did when heused to stalk about his tent and exclaim. Peace,peace." " I am quite comforted with the intelligenceyou give me of the opinions of fair and goodmen,concerning the general conduct of the Lancashiremagistrates. How shocking are the resolutionsof some of the meetings in the West Riding of Yorkshire! Yet the cause of the seditious being patronizedby men of rank and influence, may tend to rescue themultitude out of the hands of the Hunts and Thistle -woods." 39 ff I have had no intercourse with government,but really arguments for the necessity of theremoval of Earl Fitzwilliam 40 at once present themselves,though I will not pronounce whether the attendantevils may not be such as to countervail thegood. Yet I must say I estimate Lord F. far toohighly not to hope he will feel even the more warmand active in discharging the duties of a good citizen,for the very purpose of proving that his zeal for hiscountry is not lessened by the treatment he has experienced."41 Two other letters in a tone very differentfrom each other shall conclude the extracts fromhis correspondence of this date. The first is to hisson (aetas 14) at school, in answer to an applicationfor a subscription to a fire-work fund for the approaching5th of November.39 To Z. Macaulay Esq. Oct. 9.40 From the Lord-Lieutenancy of the county of York.41 To S. Roberts Esq. Nov. 6.38 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1819.My dear ,The bustle I have been in for some days mustbe my apology for having suffered a post to pass withoutanswering your letter. I hope however that thefire-works will be with you by the evening of the5th. I am almost ashamed of squibbing away moneywhen I have too little of it for the distressed ; but mydear has behaved so well, and in these days offaction it is so peculiarly right to let our loyalty Hazeabroad) that I cannot refuse adding my contribution.I am truly vexed at not having been able to writesooner ; but if the parcel be not in time, you mayhave a special bonfire for Mr. Hunt, who deservesthat distinction about as well as Guy Fawkes. Forif he be not quite so desperate a conspirator, he hasless than Guy to plead in his excuse. Farewell, mydear boy, and believe me to remain,Ever affectionately yours,W. WILBERFORCE."The other letter was to Mr. Bankes.Nov. 1, 1819.My dear Bankes,When your letter reached me on Saturday, Iwas actually about to write to you to express myhopes that you would attend parliament on the 23rd ;and to inquire if you had any opinions as to the properregimen for such a disordered state as the bodypolitic now exhibits. I meant also to send you a .TRIALS FOR BLASPHEMY. 39ter recently received from Morritt, which paints invery gloomy colours the state of the manufacturing partof our great county. One idea of yours I had anticipated,that I mean of making our law travel with anaccelerated pace, and without those pauses which arenow so injurious. Some weeks before the prorogation, Ipressed the Attorney-general to bring on Carlisle's trialfor blasphemy before the recess, telling him that thevarlet's shop was thronged day and night with visitors.He pleaded having much to do, and little leisure todoit in, and very truly I doubt not ; but time oughtto have been found for trying such a delinquent. Igrieve to hear that his poison, and that of such othervenomous beings, is propagated extensively, andgreedily sucked in by the lower orders in our manufacturingdistricts. Again, in Leicester the lowerorders are in the habit of meeting by night in partiesof twenty-five to practise the pike exercise.Your suggestion of authorizing government toproclaim certain districts in certain cases, claims themost deliberate reflection. It seems clear to me thatif ever this country should fall into the euthanasia,as Hume calls it, of absolute power, it will be owingto the anarchists, and the manifest necessity of givingup that liberty and those privileges which they abuse.In the instance of the liberty of the press I am reallylooking out, but hitherto in vain, for some better protectionfor character than the existing law affords.I wish you may be in London a day or two beforethe meeting, that we may confer on the subjectsto come before us. I will show you the judgment of40 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1819.the Manchester affair, which was formed by a verysensible and dispassionate man, (no partisan of ministers,)who halted at that place a short time after thetumult. I think the magistrates have been unjustto themselves in not publishing what may be calledtheir case. The bulk of the people will not forbearforming an opinion, because they are toldthat hereafter the grounds of a just opinion shallbe supplied to them. On the contrary, they willbuild on such a foundation as they have, and whenonce they have built they will not quit their edificebecause you tell them it is founded on the sand. Farewell.Give my kind remembrances to Mrs. Bankesand your sons, and believe me,Ever sincerely yours,W. WILBERFORCE."The worst feature of the disaffected was their zealagainst the Christian faith. " What your Lordshipand I saw," he reminds Lord Milton, " amongst thepapers of the Secret Committee, gave me but toomuch reason to fear that the enemies of our politicalconstitution were also enemies to our religion."Heretofore they inveighed against the inequality ofproperty, and used every artifice to alienate the peoplefrom the constitution of their country. Bat nowthey are sapping the foundations of the social edificemore effectually by attacking Christianity. The highand noble may be restrained by honour ; but religiononly is the law of the multitude," 42 It was with42 Private Mem.1819. DISTURBED STATE OF THE COUNTRY. 41some indignation that he saw at this time " rich andsuccessful men, secured by the laws against invasionsof their property, &c. (especially if men of nogreat real superiority and personal means of defence,)abusing the constitution and laws as the worst of allpossible. I am reminded of the monarch who publisheda reward for a new pleasure. They have exhaustedall other gratifications, and must' try thepleasure of complaining ; like noble and rich menassuming the garb and food of peasants for a frolic.How disappointed if all to be realized ! If the one tobe made real peasants, the others really insecure." 43In this spirit he entered the House on the first dayof the session ; and then, and on the 26th, when he"spoke with effect though without premeditation," 44 hemaintained forcibly the cause of order. He arraignedthe irreligious spirit of this new morality, proved thatthe bar of the House of Commons was the mostimproper place for an inquiry into the behaviour ofthe magistrates, and turning upon those who showedsome inclination to reap a factious triumph from thesufferings of their country " Can there be one manhere," he asked, " who does not from his heart lamentthese transactions ? If there be, it must be one whohas learned to look to civil war and slaughter for theregeneration of the country, and to regard the overthrowof our religion and our laws as the means ofaccomplishing their end."Throughout the stormy session which succeeded,his language was the same. He esteemed " the43 Private Mem. Diary, Nov. 23.42 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1819.situation of the country very critical, and though"he " had no small reason to complain of some membersof administration' he " thought it" his " dutyto come forward in support of the several measureswhich were proposed for the preservation of the publicpeace." 45 His Diary sketches out the advance ofthe session, and of his own employments. " 30th.Lost an hour and half yesterday morning in Bartlett'sBuildings meeting, and the rest too short for hadrianletters, so no time for preparation on House ofCommons' subjects either yesterday or to-day. Wentinto city about the ploughmen (for Hayti) uneasyabout them."London, Nov. 30, 1819.My dear Macaulay,My heart quite fails me at the idea of sendingthese four raw creatures into so distant, and to themso strange a clime, without preparing them more forwhat they have to expect. I began my note meaningto entreat you to talk with them, especially on whatI did not mention, the moral, or rather immoral stateof society in Hayti. I did talk to them on severalpoints, but not on this, partly from wishing and meaningto speak to each separately, which I could not dolast night, and hoped to do to-day. I desired them toconfer with you about health, how to proceed on thefirst symptoms which you would state to them theyought to regard as indications of approaching sickness,and how best to take precautions against its attacks.45 Letter to Dr. Milner, Dec. 15.1819. SEDITIOUS MEETINGS' BILL. 43But I am so uneasy, that if possible I will go intothe city myself, as from their not coming I suppose Ishall not see them here, and try to obtain an interviewwith them. If I do not succeed, let me beg youto confer with them.Ever affectionately yours,W. Wilberforce."I saw them about four, and talked with them.Then House Lord Thorpe's motion for referring thepapers to a committee very poor and dull debate, orrather common sensible talk, shop talk, till Castlereaghat length spurred Tierney, who retaliated verycleverly. Division 323 to 150. Plunket says, thatLord Grenville's speech in the House of Lords tonight,was the finest display of statesman-like wisdomand eloquence he ever heard. Wellesley good too.Grey also and Lansdown good. I am not qualifiedto contend with these men, yet if I had time, andwould cultivate my powers, I might speak better thanany in the House but two or three. I believe I oughtto find time, yet I am afraid here of being misled byvanity. Otherwise to my personal comfort I shouldbe far more agreeably employed in study thanin the business and letters which now occupy mytime. Dec. 1st. Called Grenville found Duke ofMontrose calling to thank him for his speech. NoHouse. Evening, letters. How can I do well in theHouse, who never can find time to reflect beforehand ?2nd. House second reading of Seditious Bill. Bednear four. Brougham's long speech Peel good44 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1819.Lyttleton good. 6th. House on Seditious MeetingsBill. I spoke middling well, though I forgot mychief argument. I seldom have a quiet hour, so thatthough these important Bills are going through theHouse, I get little or no time for considering anyspeech I might make. This is not giving my characterfair play, considering that really what I say isso well received even by the House, and so muchbetter by the country. The complaint in my eyes isa grand impediment. Yet God has been gracious tome,for I have not done myself discredit, and I haveonce or twice assisted the cause of religion, but ohhow much less effectually than if I had been able tothink more over the various political questions ! Ohmay my eye still be single, and may I act on theapostle's rule, ' Whatsoever ye do in word or deed, doall in the name of the Lord Jesus.'ee 9th. Bennett's motion for a Committee on theNational Distresses ruined by making it a partybusiness. I spoke, and not amiss Baring and Ellicevery well. Called Canning's this morning afterwardsLord Liverpool's, where all the booksellers,Butterworth at their head, about the proposed taxand security for publishers.10th. My Yorkshire friends claimed me for thewool business. Went with them to Lord Liverpool's.House on Courteney's complaint of Breach of Privilegein Hothouse's pamphlet. I spoke, and bettersatisfied with myself than on any night this session." 46We are in a state of almost combustion," he com-diary.1819. STUDY OF HOLY SCRIPTURE. 45plains amidst these nightly contentions, 47 " whichdoes not suit me as well as it did thirty years agoCalicut inventa,Consule Plano.' "In the hot fitOf youth and Pitt.Yet his own mind was quiet in the storm. Thenext day's Diary affords a glimpse of those deepwaters which no political tempests could disturb.Walked from Hyde Park Corner, repeating the1 19th Psalm, in great comfort." 48 His learning thiswhole psalm by heart in all his London bustle, is astriking instance of the care with which he studiedHoly Scripture ; and in spite of his complaints, hismemory could not have been materially injured, sincehe could (even with the help of a technical artificewhich he now frequently employed) acquire and retainperfectly this long and unconnected passage. Toreturn to the Diary.Dec. 14th. Not a minute alone to-day. Moneywith me during dressing. Then Mr. Scott about theWool Tax. Then African Institution Duke ofGloucester there, and Lord Lansdown. Then HouseLord John Russell's motion. He spoke pleasinglyLord Normanby seconded with more talent,though Romeo-like. Alas ! I get no time to myself.To-night Arms Seizing Bill ; doubtful what course topursue, as to whether one or two justices, and bynight as well as day ; decided for former, on ground4 7 Letter to Venerable F. Wrangham.Diary, Dec. 12.46 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1819.of publicity, and the clause requiring time beinggiven, and that in 1812 the same power was givenand no abuse followed. O Lord, enable me to decidearight. Blessed be God, I serve a Master who takesthe will for the deed.16th. Took my place as for some little time past,the last seat on the opposition bench. Finding thatopposition complained of it, I named it this evening toTierney, who behaved very kindly about it. Severalpress me strongly to bring forward a committee toinquire into and relieve the distresses of the lowerorders. I am much puzzled about it. Sir W. DeCrespigny's motion to refer Owen's plan to a committee.I forced to speak against it on the Christianground.17th. Found Owen of Lanark truly placable andgood-humoured; he said Vansittart and I right invoting against him." He was no advocate for " asystem of morals or instruction not founded on religion."" They would exclude," he complains ofsuch instructors, 49 " religion from life, and substituteknowledge in its stead." " It is only by educatingour people in Christian principles, that we can hope toadvance in strength, greatness, and happiness. Bytheir efficacy alone can we escape the operation of thosecauses, which have assimilated other states to the humanframe in its infancy, manhood, and decay. But thereligion of those states was founded on false principles.They went on from stage to stage of intellectual improvement,emerging from ignorance to knowledge, till& Diary.v^1819. EFFECT OF NEWSPAPERS. 47the light of day beamed upon the fabric, and betrayedthe rotten imposition upon which it was built. Thepillar of our greatness is raised upon that basis of allintellectual and moral improvement, the Christianreligion." 50 The same sentiments appear continuallyin all his correspondence. " I never," he tells HannahMore, " answered a letter of yours which passed1 from grave to gay, from lively to severe.' I referto that in which you gave me the result of your experienceconcerning the education of the lower orders.In one particular I entirely concur with you ; I meanin thinking that to, inculcate and enforce Christianprinciples and Christian practice, should be the grandobject, in comparison with which all other knowledgeis contemptible." Amongst the novelties which hehad found in Westmoreland the year before was one,he tells Mr. Bankes, " which I very much regretted ;that I mean of political enmity. I wish, and so Idoubt not do you, that our country population shouldnot become Edinburgh Review men nay, that theycannot be ; rather Cobbett and Woollen men requiringthe constant diet of newspapers to gratifytheir morbid appetite for politics. The late electionnaturally had this effect for a time, and I am toldthat there is a regular system for maintaining theanti-aristocratic feelings in their full life and action.One of the chief engines of mischief is a very bitter,and I am told clever, weekly newspaper ; and to besure as an alterative, if one may so term it, of thebody politic, one can scarce imagine a more effectual*> Speech of Dec. 16.48 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. " 1819.expedient for changing the whole mass of the bloodand humours, and producing sour, morbid secretions,instead of the sweet and wholesome chyle of a healthfulconstitution. Seriously, the newspapers are nowamong the very greatest, if not the greatest, evils ofthe country."I used to think you the most violent politicianthat I knew," he said to a friend living in the country," but now that I find you take in the MorningChronicle and nothing else, I am only astonished atyour moderation." " Have you reflected," he asksDr. Chalmers, " on the effects produced in this countryby the newspapers? They are almost incalculablygreat, and on the whole, I fear, very injurious. It ismy persuasion that our safety will henceforth be toeducate our people up to the newspapers, if I may soexpress myself. We must so much enlighten themthat they may be armed against those delusions ofwhich they are otherwise likely to become the victims."" Yet when I say this, I cannot but rememberthat we have a corrupt nature, and that the idea, therefore,of the easy and speedy predominance of truth israther an Utopian speculation." 51 The last debatesbefore the holidays were upon a cognate subject, andhis forced absence from them greatly disappointedhim.51 Vid. a letter to Mr. Roberts, in his Correspondence, for the fullexpression of his feelings on this point.CHAPTER XXXIV.JANUARY 1820 TO JANUARY 1822.Death of the King Dissolution of parliament Dean ofCarlisle's death Attendance on the sick Paul's Cray Religiousanniversaries Self-suspicion Arrival of the QueenHis conduct in parliament Adjourns the inquiry Privatelyaddresses the King Moves and carries an Address to theQueen Her chief law-adviser undertakes that it shall beaccepted Her reception of it He is exposed to muchcalumny Correspondence Mr. Bankes WeymouthLetter from Lord John Russell Return to London Bill ofPains and Penalties its abandonment Bath Death ofChristophe his character Queen's name finally left out ofLiturgy African Institution Domestic character Sessionalbusiness Marden Park and his life there OccupationsIllness and death of his eldest daughter.THE year 1820 opened with an unexpected calm.The restrictive Acts of the preceding session, and theclearing of the commercial gloom, quieted the angryspirit of that stormy period. A busy session seemed tobe at hand ; when the unexpected death of George III.suspended public business, and dissolved the parliament.Mr. Wilberforce's" spring passed in its usualemployments, marked only by two domestic features ;the marriage of his eldest son, and the lingering andfatal illness of his early friend, Dean Milner, of Car-vol.v. D50 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1820.lisle. He came to Kensington Gore, to attend asusual on the Board of Longitude ; and after five weeksof suffering illness, breathed his last upon the 1st ofApril. <f Never was there an easier dismission, whichis the more observable because he had fears of thepain of dying ; when he was told he was in danger,he grew more composed and calm than he had beenbefore. It is very odd, but I felt rather stunned thanmelted. Spent the day, after a short prayer, chieflyin writing to different friends." 1 He followed hiseld friend's remains to their last resting-place atCambridge, and listened to a funeral sermon preachedon him by " Daniel Wilson, who had seized uponthe chief constituents of his character his ponderoussense, his tenderness and kindness, his solid and experimentalpiety." 2Many were the hours he gave to soothing thesick-bed of his friend. Though his life had beenspent so much in public, he was no stranger tosuch scenes ; and never was the genuine tendernesswhich filled his heart more beautifully shown thanin these unwitnessed charities. More than onetouching instance may be quoted from the privatememoranda of a friend, who was at this time a frequentinmate in his family. At the close of oneof his days of hurry, perhaps after the stormy contestsof the House of Commons, " between twelveand one o'clock he heard that his daughter, who wasill, could get no sleep. Coming into her room, hetook her hand, and, kneeling down by the bed, spokeDiary 2 ib. April 16.1820. PAUL'S CRAY. 51of the tender shepherd carrying the weak and lamein his bosom to warm and cherish them. Then heapplied this to our blessed Saviour ; spoke of Histenderness and love ; how He would feel for His dearsuffering child, and conduct her all the way she hadto go, until He took her from this scene of trial andsorrow to a world where sorrow and sighing shall fleeaway ' a beautiful personification, indicating theirhaste to leave the mansions of the blessed.' In thisspirit he prayed with her, and never left the beduntil her spirit was visibly soothed and supported."One other extract shall be given. On the 24th of Mayhe " went down to Paul's Cray, honest Simonss's, wherea great party at his school fete. Gerard Noel gave usabeautiful sermon. Lord and Lady Jocelyn, CharlesNoel, Lady E. Whitbread, and various friends." 3He was all sunshine at such times, from principleas well as habit. ' ' It is a fault to be silent ; every oneis bound to present his contribution to the commonstock of conversation and enjoyment ;" and whereverthe group was the most crowded and attentive, he wassure to be found its centre. From all this he stoleaway, and " asked me " (to quote from the same memoranda)" to walk with him down the village. It wasto visit a poor woman, of whom he had heard as inadeep decline. He found out the sick room, and satdown by the bed, and began to speak to her of the loveof God, which should dwell in his children's hearts.1 Ask yourself then, do you love him. We know howlove to our fellow-creatures acts; how it makes us3 Diary.D 252 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1820.try to please them, bear for their sakes unpleasant orunkind things, pain or hard words, with patience.Now does your love to God act in this way ? Do youbear patiently what he sends you because he sends it ?It is no proof of love to God to do what pleases us,to come for instance, as I have done to-day, to see allthose dear children in the society of friends I love.But if you submit to your illness, and give up yourwill to God's will ; if you seek to listen to His voicein this affliction, if you are patient under your sufferings,and gentle to those about you, this will indeedbe a proof of love to God. And then think of thehappy consequence. He will come and abide withyou, and bring such peace and joy into your heart, asnone else can bestow. The Comforter will come anddwell with you ; not pay you a short visit as I am nowpaying to my friends here, but dwell with you, andnever leave you. Now this is the joy I wish for you.'And then he knelt down, and asked of God. to comfortand support her, and after all her sufferings bringher to a world of peace and joy, where the formerthings shall have passed away. ' It is delightful tome,'he said as we returned, ( to visit such a bed ofsickness, to be able to take one ray of joy from the fullsunshine of the social circle, to gild her sick room.It has been one of the happiest days I ever spent.' "Went," he says, on the 26th of April, " to Freemasons'Tavern Committee room, and afterwards tothe Hall on the Duke of Kent's Statue proposal.Duke of Bedford in the chair. Lord Darnley there,Breadalbane, Clifford, &c. I seconded the first .RELIGIOUS ANNIVERSARIES. 53solution kept there latish. I am much pressed toattend the London Missionary Society, but I cannotdo it. Last year I was at eight or nine of these publicmeetings in as many days, but I must not this year."He attended four or five, and was the charm of eachone where he took a part ; doing according to hisown account " pretty well, and every body very kind tome."" But oh how humbled am I to find still in myselfsolicitude about human estimation 1 Yet I striveagainst it, and despise myself for it. O Lord, helpme." No one perhaps was ever freer from this fault ;but his rigid scrutiny detected in himself the smallestrising of the tempers he condemned. " I shouldlike you," Mr. Stephen said to him when he wasonce depreciating himself, 4 " to write a life of yourself,and I would write another ; and it would becurious to see the different renderings which would begiven to the self-same facts." " To one of thesemeetings," says the friend, whose memoranda havebefore been quoted, " I went with him, and arrivedbefore the room began to fill. He walked round,looking at the portraits which hung around the walls,and his spirits seemed unusually depressed ; after atime, he burst forth into expressions of his grief andself-abasement, at his remembrance of some scenes ofrevelling, in which, though never given to excess, hehad joined in early life within that very room ( To4 The occasion is too good to be omitted. " I was so small of staturewhen a youth," was his account, " that Milner put me on a table to readto the boys." Mr. Stephen interrupted him, " Why, Wilberforce, Milnerhimself has told me that it was that your elocution might be a modelto the school."54 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1820.what a different use, thank God, are we now about toput it ! " Nothing could surpass the depth of hishabitual humility. " Alas," he complains, " how unprofitablea servant I am, if I] compare myself withM. ! How unspeakably am I humbled ! In every particularhe excels ; in every one I fall short : naturalpowers make some difference, but the want of Christianexertion makes ten times more. O God, forgiveme. I find my body as well as mind indicating weakness,soon tired, and requiring rest. Alas, that Ihave not better used my faculties ! God be mercifulto me a sinner. Oh what cause have I to say this !Oh they do not know us as we know ourselves.Lord, help me. I should despair, but for the preciouspromises of Holy Scripture. 5Yet in spite of this low estimate both of his powersand services, no slight labours were before him. Thearrival of the Queen soon introduced a new and fearfulstrife amidst the subsiding waves of civil strife.The first intimation of this danger is as early asthe 27th of April. " The Vice Chancellor Leachhas been trying to root out ministry ; he has beentelling the King that his present ministers are notstanding by him, that he ought to have a divorce.There has been a flirtation between Tierney and theKing. I hear Brougham has had the sense or patriotismto see that it is better not to have a publicfracas between the King and Queen." All hopesfrom the St. Omens' conference soon failed. On the5th of June, " the business of the House was stopped5 Diary, June 4.1820. THE QUEEN'S ARRIVAL. 55by Vansittart's declaring on the Grampound DisfranchisementBill, that the ministers could not attend beingcalled to a Cabinet. It was said to be on accountof the Queen's approaching return, who had refused theterms brought by Lord Hutchinson. News at nightthat the Queen had landed, and was to sleep at Canterbury."On the 6th, " a message was deliveredto the House, announcing the Queen's arrival in England,and the necessity of disclosures to parliament.She arrived about six in London crowds greetingher. She approaches wisely, because boldly. Fixesat Alderman Wood's. Brougham in the house.How deeply interested all are, indeed I feel it myself,about her! One can't help admiring her spirit,though I fear she has been very profligate. Bergamoleft her at St. Omens."The 7th brought on the " Green Bag SecretCommittee question. I moved the adjournment ofthe debate till Friday, which was approved bya great majority of the House, in order to givethe parties time to effect an amicable accommodation."6 His part was at once taken. " I resolvedif possible to prevent the inquiry; an objectwhich could only be attained by such an amicable adjustmentas should give neither party cause fortriumph. When therefore Lord Castlereagh hadmade a motion to refer the papers to the considerationof a secret committee, I endeavoured to interpose apause, during which the two parties might have anopportunity of contemplating coolly the prospect becDiary, June 7.56 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1820.fore them. Accordingly I sounded the House ; myproposition was immediately adopted, and a pause wasmade with a declaration that its purpose was to giveopportunity for a private settlement. What followedis before the world the correspondence, and subsequentlythe conferences which took place betweenthe King's servants and the Queen's law-officers.The concessions made by the King's servants, as Mr.Brougham afterwards declared in the House of Commons,were various and great. The name and rightsof a Queen were granted to her Majesty without reserve,any recognition of which had formerly beencarefully avoided. A Royal yacht, a frigate, &c.were offered. It was agreed that her name and rankshould be notified at the court either of Rome orMilan the capitals of the countries in which shehad expressed her intention to reside ; and that an Addressshould be presented to the Queen no less thananother to the King, to thank her Majesty for havingacceded to the wish of the House of Commons." 7During the anxious interval which followed, he wasfar from idle. He sent his son with an earnest letterto the King, in which he entreated him to restore theQueen's name to the Liturgy, " suggesting the fermentwhich would be occasioned ; that the countrywould be in a fury, and perhaps the soldiers mighttake the Queen's part." 8 The negociation still proceeded." June 9th. Lord Castlereagh came to me onhis way up stairs, and told me he meant to propose tothe House to adjourn till Monday. I returned home7 Memorandum among his papers. s Diary, June 9.1820. LANCASTRIAN SCHOOLS. 57to dinner. Sir James Mackintosh came in, andwas as entertaining as possible. After breakfastmet Mackintosh about Manumission business. Thento meeting of the British and Foreign School Society,Lord Ebrington in the chair ; George Byngsupporting him. Quite a Dissenting appearance, Imust say ; but being there, and arriving an hour toolate, I thought it would be rude to come away, so Istaid." *' Sunday. I fear lest it should please Godto scourge the nation through the medium of thisrupture between the King and Queen. If the soldieryshould take up her cause, who knows what mayhappen and is it very improbable ? O Lord, deliverus ! Thou only canst, who hast the hearts of all at Thydisposal. Yet how gracious God is to me, giving methe acceptable service of putting off the discussion !I go to prayer, and oh may He have mercy on us andavert so great an evil, in answer to the prayers ofmany among us, who call upon His name, and settheir hearts on Him."Another adjournment on the following day seemedstill to promise peace. " I heard this morning, thatthe Queen had as yet not been prevailed on to concedeany thing. But I trust matters will be accommodated."9 These hopes soon vanished. " I meant tocall early on the Bishop of London, but was kept byBrougham's calling. I fear the difficulties will notbe superable, except by our taking the matter intoour own hands in the House of Commons." " 20th.Canning took me to town, and I talked with him9 To Mrs. Wilberforce June 15.D 358 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1820.about arrangement. Various friends confirmed methat it was right for me to go on by addressing theQueen, (for which room in the papers,) and to try toget her to give up the mention of her name in theLiturgy. So I gave notice. Tierney pressed to knowwhat my motion was to be. I defended myself aswell as I could ; opposition seem all disposed to takeup Queen's cause on party principles. Alas ! " 10He well knew that by this course he exposed himselfto extreme odium and misconstruction. " However,I hope I am averting a great evil." 11 He hasrecorded the grounds upon which his motion proceeded.if The only material difference which remained betweenthe negociating parties, was that which respectedthe omission of her Majesty's name from theLiturgy. Her law-officers declared that they pressedthe restoration of her name on the grounds of therecognition of her rights, and the vindication of her character,but they several times suggested that an equivalentmight be devised which might answer the samepurpose. This proposal constituted the ground of myhope that an Address of the House of Commons mighteffect that adjustment for which former efforts hadbeen made in vain. I could not but be persuaded thatif an Address should be carried by a great majority,assuring her Majesty that her giving up the pointshould be regarded not as arising from any dispositionto shrink from inquiry, (an imputation to which herwhole conduct had given the lie,) but from a wish togive up her own opinion to the authority of the House10 Diary. 11 To Z. Macaulay Esq.1820. ADDRESS TO THE QUEEN. 59of Commons, this very Address would constitute theequivalent desired. This hope was confirmed by herMajesty's declaration, that she was disposed to yieldto the declared sense of the House of Commons." 12This reasonable hope was soon greatly shaken.After his return from the House, " just as I was goingup to bed, I heard a knocking at the door announcinga letter from the Queen. It was so. AldermanWood had given her a mistaken account of my notice,and she wrote a warm, expostulatory letter her ownebullition [Lady Anne Hamilton's hand]. I sleptwe'll, I thank God, but next day talking with Worsleyand others, we thought our motion should be changed,and there being no time to resettle it, still more wishingthat the Queen should have time to consider myanswer, on which I hoped Brougham would comment,I resolved, against the advice of all my friends, to putoff my motion till tomorrow. The House all impatience,and I obliged [it] to wait, having had conferenceswith several persons. Tierney, &c. ill-natured,yet Castlereagh gave way. Several of my friendspressed me strongly to make my motion a defence ofministry, but I saw all depended on my keeping to mypoint no inquiry."Leaving the House, " I walked home, calling atStephen's. There Brougham brought me a secondletter from the Queen, more moderate." 1S " Nextmorning Acland came with the fruits of his morningstudies,' and his draft of great use to me in drawingResolution. So pressed that I did not get above one12 Mr. Wilberforce's Memoranda. l3 Diary, June 21.60 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1820.quiet hour for preparing, but God in whom I trustedgraciously blessed me, and enabled me to go throughmy business not discreditably. An immense majority.The House very noisy and impatient ; would not hearA eland, or even my own reply quietly. Burdett violentand bitter, but very able. Tierney mischievousDenman strong and straightforward. Broughamable. Canning clever, but not letting himself out.My reply better than my speech, and would have beenmore so, but that interrupted. Sad work amongst thesoldiers my first apprehension Lord Sidmouth veryuneasy, &c." 14 The next day he tells Mrs. Wilberforce,who for the health of his family was on herroad to Bath ;Downing Street, Friday afternoon.I thank God from the heart that my businesswent off yesterday very well, though not quite so wellas must have been wished by one who was and isdeeply impressed with a sense of its importance. Weseparated about a quarter-past four this morning, anda lovely morning it was. Our division 391 to 124.I seldom have known so full a House, since numbersmust have gone away before the business terminated.We are to present our last night's motion to the Queentomorrow. I hope she may assent to our wishes, butI am not very sanguine.I trust this will find you safely arrived at Bath,and let me hope my dear children will be living underan impression of the many mercies we are allDiary, June 22.1820. THE QUEEN'S REPLY. 61receiving. What a blessing it is to have been led bya gracious God into paths which enter Broughamand Denman the Queen's law-officers, and I mustmake up or be too late.Ever affectionately yours,W. Wilberforce."The next day was fixed by the Queen for receivingthe Address. " Dressed at Calthorpe's, and went upwith the Resolution (Stuart Worsley, A eland, andBankes also) to the Queen in Portman Street. Thepopulace most violent, and I received a letter (kindlymeant) whilst in the House, desiring me to come outportico, but it was not a case for this had I been tobe killed, (of which in truth there was no danger,) webeing representatives of the House of Commons." 15All the four members alighted without any interruption.They were dressed in full Court costume, andshowed a proper insensibility to the uncourteous mannerin which they were greeted by the multitude. Mr.Wilberforce read the Resolutions." 16 " Alas ! " hesays, " the answer most decidedly rejected our mediation."17TO MRS. WILBERFORCE.Downing Street, Saturday, June 24.I grieve from the bottom of my heart to saythat with my brother messengers I am lately returnedfrom our visit to the Queen, bringing back her Diary. 16 Times, June 26. >7 Diary.62 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1820.swear, civil in terms to the House of Commons, butpositively rejecting our proposal. Her manner wasextremely dignified, but very stern and haughty.There was a great mob about the door, which if ithad been night would have been very dangerous, butno stones were thrown, &c. I am not surprised byher rejection of our offer, though I deeply regret it.What is next to be done deserves the mostserious consideration. Whatever ensues, it will alwaysbe a consolation to me to reflect that I havedone my best to prevent all the evils that mayhappen."The grounds of his own conduct are more fullystated in a letter of a few days' later date.TO SAMUEL ROBERTS ESQ.My dear Sir,To you I will frankly confess that I shouldmyself have given the preference to the propositionsuggested in the letter in the Sheffield Iris that ofmoving for the restoration of the Queen's name to theLiturgy. I myself have never concealed my opinionthat it was a wrong step to leave the Queen's nameout, and consequently I could not but have wished forits re-insertion. But I had all but an absolute certaintythat this motion would be rejected, and thenwe should have had no resource. The ministers hadbeen contending, as it is supposed, with the King verystrenuously : they had once even resigned their .GROUNDS OF HIS ADDRESS* 63faces ; and I presume that they must have consideredthe omission of the Queen's name as part of a compromiseto which they were bound to adhere. Bethis as it may, it is notorious that a few days beforemy motion, they called all their adherents together,and explained to them without reserve, that all themembers of the Cabinet had agreed to resign theiroffices if the question for restoring the Queen's nameto the Liturgy should be carried against them. Now,the influence of government in the House of Commonsis so great, that I could not have hoped tocarry a motion, against which all who possess officeswould have fought so furiously, as well as all thosewho conceived that in our present circumstances achange of government might throw all into confusion.It was in this state of things that a careful perusalof the papers containing an account of the conferencesbetween the King's ministers and the Queen's law-officerssuggested to me the expedient of which Ihad every reason to expect the success. The law-officershad not originally included the restoration ofthe Queen's name to the Liturgy, as any one of the chiefparticulars of her claims ; and when they did mentionthis restoration, they declared that it was askedas a recognition of her rights and a vindication ofher character : and then they suggested that if itcould not be granted in substance, an equivalentmight be found for it ; such e. g. as her being introducedinto any of the Courts on the continent.This it was that constituted the ground of myhopes. It appeared to me that an Address of the64 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1820.House of Commons, assuring her that her givingway would not be construed into any wish to shrinkfrom inquiry, but only to indicate afresh thedisposition she had already expressed to sacrificeher own wishes and feelings to the declaredsense of the House of Commons, especially if thisAddress should receive the assent of a large majority,would be as good an equivalent as that which thelaw-officers had specified. In fact I had everyreason to believe her Majesty would have acquiesced,but for circumstances which I would ratherstate to you in person than by letter. Give mecredit however for not assuring you on lightgrounds, that the Queen's chief law-officer recommendedthat acquiescence. You yourself must haveobserved in the newspapers that some of thechief opposition members in both Houses maintainedthat, whether my motion should be acceptedor rejected, it was impossible that the inquirycould be prosecuted. This was a sad obstacle ;since undoubtedly I hoped that the Queen's comparingher situation in the two opposite alternativeswould have led to my success. But after theQueen's rejection of our mediation, there couldhave been no hope of success in moving for therestoration of her name, and indeed I must own itwould have been at that time an improper measure.Any one who has been so long as myself in publiclife must have lived in it to little purpose, not to beprepared to have his conduct misrepresented and hisviews misconstrued. I am not therefore surprised1820. QUEEN'S REFUSAL. 65that the great part even of intelligent by-sanders donot advert to the suggestion of the Queen's law-officers,on which alone my motion was grounded;but consider me as proposing from my own merespeculation, that the Queen should consent to giveway on the disputed question concerning the Liturgy.I shall be glad to hear from you from time to time,especially during the present very interesting state ofthe public mind. I remain, my dear sir, with cordialesteem and regard,Yours very sincerely,W. Wilberforce."The failure of this attempt drew on him all theabuse he had expected ; he was charged with triflingwith the House of Commons and attempting to deceivethe people. He had in his possession a triumphantanswer to the charge in the positive engagementof the Queen's chief law-adviser. " Shewill accede to your Address," he wrote to Mr. Wilberforce,(June 22nd,) " I pledge myself." His influencewas overborne by a less sagacious counsellor, and witha political forbearance which," says the party whomit spared, " I never knew equalled," he suppressedthis unfulfilled pledge, and bore quietly the groundlesscharge of an unreasonable interference. Thesecret of this quiet confidence is seen in the followingletter to his family.I am often prompted by the injustice and unfairnessof men, to look upwards, and to say to myselfwell, the time will come, when He will make thy66 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1820.righteousness as clear as the light, and thy just dealingas the noon-day.I got the nineteen Sunday newspapers once for allthe other day, that I might the better judge of theircontents ; and assuredly such a collection of ribaldryand profaneness never before disgraced my library,and I trust never will again. Of course many of thewriters honour me with a peculiar share of attention.But this will soon blow over, and by and by all thewell-disposed part of the community will do mejustice, and above all, the Lord will protect. This isas fine a summer's day as I ever knew, and I havebeen quite delighting in the garden. What a pity itis that you all do not enjoy it more ! I never saw theweeping willow so fine as it is this year. I wish Icould transplant myself to you and my dear children,who occupy their place in the group that my fancydraws of you all upon the sands. (Ask the boys if itbe a good place for ' cravings') They will be delightedwith the Isle of Portland."Some friendly voices confirmed this judgment ofhis conscience. " Due gratitude," says one, 18 " cannotbe expressed to you for what you have done'*The nation," he was assured by another, 19 " feelsits obligation to you ; or if it does not, historians willrecord it."All negociation was now at an end. " June 26th.Ministers resolved to charge the Queen before theHouse of Lords, and give up the House of CommonsCommittee. I talked with Lord Kenyon and CalcLord Kenyon. Rev. Charles Simeon.1820. HIS FEELING FOR THE QUEEN. 67thorpe, and rather agreed that nothing was to be donebut to go on with the business, though I would embraceany creditable way of stopping it. Castlereaghmoved to adjourn his proceeding for a fortnight.This gave opposition an opportunity of moving itsadjournment for six months. I and others votedagainst opposition ; not meaning to vote for a SecretCommittee at all, much less specifically in a fortnight,but not being able at once to take a by-way of defeatinga thing which might at any moment be revived."20If the case," he said, " must be inquired into, itwill be better done in the House of Lords, which isa court of justice, than in this House. Even thenhowever it will be long, painful, and disgusting, and,what in my mind aggravates the evil, parliament isnot clear in the matter. We marry our Kings andQueens contrary to the laws of God and of nature,and from this source proceed the evils which I amnow anxious to avoid. I am strongly impressed witha feeling for the Queen's situation in early life, and inwhat I lately proposed her advantage was especiallyintended." 21I bought Cobbett's letter to me very clever,but very mischievous, and full of falsehoods : wiselyhowever (as of this generation) dissuading the Queenfrom going abroad. Then to the House of Commons,and heard a violent speech from Reeves, and anotherfrom Bennett, speaking of the Queen's ill usage whenshe first came to this country, and too truly, alas !20 Diary. 21 Speech, &c.68 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1820.but where is the use of talking thus? Surely it canonly tend to produce insurrection. I am glad howeverto hear that the coronation will be probably put off.Oh what a comment is all this on ' Be sure your sinwill find you out'" 22I ought to be thankful' he tells Mrs. Wilberforce," that I have lately felt a comfortable consciousnessthat I am in the hands of God. The71st Psalm, which I learned by heart lately, hasbeen a real comfort to me. Cobbett has beenpublishing a very clever letter to me, full, as youmay suppose, of falsehood and mischief. Well !remember good old Luther, in worse times, whenassailed by enemies who could burn as well as write."He reasons on this passing odium as calmly asif it had attacked some one else. " I am doubtfulabout moving an Address on the Slave Trade.I greatly doubt the wisdom of bringing on thesequestions now, because the public mind is engrossedwith the Queen's business, and because I am unpopularout of doors, though not in the House.What a lesson it is to a man not to set his heart onlow popularity, when after forty years' disinterestedpublic service I am believed to be a perfect rascal !Oh what a comfort it is to have to fly for refuge to aGod of unchangeable truth and love !" 23It was another fortnight before he could rejoin hisfamily. " I think," he writes to them, " it is goodfor the mind to feel a little solitary. It more impresseson me the true character of life, which hasDiary, July 6. 23 Diary.1820. LETTER TO HIS SON. 69been to me too uniformly comfortable. Indeed I cansay, ' My cup runneth over.' What a beautiful expression! the passage struck me yesterday, whenmeditating over the 23rd Psalm in the garden."From Kensington Gore he wrote to one of his sons(aetas 18).My dear ,Are you particularly desirous of seeing thecoronation show ? If so, I will get you a ticket, forI understand from your mother, that you were to havehad one from Lord Gwydir, who is just dead. It isin consequence of his death that I write to you. Isuppose it is the finest of raree-shows, and, probably,if I were at your age, I should like to witness it.My late occupations and their result afford anexample of the uncertainty of popular opinion. I wasreally acting the part of the Queen's best friend, andher legal adviser strongly recommended her to accedeto our proposal ; but she was over-persuaded into moreviolent counsels. And the language of opposition,especially Lord Grey, Mr. Tierney, and Sir FrancisBurdett, was, ' Oh you may be sure you never can beprosecuted,' thereby taking away what must doubtlesshave most powerfully enforced her consent. Then,no sooner has she refused and the prosecution goesforward, than they say, government never should haveadmitted a compromise at all, but have prosecutedwithout hesitation.I know not whether you might clearly see theground on which my motion rested . . But I wish you70 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1820.from my heart not to become a politician. I hope youwill act on a far higher level, and where the path,blessed be God, is clearer as well as more peaceable.And I am sure that you must endeavour to keepyour mind from those false estimates of things whichprevail in the world, and habituate yourself to thosejust and true valuations, which the word of God inculcates.Farewell, my beloved .I am ever most affectionately yours,W. WILBERFORCE."A few days later he wrote to Mrs. Hannah More.Kensington Gore, July 21, 1820.My dear Friend,I am seldom so much provoked by irritationsof the minor order, as by my real friends,especially if they are at all agreeable correspondents,when they gravely allege my want of time and eyesight,as the reason for their entire silence, or if notquite so bad as that, for their fobbing me off with ashort letter. I beg you never to try the experimenton me again. In truth, the more numerous my lettersof business or of boring are, the more do I need thecordial of an epistle from a friend. It is squeezinga cheering juice, the natural expressed produce offriendly affection, into a turbid, fermenting mixture,which really at this day teems with as many nauseousingredients, as Macbeth's witches' caldron, (the hellbroth, as Shakespeare terms it,) while green lag,like the roll in the soup, floats in the midst of the1820. PROSPECTS OF THE COUNTRY. 71mess, imparting its pungency and flavour to the wholecomposition. Alas ! alas ! my dear friend, we are inasad state. I own it does greatly shock me to seeour rulers, even such of them as we have reason tobelieve have some sense of religion, exhibiting nofeeling of the necessity of our ( humbling ourselvesunder the mighty hand of God.' This I frankly owndoes alarm me, and that in no ordinary degree. Atall events, my race is nearly run, though to you Imust own that I am quite distressed when I contemplatethe idea of retiring from public life, without evenbringing forward more than one very important business,which I have long had in view. My dearfriend, I speak the strict truth, when I say that Ihave wanted a little of your decision and alacrity. Ifthat has made you sometimes appear in public lessfinished than you would otherwise have been, yet thegood has been done. Your last letter really gratifiesme much, from the proofs it exhibits of your preservingall your old good spirits and pleasantry.My family are at the sea, (Weymouth,) havingbeen driven from Bath immediately on their arrivalby the violent heat, which indeed arrived on the verysame day, and quitted the place for the West Indiestwo or three days after their departure. I must jointhem as soon as I can. But really No, I will notagain touch on that hated subject, but tell you thatin consequence of a very civil messenger from theDuchess of Kent, I waited on her this morning.She received me with her fine animated child on the72 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1820.floor by her with its playthings, of which I soon becameone. She was very civil, but as she did not sit-down,I did not think it right to stay above a quarterof an hour ; and there having, been a female attendantand a gentleman present, I could not well get uponany topic so as to carry on a continued discourse.She apologized for not speaking English well enoughto talk it, but intimated a hope that she might talkit better and longer with me at some future time.She spoke of her situation, and her manner was quitedelightful. Farewell, my dear friend, may God blessand cheer you. This is the cordial wish and prayer ofYour affectionate Friend,W. WILBERFORCE.P. S. A friend (a gentleman of course) told methis morning that out of curiosity he last night, betweeneight and nine, went to Portland Street, (22,)and found a most shabby assemblage of quite thelowest of the people, about fifty in number, who everynow and then kept calling out Queen, Queen, andseveral times, once in about a quarter of an hour, shecame out at one window of a balcony and AldermanWood at the other, and she bowed to them; herobeisance of course being met by augmented acclamations.My friend entered into conversation with aperson present who argued for the natural equality ofman, and that any other of the people present had asgood a right to be King, as George the Fourth. Oncemore, God bless you."1820. PITT'S PICTURE. 73On the 25th the House of Commons adjourned foramonth ; and on the 28th he was preparing for hissummer's flight. " To London, and wasted my daysadly. Castlereagh in Kent ; Sidmouth, Devonshire ;Bathurst, Gloucestershire curious that all absent,and, I fear, most improper. Called on an man of business, and talked an hourwith him on public affairs. We agree as to danger.He sees no resource. Miss W. came and asked meto be her brother's executor for his West Indian negroes,whom he means, she says, to emancipate. Itold her he must prepare them for it. Then I talkedwith Harry Drummond, and spent an hour in thepictures of our English worthies. Mulgrave's byOffer. Poor Pitt's a vile picture his faceanxious, diseased, reddened with wine, and souredand irritated by disappointments. Poor fellow, howunlike my youthful Pitt ! " 24 His route to Weymouthtook him to the house of another early friend,whose guest he had not been for many years. " Sohere is William Wilberforce going to visit HenryBankes," his companion overheard him murmur tohimself as he drove up to Kingston Hall, " and theyare the only two of the old set of whom so much canbe said."On the 5th of August his wish had been to movewith his family inland, " feeling robbed of the fair enjoymentof the summer when destitute of trees." Butfor his daughter's health he determined to remain at^ Diary, July 28.VOL. V. E74 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1820.Weymouth. " Your idea of a country residence," hetold Mrs. Wilberforce, " is quite delightful, butIf solitude makes scant the means of life,Society for me.'I have been treating this beautiful place anddelicious summer's day very ill," he adds, " by sittingall the morning writing. But perhaps it is better notto indulge too great a relish for trees, now that Imust so soon take my leave of them." 23His residence at Weymouth was soon interruptedby the threatening aspect of affairs. " The accountsfrom London are most alarming." 26 In this crisis hisinterference was requested by men of various parties.Lord John Russell led the way by a letter in theTimes of August 5th, " which can hardly fail," saysthe editor, <f to propitiate Mr. Wilberforce, so beneficentis the office which it assigns to him ; so nattering,and we will add so just, the tribute both to hisvirtues and his power." (e I address to you, sir, apublic letter," began this appeal to him, " becauseyou are a public man, on whom much depends.Although I generally differ from you in politics, Iwarmly admire your generous efforts for the welfareof mankind, and I believe you capable at this momentof doing a great benefit to, your country.You, sir, and some others whose support is the solestrength of administration, are bound to interfere ifthey bate any thing of the wisdom and prudenceTo Mrs. Wilberforce, July 31. * Diary.1820. LORD JOHN RUSSELL. 75which you attribute to their general conduct. * *In your hands is perhaps the fate of this country."This step he thought most ill-advised from reasonswhich he thus imparts to Mr. Buxton. " You mustere now have seen Lord John Russell's curious publication.I presume it is genuine, though I only knowit from its having been read to me from the Timesnewspaper this morning. It is somewhat singularthat he should consider me as possessing so muchpower, and ministry as deriving so much benefit frommy support, when at the same time he considersgovernment indebted to the patronage of the Crownfor the support it experiences from the House ofCommons. I own I am concerned to see the letter,because it sadly obstructs the course of proceeding Ihad before meditated. It would have been verydifferent if he had in private communicated to me hisideas." " At least," replied Mr. Bankes to a likecommunication, 27 " he should have sent to you a firstimpression of his letter, instead of leaving you to pickit up upon the sands of Weymouth among otherjetsam and flotsam that might be cast upon theshore."I do not quite despair of getting the business putoff," he tells Mr. Stephen, 28 " though it must be said,that Lord John's letter is a sad obstacle in the way,and one which may perhaps be insuperable." . . " Myproject was to urge the King to go to the House ofLords, and declare he gives up his own wishes to the27 Henry Bankes Esq. to W. Wilberforce Esq. Aug. 16.28 Aug. 8.E 276 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1820.gratifying of his people." 29 > . " But how could he hopethat I should prevail en the King to accept my mediation,as that of a neutral man, when publicly calledupon to come forward by one of the strongest partisansof the opposition ? "I am divided between the fear on the one hand ofneglecting some measure, which by the blessing ofGod might be the means of arresting our progressinto that abyss to which we seem gradually but toosurely advancing, and on the other of appearing conceitedlyto think of myself more highly than I oughtto think, and of thereby injuring the interests of religion.My situation would be very painful if religiousprinciples I hope in part, but still more natural temperand habit, had not lessened the sensibility of myfeelings on all terrestrial things. Yet to be told beforeall the world, that on me and my conduct depends thefate of the empire, is enough to make a man anxious."Such an address to an independent man from onewho held that to " abandon party was to forfeit all politicalimportance," was not a little curious. Yet thesame appeal was made to him from many quarters,and with more propriety of manner. " I feel withyou," he heard from Mr. Lamb, " all the objectionsyou have stated to the publication of Lord John .Russell's.Yet you will forgive me for saying that I cannotbut think you would do well in returning speedilyinto the neighbourhood of London. If any thing isto be done, your presence and influence will do it." 3029 Diary.3( > Hon. William Lamb [Lord Melbourne] to William WilberforceEsq. Aug. 10.1820. RETURN TO TOWN.The day before this letter reached him, he had " decidedthat it may be well to be on the spot when theQueen's business is going to begin, that if any openingshould present itself, it may be embraced. I goup to try if I can prevent the inquiry. Yet I feeldeeply the evil, that so bad a woman as I fear she isshould carry the victory by sheer impudence, (if sheis guilty,) and assume the part of a person deeplyinjured. Oh the corrupted currents of this world !Oh for that better world, where there shall be noshuffling." 3lPray for me," he writes back from London to hisfamily, 32 " that I may be enlightened and strengthenedfor the duties of this important and critical season.Hitherto God has wonderfully supported and blessedme ; oh how much beyond my deserts ! It will be acomfort to me to know that you all who are, as it were,on the top of the mountain, withdrawn from andabove the storm, are thus interceding for me who amscuffling in the vale below."He found all thoughtful men looking forward tothe future with alarm " Lord Castlereagh appearseven more impressed with the danger than Liverpoolhimself." But matters were too far advanced for anybeneficial interference, and he returned after a time toWeymouth, where he was still followed by pressingapplications that he should demand an audience of theKing, or recommend conciliation to the Queen. Oneardent friend, with more zeal than discretion, sentdown a messenger " to fetch me up express, and meet3 Diary, Aug. 11. Aug. 14.78 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1820.him at Salt Hill to have an audience of the King. Ipositively refused. He had summoned S. and LordH. from Hastings, who both came ; he himself wentto the cottage and conferred with General Thornton,and sent in to the King that he expected me. TheKing sent a very proper answer : That if he had conferredwith me, it must be on some political business,and that he never talked on political subjects withany but his ministers."Seeing therefore no present opening for usefulness,he remained with his family at Weymouth and atBath, watching from a distance the advancing trial.As for politics," he writes to Mr. Bankes, (Sept.19th,) " you are likely to have heard from the Chancellormore than I know. He will confirm or contradictthe report I have heard that the Divorce clauseis to be given up. But what is government about, tosuffer such a multitude of poisonous fountains to beplaying in the great city ? I have had a few of themsent me, and any thing more mischievously contemptuousI never read. The more I think of the wholebusiness, the worse I like it ; and though I am by nomeans clear I could have voted for the Divorce clause,yet when that part is withdrawn, the question recurswith augmented force will it be worth while to undertakea process of so much danger, and permanentbad consequences to the constitution in its regal part,when all we shall get by it will be to say we havedegraded her ; while being the King's wife, she willbe still regarded as the Queen ? Alas ! surely wenever were in such a scrape. The bulk of the people1820. QUEEN'S POPULARITY. 79I grant are run mad ; but then it was a species ofinsanity on which we might have reckoned, becausewe know their prejudices against foreigners ; theirbeing easily led away by appeals to their generousfeelings; and then the doses with which they areplied, are enough to intoxicate much stronger headsthan most of theirs." " I begin more and more tothink that a change of ministers might afford themost probable way out of our present difficulties.Yet one must not be unfair to them ; but, judgingcandidly, their conduct has been very ill-advised."As the cause advanced, his prospects did not brighten." Whenever I look forward," he says a fortnightlater, 33 " I am quite sickened with the prospect. I donot like to think over it till it is necessary, becausecircumstances may so alter as to change the ground ofreasoning. But you and I may think aloud to eachother. How I wish you were here that I might takesome long walks with you ! We never are togetherexcept in harness. I wish to be your companion inthe field, whether frisking in the meadow, or reposingunder the trees." The weeks passed on at Bath,and he was beginning to look forward with no pleasureto the reassembling of the House of Commons. " Fiveor six years " seemed more than he could now look forwardto with any probability of usefulness, "yet Ishould greatly like to lay a foundation for some futuremeasures for the emancipation of the poor slaves, andalso to diminish the evil of oaths. These things beingdone, how gladly should I retire ! I am quite sick of33 To James Stephen Esq. Oct. 580 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE.the wear and tear of the House of Commons ; of theenvy, malice, and all uncharitableness." M The progressof the Bill of Pains and Penalties greatly increasedthese feelings. " I had fully hoped that itwould never come down to the Commons ; but " henow began to fear the contrary." 35 His mind wasnot made up as to his future conduct. "I amstrongly impressed by a sense of the ill-usage sheexperienced on her first coming to this country.Nothing could be worse; and even the public letterthe Prince wrote her was almost like putting heraway." 36 " The present inclination of my judgmentis strongly against receiving the Bill." 37In this state of feeling he hailed with no smallpleasure its actual issue. " This morning theearly coaches from London came in, men and horsescovered with white favours, emblematic I supposeof her innocence, for the rejection of the Bill againstthe Queen, or rather for Lord Liverpool's giving itup when carried only by nine." 38Bath," he writes 39 in better spirits than his lateletters had exhibited, " is a sad place for interruptions.Calling is quite a business, and not a merecompliment ; for many of my maitres are old folks,valetudinarians, &c., who keep the house, and keeptheir court as regularly as Queen Caroline will do.How much you must regret that you, being out oftown, could not accompany Lady Fitzwilliam and the34 To J. Stephen Esq. Oct. 29. ib. Nov. 3,36 To T. Babington Esq. w To J. Butterworth Esq. Nov. 2.39 Diary, Nov. 11. 39 TO Lady Olivia Sparrow.1820. PROCEEDINGS ABANDONED. 81Duchess of Somerset, to congratulate her Majesty onher honourable acquittal ! Seriously, for indeed it isa very serious subject, the matter has ended, if endedit is, which however I fear is not the case, better farthan if the Bill had gone down to our House. Withoutexaggeration it might have occupied us just aslong as the Queen's partisans were disposed to thinkit for her interest that we should be so employed, andone entire session would certainly not have sufficed ;for we have no judges to whom doubtful questions ofevidence might be referred, or even ex-chancellorswhose judgment is allowed to decide as to admissibleor inadmissible papers or questions ; instead of whichevery individual member among us thinks himselfas well able to decide on these points as the first lawyersin the land."It was soon too clear that the matter was notended. " The political sky " he thought " verygloomy. I hear from Canning of his resignation becausehe cannot properly remain neutral." 40 " Ministersare resolved to refuse the Queen the restorationof her name to the Liturgy and a palace. She isstriving to keep the flame alive and to blow it tofury." " She throws out a threat of recriminating, amode of proceeding which has been wisely reservedfor the House of Commons. Even among us indeedshe will not I suppose be admitted to recriminateformally, but she may through her spokesmen, bothat the bar and in the House, produce all the effects*> Diary, Nov. 26.E 382 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1820.of recrimination. I myself see Matt. v. 32 preciselyin the same light with the Archbishop of Team." 41This storm was kept off for the present by the adjournmentof the House of Commons, and Mr. Wilberforcewas able to remain quiet in the midst of hisfamily at Bath. Here a new blow distressed himgreatly. On the 9th of December he heard fromunquestionable information of the sudden death ofChristophe; and with Christophe he well knew allthe plans for the improvement of the Haytians,which had cost him so much time and labour, mustfall to the ground. " I cannot mention Daytimesays a few days later, 42 " without interposing aword or two concerning this same tyrant, as nowthat he is fallen it seems to be the fashion to callChristophe. If he did deserve that name, it isthen compatible with the warmest desire in a sovereignfor the improvement and happiness of hispeople ; and I must also add that all the authenticaccounts I ever heard of him have led me to believethat he was really a great man, with but few infirmities.Nevertheless I am not much surprised at whathas taken place, for I must confess that the yoke ofgovernment might probably press heavily upon hispeople, and that he might carry on his whole system,both in introducing improvements and in reformingmorals, with too much rigour. Again, the militarydiscipline which he enforced, and the great army41 Letter to J. Stephen Esq.To the Rev. F. Wrangham, Dec. 26, 1820.1820. CHRISTOPHE'S DEATH. 83which he maintained, were necessary to resist theexpected invasion from France ; and I fear that allkings are apt to be too fond of arms and reviews ofcourse except the King of Great Britain."I regret," he said at this time to a friend, f( thatI did not more press Christian principles upon poorChrist ope, and instruct him in the knowledge of aSaviour ; yet I was afraid of losing my influence withhim by going too far. I sent him books, and saidwhat I thought I could, but I have been uneasy sinceI know not that a day has passed that I have notprayed for him. He has only been charged, as far asI know, with two faults ; one, an overstrict enforcementof justice ; the other, his being avaricious, andheaping together much money in his capital. Butthis was for the purpose of buying gunpowder fromthe Americans, in case France should attack him.He sent me over 6000 43 to pay schoolmasters, &c. ;and I remember his giving a man, whose conduct heapproved, 1000 dollars, quite spontaneously. He wasa great man, intent on the improvement of his people,but he furnishes a striking instance of the truth, thatby too earnestly pursuing a good object you directlydefeat it."Christophe's noble plans fell with him. " Everydaysomething transpires," wrote a medical gentlemanfrom St. Domingo half a year afterwards, 44 " toshow the importance of King Henry to the Haytians.43 A part of this money still remained in Mr. Wilberforce's keeping,and was paid to Christophe's widow on her arrival in England.44 Dr. Duncan Stewart to W. Wilberforce Esq. March 6.4 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1821.His greatest enemies now acknowledge that theynever have had a chief whose powers of mind andbody were so fitted for command. Had he reignedover a people untutored in the scepticism of moderninfidelity, and uncontaminated by the licentiousnessof French libertinism, Hayti must centuries hencehave regarded his memory with veneration."As the meeting of the House approached thepolitical horizon became darker. Mr. Wilberforcereturned to London with a heavy heart. " Pray forus," he said when he left his family, who for hisdaughter's health still staid at Bath ; " pray for uswho are about to attend parliament, and shall soon bein the heat of the battle." " I wish I had any thingto call me away tomorrow from the House of Commons.The question before us is a most perplexingone : a choice of evils. But how little these parliamentaryaffairs will interest me when I look deathin the face except having kept a clear conscience ! "I must now," he adds, " withdraw my mind fromthe scene of peace and kindness with which it isconversant when my eye is directed to No. 26,Pulteney Street, and occupy it with all that is of anopposite character. I have a most painful route totravel whatever course I pursue." 45On the 26th he " found the question changed bythe motion of Lord A. Hamilton, from restoring theQueen's name to the Liturgy, to blaming the leaving itout. Not one man in fifty but thought it wrong, andstill more foolish, to leave the name out, yet a large45 To Mrs. Wilberforce, Jan. 22, 1821.1821. QUESTION OF THE LITURGY. 85majority voted for the previous question. That nightI meant to vote for restoring her name, but was forcedto go home by illness, though had the division comeon a few days before, I should have voted against it,on the ground of the Queen's outrageously contumaciousconduct. It is almost rebellious" 46 This concessionhe thought due to the religious feelings of thegreat bulk of the middle classes. He found that notonly the political Dissenters, but even the WesleyanMethodists prayed for the Queen by name, andwould not allow that she was prayed for at all, inthe words, ' for all the royal family.' " 47 For himself,he had never viewed the omission as involving anyreligious question, sharing the sentiment expressedby Dr. Parr : " In the words, f all the royal family,'I include the Queen." 48 But to perpetuate thenotion that it was designed to deprive her of thebenefit of the people's prayers, was, he thought, soparamount an evil, that on the 13th of Februaryhe supported Mr. John Smith's motion for the restorationof her name.This exclusion," he maintained, 49 " is a most unhappycircumstance, because it has been the meansof introducing a political feeling into the Church.Every religious man has hitherto consoled himselfwith the reflection, that there is at least one day inthe week, when he may forget all his low and vulgarcares, and dismiss from his mind the animositieswhich disturb the course of human life. On that day46 Diary. * Ib. Life.*> Debate of Feb. 13.86 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1821.the elements of discord ought to be at rest, and everyrecollection which creates disunion or excites a jarringsentiment should be, if possible, avoided. But atpresent this unhappy subject is brought under publicnotice every Sunday, and the wound which mightotherwise be healed is kept in a state of constantirritation. Nothing can more tend than such a stateof things to bring into discredit an ecclesiasticalsystem sealed with the blood of martyrs, and fromwhich the Dissenters themselves have derived all theadvantages which they enjoy."(( lt grieved me more than it ought," he wrotenext day, 50 " to differ from many dear friends, but Ireally could not in conscience forbear to support themotion." " I felt extremely distressed, but was toldI spoke well." 51 Two days later 52 he urges as an excusefor his silence, that " the subjects on which hemeant to write were scarcely in unison with the roughand discordant notes " which had been " too commonlyvibrating in his ears. You are such an anti-queenethat perhaps you will hold me almost incapableof the relations of peace and amity, afterhaving supported the restoration of her name to theLiturgy. Here however I am not so serious as I wasbefore. Yet there are those even whom I love, who,if they will not look at me with altered countenance,will yet feel real grief of heart ; and I perhaps, even toweakness, feel full as much pain from the consciousnessof grieving them. But we must not suffer such conicTo Mrs. Wilberforce. Diary, Feb. 13.Feb. 15.1821. QUESTION OF THE LITURGY. 87alterations to affect our conduct, or even to bias ourjudgment. Yet it is one of the views in which abetter world often presents itself to my mind's eye,and cheers my heart by the prospect, that then therewill be no errors, no room for misconstruction, but allwill at once recognise the kind intentions of others,and live in the clear and full light of unclouded loveand confidence. Oh how trivial will then appear tohave been many of those questions which we nowcontest so warmly ! "After the loss of the motion, he once more attemptedto promote a peaceable adjustment of thequestion, by a letter which he thought would reachthe King in private.March 6, 1821.My dear Sir,After having been confined for a week to mychamber, I have just now heard a piece of intelligence,and that from no mean authority, which would havebeen a cordial to me had my nerves required a refresher.I mean that the Queen sent last night tosay that she would thankfully receive the moneyoffered her ; and it was added, that she would now beglad of her name's being put as a matter of graceand favour into the Liturgy, because if she wereabroad, the omission would operate so unfavourablyon her. The prospects thus opened to us are reallycheering. For remember, and that is what you andother friends have not sufficiently considered, thatit is not that I, or any experienced man, ever supsLIFE OF Wilberforce. 1821.posed the bulk of the people would long feel acutelyabout the omission of the Queen's name, but thatthe omission would tend to produce an estimation(a most false one) of the King's mind and motives,and a state of alienation of heart which would helpto render them the more easy dupes of the artful,bad men who are trying to seduce them from reverenceand regard for all they ought to respectand love. But now, my dear sir, what an opportunityfor the King to establish himself in the good-willof the people, when it will clearly and indubitablyappear to be the result of his own spontaneous grace !ReallyDeus haec tempore,' &c.I thought I would throw out this hint to you. I doreally think there scarcely ever was such an opening.Never did you utter a more just word than thatof prudence, which you suggested in a former letter.Good people are not always prudent people. Thevices of the tongue, to speak honestly, are far toolittle regarded by those who we may hope do makea conscience of their words and works ; yet howstrong is Solomon and St. James, and above all ourSaviour ! I myself have often had this truth enforcedon me. A public man of sixty-one and a half,for thirty years an intimate of a prime minister,must be incurable if he is a babbler.With kind remembrances to Mrs. , I remain,Ever yours sincerely,W. Wilberforce."1821. TO MRS. WILBERFORCE. 89He soon turned to more congenial subjects. " Feb.3rd. Grand Committee of African Institution atLansdown House. Discussed parliamentary measuresfor the session." 53 It was mainly for thiscause that he remained this winter near town, atthe house of Mr. Stephen, whilst his family weredetained at Bath and heard from him every day.TO MRS. WILBERFORCE.Jan. 25.My day ever since breakfast time has beenconsumed by two peers of the realm ; Lord C. had agood share of it, but I am told that by the clock LordHarrowby was full two hours and a half with me, andI have barely time to scribble my letter to you ; thebulletin report is Well, I thank God. I have severalvisits to pay, and would you believe it, I am just nowdrawn into volunteering a dinner with Inglis, to meetWalter Scott.I enclose a letter from P., which breathes sofriendly a spirit that I think you and the girls oughtto see it, in order to do justice to his kindness. Ilove to make people like each other better, and Ioften regret the tattling system, which prevails sogenerally, and from which I grieve to say many, ofwhom it would be uncharitable not to think favourablyon the whole, are nevertheless not exempt. Itis indeed a striking instance of our natural self-deception,that persons who would quite shrink from theidea of committing most of those crimes which areDiary.90 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1821.condemned in the word of God, think little of thevices of the tongue. But any one who is duly jealousof himself will always watch most carefully againstthe sins which are the least unpopular in his owncircle, and certainly the great evil of what is called thereligious world is chatterton.Pray let the girls see my letter. Young peopleought especially to guard against this fault, and whenI write to you now I consider myself as addressingthem also. I beg you will write occasionally toand ; their sisters also should write to thempretty frequently. I assure you both from my ownexperience and from that of others, that at theirperiod of life the frequent recurrence of home associations,and of sisterly affection, has a peculiarly happyeffect both on the character and manners. Can yousend your newspaper after reading it; he hasrepeatedly asked to have one, and I don't like tosend him an opposition paper ? Return the Courier Isend to-day, and if you have any convenient opportunityyou might send me my Parkhurst's Lexicon.Farewell, with kindest remembrances to the deargirls,Ever affectionately yours,W. WILBERFORCE."His domestic character was truly remarkable Itwas not merely that the tenderness of his earliestaffections was unchilled by a bustling public life, butthat there was a careful thoughtfulness as to the effectof little things upon his children's characters which1821. HIS SONS' PROFESSIONS. 91seemed almost incompatible with his incessant occupations.This was now more observable when hissons were growing into manhood. For them hechose, as he had done for himself, (a far severer trialof his principles,) with no eye to personal ambition.His great wish was to see them useful clergymen, andleaving to themselves entirely the choice of their profession,he watched the little openings of domesticlife to give to their minds the bias he desired. " Mydear boy," he exclaimed at Bath seeing one of themread Cobbett with great interest, " do not be a politician;it is the most unprofitable of all subjects; ithas been my business all my life, but I hope you aremeant for something better."" he says of another, " has been kindly receivedat Lord E.'s. I do not wonder at its havingthe effect of making him overvalue the worldlydignity of politicians and lawyers in comparison withthe true dignity of the ministerial office. I greatlyfear his estimate of things will be spoiled," 51 Allhis plans were laid thoughtfully with this intention.If you have sons who are likely to distinguish themselves,"he writes to a friend, " and wish them to gointo the Church, I would advise you to send them toOxford." The result was what he wished. Of hisfour sons, who came of a stock which for twenty-sixrecorded generations appears not to have producedone clergyman, he lived to see two in Holy Orders,and a third preparing for the ministry. His lettersto them are full of the same spirit.54 Diary, Oct. 12.92 LIFE OF Wilberforce. 1821.TO A SON AT ORIEL COLLEGE, OXFORD.Saturday, March 10.My dear ,It seems very long since I heard from you.Yet I really trust your silence has proceeded ratherfrom excess of occupation than from indolence ; thoughI must say that to any one who has the full use of allhis organs, there are intervals in the busiest lifewhich afford opportunities for doing sundry littlethings, which to a man who has nothing to do, (letme correct myself, every man has something to do, Ishould say to a man who does nothing,) appear toolaborious to be undertaken. At all events, never letmy want either of time or eyesight be a reason forshortening, much less for omitting to write to me.Amidst the drudgery which the post imposes on me, aletter from my dear is a cordial that refreshesand revives me.But you have perhaps been expecting to hearfrom me in answer to your [question]. I cannotobject to your plan of retiring to read, but I hope youwill be very careful whom you select for your companions.Believe me on the credit of my long experience,that though Christians who wish to maintainthe spiritual life in vigour and efficiency, (fervent,geovre?, in spirit, serving the Lord,) may without injurymix and associate with worldly people for thetransaction of business ; yet they cannot for recreation,still less for intimate friendship and society. With1821. LETTERS TO HIS SONS. 93the deep interest I feel for your eternal concerns, (ohhow contemptible does all else appear in comparison !)I cannot but enforce on you this most important truth.I hope you keep steady to your plan of spending yourSunday properly, and not joining in parties on thatday. Observation and my own experience have convincedme that there is a special blessing on a rightemployment of these intervals. One of their primeobjects in my judgment is to strengthen our impressionof invisible things, and to acquire a habit of livingunder their influence. Now this habit will manifestlybe counteracted, not merely by gross outrages onthe decorum of the day, but by whatever tends tosecularize it, (if I may 'use the term,) to associate uswith worldly objects and interests. Sursum corda isthe Christian's Sunday motto. In the higher region towhich he on that day endeavours to obtain access, hemeets in idea that Saviour who died for him, and whostill looks, we are assured, with the most tender solicitudeand sympathy on all His followers, and with morekindness on none than on His younger servants. Ithink I must ere now have told you, that before Imarried, and indeed when I used to spend my Sundaysalone, before I had the privilege of having two suchChristian friends as the late Mr. Eliot and dearHenry Thornton, I used after dinner to call up in ideaaround me my absent relatives and friends, and thushold converse with the objects of my affection. Omy dearest , remember how much depends onyou. You will I trust do credit to your name. Buthonestly more depends on the next few years than on94 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1821.any other period of your life. You will be glad tohear that Tom Macaulay and his friend and quondamrival Maiden have got two out of the threeUniversity scholarships. I think there were thirteencandidates, and they are always the first men in theUniversity. * * * *I shall have you much in my thoughts and feelingtomorrow, especially from two to four o'clock.Farewell. May every blessing be your portion hereand hereafter. This is the daily prayer ofYour affectionate Father,W. WILBERFORCE."TO THE SAME.Kensington Gore, Saturday, Feb. 24.My dear ,Notwithstanding my having written to youyesterday, I should have sent you a few lines to-dayon the principle of paying you a visit, though but apop-visit, on the Sunday, if a conference with the Duede Case and some other engagements had not consumedthe whole morning. Indeed I account it apart of my regular Saturday's business to write to mychildren ; yet as I have a letter to frank to you I willadd a very few words to assure you that the mentionwhich is twice in every day made of you in my prayers,will tomorrow be made with double enlargementand particularity. Your uncle Stephen and I wereconversing seriously the other night, and we bothexpressed the greatly augmented sense of the .HOLY ALLIANCE. 95portance and value of prayer which a long life hasproduced in us. The idea of discarding what is calleda particular providence from the lesser events oflife, and acknowledging it only in the greater andmore important, is not less unphilosophical than it iscontrary to Scripture ; and we both agreed that ourown experience strongly opposed this false and mischievouspersuasion. My dearest , may God blessand keep you.Ever most affectionately yours,W. Wilberforce."As the session advanced, he took part on someimportant questions. " Feb. 21st. I rather preparedfor the coming debate ; yet, as too common with me,expended nearly all my time over old accounts, whichhad only general reference to the subject, and madesome little deposits of useful facts, but little or noimmediate preparation. My secretary too late. Itis a sad business to have my eyes in another person'skeeping. Subject, the circular of the three parties tothe Holy Alliance, Russia, Austria, and Prussia theparties also to the partition of Poland declaring theirdetermination to suppress all revolutions, and applyingthe doctrine to the case of Naples. I spoke, andreally thought it right to condemn such doctrine ;and all without exception condemned' it. It was veryfoolish in opposition to divide. 23rd. Dinner in supportof the Refuge for the Destitute. Very kindlyreceived. Duke of York proposed my health. Satbetween Lord Liverpool and ; the greatest man in96 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1821.station, and the richest man for his rank, in the country.Former melancholy ; latter affectedly vivacious.Oh how little does wealth give happiness ! 27th.While walking in the Park this morning I met Castlereaghand Arbuthnot, and told the former that I wasrevolving the idea of an address on the principles andconduct of the three allied powers. Castlereagh laidin claim (my doing so in 1799 to Pitt 55 ) to my hearinghis objections first, and renewed his claim on a secondmeeting. March 9th. A meeting about the immolationof widows, and other Hindoo barbarisms. Resolvedto have papers collected, 11th. On Sundaydear came to me, and spent three-quarters of anhour on his peculiar theological topics. I grieved tolose my time, but it was a trial of Christian principle,Rom. xiv. 1. His fault is that he reasons out hisopinions, and then reads the Scriptures. 14th. AttendingSir Thomas Brisbane, Governor-abounds ofNew South Wales. 16th. Second reading of theRoman Catholic Bill. I was complimented on myspeaking, though from turning away from the gallery,said to be inaudible there. I had thought thematter over in Stephen's garden for about an hour,and spoke near an hour." 56It was a most able exposition of his views,"says Mr. Buxton, " and the passage in which hesaid that though we had delivered the Roman Catholicsfrom prison, we insisted on their wearingthe gaol dress, was particularly admired." Therest of the week was occupied in "opposing Vid. vol. ii. p. 365. & Diarv.1821. HIS ILLNESS. 97well's Bill" for removing his slaves from Antiguato Demerara. " I voted and spoke one night for repealingthe Malt Tax. Day passes away after dayso rapidly, that life is sliding from me, yet littleseems to be done. There is I hope no intentionalmisapplication of time, and we are to ' rule with diligencesbut I must retire from business for which notspecially fitted." 57 His state of health at this timegave many indications that his parliamentary servicesmust terminate ere long. Several successive attacksof illness made it impossible or dangerous for him toattend the House, and delayed his intended inquiryinto the West India system to another year. " Iscarcely dare tell you," he writes to Mrs. Wilberforce," that at one time, thinking I was not likely tobe able to speak before Easter, I was actually meditatingthe cutting and running system without delay ;when I recovered, so as to allow me the hope ofdoing two or three important matters before mydeparture."His secret thoughts on his recovery are full ofgratitude to God. " What cause have I for thankfulness,that even when ill I scarcely ever experiencepain, or distress of body or mind ! But then I learn,or rather I re-learn, from this attack, two importantpractical truths : when I become ever so little incapableof quiet continued reflection I can only gaze atknown truths, and look up with aspirations of humblethankfulness to the will of my unwearied and long-sufferingBenefactor. I should be ungrateful indeed,5 ? Diary, March) 31.vaL. v. F98 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1821.if I were insensible to the innumerable mercies whichI have been receiving all my life long. But it isastonishing how little I feel the lapse of time. I forgotthat I am now arrived at sixty-one years and ahalf, though never a strong man, and in 1788 in sucha state of apparent weakness, that Dr. Warren, ofunrivalled sagacity, said confidentially, (but it wassoon told to my kind sympathizing friend Lancaster,)that I had not stamina to last a fortnight. Howwonderful is it that I continue unto this day ! But Ishall probably have little warning : let me remembertherefore Christ's admonition, ( Be ye also ready.'Again, how careful ought I to be not to let self-indulgenceor inadvertence obstruct my usefulness.My powers of serving God (He best knows and ordainstheir effect) depend entirely on my health.Little things then, which in others are nothing, arein my instance important, since who has such motivesfor gratitude and active service as myself."The following letter is of the same date.TO LADY OLIVIA SPARROW.London, March, 1821.My dear Friend,I beg your pardon for having been so dilatoryin executing the commission with which you chargedme. But the honest truth is, that the affair escapedme, and I assure you I often find humiliating proofsof this decay of memory. My friends must bear withmy infirmities. I hear you are going with Millicentto Leamington ; may it be with benefit, if, as I .HIS CONTEMPORARIES. 99some must be the case, the waters are the object. Imyself have been unwell for about ten days ; not materially,but enough to keep me from the House ofCommons. In truth, that attendance is become verydistasteful. To those who remember my first yearsin parliament, the difference cannot but appear extreme,in point of talent and eloquence.I hope will become one of the first stars inour, alas, darkened hemisphere (all our 'old constellationsextinct). To say nothing of the older names,Lord North, Dunning, Wedderburne, Barre, thereare no more Fox, Pitt, Burke, Windham ; and poorWhitbread, with all his coarseness, had an Anglicismabout him, that rendered him a valuable ingredientin a British House of Commons. 58Yet to confess the truth, more talent was commonlyemployed in defending measures than in devisingthem. Very superior powers are seldom neededfor the forming a right judgment in politics, and toooften they are associated with qualities which operateunfavourably; but they enable a public man to congregateround him a number of followers, who feelthemselves respectable from being the adherents ofone who commands respect ; and who in the parliamentarycontests gives his friends the sense ofsuperiority. Yet on the whole, with one or two exceptions,our public men are better than those of theearlier part of my political existence. But then wearein circumstances which must be confessed to bepeculiarly distressing and difficult. Yet all the time,5 * From an earlier letter.F 2100 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1821.as I often think, the great Disposer of all things iscarrying on His own plans ; and oh how much moretruly important will many of these hereafter appear,on which the politician would look down with superciliouscontempt, if you were to presume to put themon a level with the objects of his attention. We forgetthat the whole apparatus of civil government ismainly intended to keep society together in peace,and thereby to enable the religious and moral interestsof the world to be promoted on a greater or asmaller scale, from the dimensions of a single family,or even a single individual, to those of a MissionarySociety in all its varied and multifarious usefulness.I have been scribbling so fast that I scarcely knowwhat I have written, but I remember that the veryidea of your retirement, friendly peace, and comfort,produced an emotion of disrelish for the Houseof Commons' occupations to which I am just now returning.But my time is more than all gone. Farewell,and believe me with every kind wish andfriendly assurance for you and Millicent, my dearfriend,Ever sincerely yours,W. Wilberforce."After an Easter spent at Bath Mr. Wilberforce returnedto London. " May 25th. Buxton's capitalspeech on the criminal laws, two hours and fortyminutes nobody tired all information and sense."26th. Meeting about the Address on the SlaveTrade papers. Then formation of East Indian .Garden PARK. 101nation Society." " June 20th. I moved my addresson the Abolition, urging government to press thematter on foreign powers. Mackintosh spoke capitally; I did not at all please myself." " 30th. Attendeda meeting at the Thatched House Tavern, onthe retrospect and prospect quoad Africa, &c. Idid not do myself justice in not stating my illness,and absence at Bath, as the causes of my inefficiency."Little was done during the remainder ofthe session. " July 12th. Had a few words withLushington, who spoke against the Society for theSuppression of Vice." " Interview with Lord Bathurstand Vansittart, about apprenticing captured negroes.A long conversation with Lord Londonderry aboutFrench Abolition he advised newspaper publications.Got Report of American Committee, favourable tothe right of search." 59He was now retiring into summer quarters ; " noslight labour, as you may imagine, when I tell you thatI have to move the accumulation of near forty years."He had just sold his house at Kensington, (" I grieveinwardly I own at leaving it") and determined uponsettling in the country. " My wife and daughterwish it, and I hope I shall secure more time for myfamily and myself when further from London ; it willgive my children country tastes and occupations, andthey are virtuous pleasures. Treated with such kindnessas I am, it would be strange if I were not to behappy any where. Oh these things are trifles, mere& Diary.102 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1821.trifles, and so let us feel them. Here indeed mytemper and principles coincide." 60He settled first at Harden Park in Surrey. " Wehave taken for a year on trial a house about eighteenmiles from Westminster Bridge, in which poor Hat-selllived for the last twenty summers of his life. Itwas once a fine place, and is one of the prettiest spotsthat I ever saw without water the form of theground most beautifully varied, and the wood stillfine, though a sad diminution of it was made to supplythe demands of a former Lady Clayton, (the placeis now Sir William's,) who was very fond of cards.The country also (Surrey) is one of the most beautifulI ever saw in England ; the Lakes and parts ofDerbyshire excepted. It is comfortable to me tohave a house of my own and my books about me,instead of being in a watering-place as has been mysummer habit for many years. But I shall find it asad drawback if I lose thereby the pleasure of a fewdays' intercourse with you.How are you about Brougham's Education Bill ?What think you of the state of the agriculturists andof their prospects? You really wrong me by notsending me some sense on these subjects. I shallsay with Major Cartwright, Give us our rights. Didyou know good H. S. ? He was lately taken off bya consumption. His sweet wife, scarcely havingceased to be congratulated as a bride, is now a widow,and will, ere long, become a mother. Surely this is60 Diary.1821. HIS COUNTRY RESIDENCE. 103an object on which our Saviour himself would havedropped a tear. O my dear Babington, let us liveunder the impression that the time is short, and befound doing our Master's business whenever we arecalled hence." 61This was the secret spring of all his conduct. " Iam profiting, I trust, from the quiet life I lead at thissweet place." 62 Never surely was family religionseen in more attractive colours. " I only wish," saida college friend who had been visiting two of his sons,that those who abuse your father's principles couldcome down here and see how he lives." It was agoodly sight. The cheerful play of a most happytemper, which more than sixty years had only mellowed,gladdened all his domestic intercourse. Thefamily meetings were enlivened by his conversationgay, easy, and natural, yet abounding in manifold instruction,drawn from books, from life, and fromreflection. Though his step was less elastic than ofold, he took his part in out-of-door occupations ;climbing the neighbouring downs with the walkingparties, pacing in the shade of the tall trees, or gildingwith the old man's smile the innocent cheerfulnessof younger pastimes. " The sun was very hot to-day,and the wind south, but under the beech trees on theside of the hill it was quite cool. Dined by ourselves,and walked with the boys in the evening." 63 19th.Gave ale and cricket to the servants, and all thefamily, in honour of the coronation. Thought it safer61 To T. Babington Esq. July 21.& To Z. Macaulay Esq. 63 Diary, July 18-104 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 182Lto refuse the invitation of a neighbour, lest my planof quiet should be rendered more difficult." " Howlittle' he said on another day, " does that childknow how much it is loved ! It is the same with usand our heavenly Father; we little believe how weareloved by Him. I delight in little children, Icould spend hours in watching them. How muchthere is in them that the Saviour loved, when He tooka little child and set him in the midst ; their simplicity,their confidence in you, the fund of happinesswith which their beneficent Creator has enduedthem ; that when intelligence is less developed and soaffords less enjoyment, the natural spirits are an inexhaustiblefund of infantine pleasure."Many of his letters speak of the pleasant dayswhich he spent here.Marden Park, Aug. 1821.My dear Stephen,Literally speaking, I was more than three-quartersasleep when I wrote to you yesterday evening.It is I suppose with sleep in the human body aswith spirituous liquors in a frost, the extremities ofthe one and the surface of the other become stiff andtorpid, whilst the heart remains awake and fluid; formy fingers were asleep, and marking the paper unintelligibly,when my mind detected their aberrations.I hope that from a better principle than vanity, Iam vexed at your having been a second time herewithout seeing the place. Beautiful indeed as it is,I fully enter into your grounds for preferring the1821. CORONATION. 105Dissenter country. It is rural nature with you ;with us it is the manufactured article, too lordly togratify the moral taste. But you must spend at leastthree or four quiet days with us. How striking is theQueen's death just now ! May it impress the heartof the King with a sense of the uncertainty of humanthings.Ever affectionately yours,W. Wilberforce."He loved thus to call his friends around him, andwas never long without having some or other of themas his guests. (< Sir George Grey with us talkeda good deal of the coronation, which all agree to havebeen the finest raree-show ever exhibited. But themoral eye seems to have been too much distracted,and it wanted the solemn effect which the mind contemplatesin a King with his nobles about him,taking oaths of fidelity to his people, and theiremotions of loyalty towards him." 64 " Your brotherthe General just gleamed in upon us," he wrote afew days afterwards to Mr. Macaulay 5 " as we havebeen wishing the sun to do all this day, to give us alittle light and warmth, but with the sun he rose thismorning and pursued his course when we were all inour beds. He gave me much information concerningthe French parties, more and more convincing mewhat an unprincipled race they are at Paris." " Whata horrible account does Sir G. Collier's packet contain.These French slave-traders are the common64 Diary, July 27. fc To Z. Macaulay Esq. Aug. 8.F 3106 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1821.pests of mankind. Think of a company formed atNantes, having twenty-four slave ships already, totake up the Trade when the Spaniards and Portugueseshould relinquish it." 66In the promised leisure of the country, he meditatedliterary works of an extensive kind, and hoped torealize the wish of Mr. Babington, " that the eveningof your days should shed a mild lustre on yourcontemporaries and on posterity, harmonizing withthe great and important labours of your earlieryears." 67 " My whole life of late has been consumedby letters, and by other business which leaves notrace behind. I must endeavour to redeem the timefor some useful work. Though the complaint in myeyes has for some years prevented my acquiringknowledge, or even keeping up what I had acquired,yet I hope that I might be able to compose both areligious and a political work, which would not bewithout value. May God bless to me this scene ofquiet. I have been dictating some French letterslately, and beginning others on my own subject.My health requires my being out an hour and half inthe morning, when fair, though I commonly use thattime for dictating. When I can, I like to spend anhour or two after breakfast in hearing some rationalauthor attentively ; or if not that, I dictate. In dressinglately, I have been hearing Lord Landgrave'sMemoirs a humiliating picture of court intrigue ;yet in another view gratifying, as it shows how a66 To Z. Macaulay Esq. Aug. 15.T. Babington Esq. to W. Wilberforce Esq. July 14.1821. COBBETT AND THE WEST INDIANS. 107man like old Pitt may rise by the honourableexercise of his talents, without servility or muchparty trick." 68The execution of these plans was continually hinderedby his public occupations. The West Indiacause exacted all his time. He was at once obligedto begin writing " letters to two members of theAmerican Congress and to the Emperor of Russia." jfI am endeavouring to write him a public and privateletter about the Slave Trade, and especially about theway in which it is carried on by the French." 7 Soonafterwards he had " proceeded a good way with thepublic letter, and had already sent a private one toprepare him for it, and to press the 'matter upon hisconscience." 71Other kindred occupations followed. He sendsMr. Macaulay an extract from a Spanish newspaper,adding, " I must write to Torrent on thesubject, and repel the mischievous and false assertion,that we are content to sacrifice our ownWest India settlements, provided we can also ruinthose of other powers." 72 " For four or five days Ihave scarcely been able to look at my notes, or makeprogress in my letter to the Emperor. It is vexatiousbeyond measure to have my time frittered away, butmy eyes are the chief hinderance. Oh that I wereyoung and strong, then I might get up at five o'clockin the morning." 73 "You do not tell me what isyour occupation during the recess," he says to Mr.& Diary, Aug. 18. Ib. Sept. 1. 7o ib. Oct. 2.7i To Z. Macaulay Esq. Oct. 27. w Ib. Oct. 3. 73 ib. Nov. 21.108 LIFE OF Wilberforce. 1821.Stephen. 74 " Is it Cobbett's answer to Cropper ? Bythe way I greatly lament Cobbett's having manifestlyoffered his services to the West Indians. He is justsuch an ally as M. would desire ; ready to assertwithout scruple, and invent facts when they are not inexistence.Poor Christophe ! I cannot help grievingat the idea of his character's being left to the dogsand vultures to be devoured."He urged at this time upon Mr. Wrangham 75 a half-formedengagement, that he would ee draw up some accountwhich should tend to dispel those dark cloudsof falsehood and misconstruction with which partyprejudice has blackened the character of Christophe.Really he claims as ci right a place in your Biography.My only doubt is, whether you could obtain sufficientmaterials. I have been reserving for some time alittle piece written by a lieutenant in the navy to hismother, after having spent a week at Cape Henry.But Christophe's character deserves a much moreelevated tone, as well as deeper views of humannature, and of the principles of civil society." " Ihave lately read whilst dressing Madame de Steel'sTen Years' Exile, and very clever it is ; full of deepand yet witty remarks, though one cannot but beoffended at the constant disposition to shine. I metin it with a curious instance of the prejudices whichprevail even in liberal minds, and amongst people ofour own party, against the blacks. She tells of Buonaparte'sperfidy and cruelty to poor Toussaint, saying,No doubt Toussaint was a great criminal ! "7* Sept. 12. 75 Aug. 16.1821. ILLNESS OF HIS DAUGHTER. 109One heavy trial alone clouded all this summer. Hiseldest daughter still continued in a state which gavehim much uneasiness. After one of her recurringseizures, he wrote to Hannah More.Harden Park, Gladstone, Sept. 28, l&l.My dear Friend,I was sorry to hear that your e soul's darkcottage' had sustained another rude shock. But Itrust it has recovered the effects of the concussion,and that though time-worn and shattered, it may yetfor some years continue to shelter its tenant. We allof us have had notices to quit, if we would properlyreceive and profit by them. I wish, but I fear mustonly wish, that you could spend a few days with us inour country retirement. I have much to say, andmore to hear, but my eyes forbid my writing. I couldnot bear however to forward the enclosed (sent me forthat purpose) without a word or two. You will probablyhave heard, that my dear daughter has beenvery poorly again. She is I thank God a little better.But, poor thing, may her ill health be blessed to her,and then it may be, nay will be matter for rejoicing.May we both be enabled to live more habituallywith reference to the next world. Farewell.Ever your sincere Friend,W. Wilberforce."As the year advanced her small remaining strengthwas manifestly sinking, and on the 30th of Decembershe breathed her last at Mr. Stephen's house, whither110 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1821.she had been removed some weeks before, for bettermedical attendance.I have been employed' he tells Mr. Wrangham, 76for a long period in attending the sick, and at lengththe dying-bed of a justly beloved grown-up daughter.But the pain of our late trial has been abundantlymitigated by the assured persuasion that she is goneto a better world. It would have been delightful evento those who were not so personally interested in thescene as ourselves, to have witnessed the composurewith which, in the prospect of speedy dissolution, ourdear child, naturally of a very timid spirit, was ableto pray that her parents might be supported under theprivation they were about to suffer." " I shall neverforget the tenderness, and faith, and love, and devotionwith which, having desired all others to withdraw,she poured forth her last audible prayer for herself andus." 77 " Sustained by a humble hope of the merciesof God through her Redeemer and Intercessor, shewas enabled to bear her sufferings with patience andresignation, and to preserve a composure which evensurprised herself. On the very morning of the lastday of her life she had desired a favourite femaleattendant to ask her physician, whether or not therewas any hope of her recovery, ' but if not,' she added,all is well.' She expired at last like a person fallingasleep scarcely a groan, and not the least struggle.I am almost bound in gratitude to the Giver of allgood to call in my friends to rejoice with me over such7 6 Jan. 18, 1822.77 W. Wilberforce Esq. to Lord Teignmouth, Jan. 3.1821. DEATH OF HIS ELDEST DAUGHTER. Illan instance of Divine goodness, and the consciousnessof our dear child's being safe is a cordial of inestimableefficacy."To Mr. Babington he opens still more freely all thefeelings of his heart in the review of this affectingscene. " There was none of that exultation and holyjoy which are sometimes manifested by dying Christians.But I know not that my judgment does notrest with more solid confidence on her humble composureand consciousness of her own unworthiness, withan affectionate casting of herself on her Redeemer andIntercessor. The day before she expired, she sent allout but her mother and me, and concluded some declarationsof her humble hope in the mercies of Godthrough Christ with a beautiful prayer addressed toher Saviour. And she had remarked to her motherthat she never had before understood the meaningand value of Christ's intercession. My dear friend,I must stop you are a father." 78I have always thought," he says, 79 " that we shoulduse such seasons for associating spiritual impressionsand ideas with the concerns of common life." Such wasnow his practice. On the day of his daughter's funeralhe was kept at home by the extreme coldness of theweather, and when the band of mourners had set outhe went into his solitary chamber to commune withhis God. " I went and saw the coffin. How vainthe plumes, &c. when the occasion is considered, andthe real state of humiliation to which the body is reduced! I must elsewhere note down the mercies and78 Dec. 31, 1821. ^ Letter to Zachary Macaulay Esq.112 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1821.loving-kindnesses of our God and Saviour in this dispensation; above all, the exceeding goodness of givingus grounds for an assured persuasion that all is wellwith her ; that she is gone to glory. When the hearseand our kind friends were gone, after a short timeI came into my little room at the top of the stairswhere I am now writing and engaged a while inprayer, blessing God for His astonishing goodness tome,and lamenting my extreme unworthiness. Andindeed when I do look back on my past life, andreview it, comparing especially the numerous, almostinnumerable, instances of God's kindness tomewith my unworthy returns, I am overwhelmed,and can. with truth adopt the language of the Publican,God bd merciful to me a sinner. Every oneknows, or may know, his own sins, the criminalityof which varies according to his opportunities of improvement,obligations and motives to obedience,advantages and means of grace, favours and loving-kindnesses,pardons and mercies. It is the exceedinggoodness of God to me, and the almost unequalledadvantages I have enjoyed, which so fill me withhumiliation and shame. My days appear few when Ilook back, but they have been any thing but evil.My blessings have been of every kind, and of longcontinuance ; general to me and to other Englishmen,but still more peculiar, from my having a kindly naturaltemper, a plentiful fortune ; all the mercies of mypublic life ; my coming so early into parliament forHull, then for Yorkshire, elected six times, and aswill be known hereafter when I am dead, though now1821. RETROSPECT OF LIFE. 113mistaken, my only ceasing to be M. P. for Yorkshirebecause I resigned the situation. Then my beingmade the instrument of bringing forward th Abolition;my helping powerfully the cause of Christianityin India ; my never having been discredited,but being always supported on all public occasions.There would be no end of the enumeration, were I toput down all the mercies of God. My escape fromdrowning by a sudden suggestion of Providence. Mynever having been disgraced for refusing to fight aduel. Then all my domestic blessings. Marryingas late as 36, yet finding one of the most affectionateof wives. [Six] children, all of them attached to mebeyond measure. And though we have lost dear Barbara,yet in the main, few men ever had such causefor thankfulness on account of the love of their childrentowards them. Then my social blessings. Noman ever had so many kind friends ; they quite overwhelmme with their goodness, and show the wisdomthere has been in my cultivating my friendships withmen of my own rank, and remaining quietly in ife,instead of trying to rise in life myself, or to makefriends among men of rank ; above all, the wisdom ofselecting religious men for friends. The great and.noble now all treat me with respect, because theysee I am independent of them, and some I believe feelreal attachment to me. Then my having facultiessufficient to make me respectable a natural facultyof public speaking though the complaint in my eyessadly hinders me in acquiring knowledge, and in writing.Then, almost above all, my having been rendered the114 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1821.instrument of much spiritual good by my work onChristianity. How many, many have communicated tomethat it was the means of their turning to God !Then all this continued so long, and in spite of allmy provocations. These it would be wrong to putdown, but my heart knows and feels them, and I trustever will. And it is a great mercy that God hasenabled me to maintain a fair, consistent, externalcourse, so that I never have brought disgrace on myChristian profession. Praise the Lord, O my soul.And now, Lord, let me devote myself more solemnlyand more resolutely to Thee, desiring morethan I ever yet have done to dedicate my faculties toThy glory and service."CHAPTER XXXV.JANUARY 1822 TO JULY 1823.Winter at Harden Park Address to Alexander SessionWest Indian Mr. Canning Motion for Emancipation stillpostponed Addresses on Slave Trade Summer at MardenPark Lord Londonderry's death Correspondence withLord Bathurst Liverpool Mr. Canning Autumnal tourCromer Windham Canning at Eton Elmdon AlleyHarley church Robert Hall Correspondence with Mr.Stephen Mr. Bankes Dr. Frewen Mr. Buxton He preparesto propose Emancipation Witherspoon on RegenerationSlavery Manifesto He presents the Quakers' petitionagainst Slavery Mr. Canning opposes skilfully Suppressionof Vice Society Mr. Hume and blasphemy Hishumility Spanish negociations Letter from CanningCommits the Anti-slavery motion to Mr. Buxton DiaryGreek meeting Continental Society S. Perceval andE. Irving He opposes the removal of slaves from island toisland Mr. Hume an active supporter of Slavery Rev.E. Irving Hannah More.ON the 4th of January Mr. Wilberforce returned withhis diminished family to Marden Park ; where hisrecent loss, as well as his decreasing powers of body,tended to detain him. He had been " stronglyadvised to attend the House very little, and to dilutehis parliamentary campaign as much as possible, by116 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1S2&.departures to the country ; " L whilst his wiser friendswere anxious " to form themselves into a cordonof defence to protect him from all manner of intrusion."2But though his bodily strength was visibly impaired,the fire of his spirit was unquenched, and helonged to be still active in his Master's work. " Iam sometimes' he told his friends, 3 " quite grievedat the idea of my probably not being able to do alittle good yet before I quit the stage; and the 71stPsalm is strongly impressed upon me, especially theverse, ' Forsake me not when I am old and grey-headed.'Yet perhaps this is in part only anotherform of selfishness ; and the better feeling that whichprompts me to acquiesce entirely in the disposal ofGod. If my chief object be that His will be done,what signifies it whether it be by me or not ? He canraise up instruments at will, and I may be servingHim more acceptably by cheerfully retiring and givingplace to younger and more active men."The main cause which stirred up these feelings maybetraced in another letter, which shows in every linethat bodily decay had left untouched the tendernessand ardour of his spirit.Harden Park, Thursday, Jan. 17,1822.My dear Stephen,Well may you desire me to return your sonsletter. It deserves, whatever happens, to be kept1 Diary. * Letter from Dr. Chalmers to W. Wilberforce Esq.3 Letters to T. Babington Esq. and J, Stephen Esq.1822. HIS EARLY PLANS FOR THE SLAVES. 117safely as a cordial, to be resorted to when your mindmay be grieved or distressed, and as a standing motiveto thankfulness. How much more truly heroicis the conduct of a young female, thus patiently andquietly accepting from the hand of God pains themost excruciating, with the consciousness doubtlessof the danger of death, than many of those actionswhich are proclaimed through the world by historians,and on which nations pride themselves !The quiet and unostentatious meekness with whichthe former sufferings are borne, and I may add thefaith, and love, and hope, should be contrasted with theconsciousness of being the subjects of observation toa whole nation in the world's herpes ; and that asglory would reward their bravery, so infamy would bethesure consequence of their weakness. Your letterwas a great relief to us, for we had heard therewas cause for anxiety. Her good husband too !What a field is open for reflection on the nature andblessings of the institution of marriage, with all itsdomestic blessings! And how infinitely criminal isour conduct in interfering with the instincts and rightsof nature, and counteracting the laws of God, by denyingto the slaves the marriage-bond ! I really thinkI must bring forward that subject if no other particularof their situation. I thought of doing this,, I meanof bringing forward the state of the slaves in the WestIndies, as long ago as 1780, when I wrote about it toJames Gordon, who was going to the West Indies ;and whenever I have thought of going out of parliament,the idea of leaving this great subject untouched118 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1822.has given me pangs that have been very painful. ButI must not trust myself on this topic. Do let usknow about your daughter. I feel a confident hopeshe will be spared, yet not I own without anxiety.My dear Stephen, I feel more about her for your sake.Indeed I should be a very brute if I did not returnyour excessive kindness to my dear child by a feelingfor yours. I believe I have other matters to mention,but they do not occur.God bless you, my dear friend, and may we allmeet in a better world, where there will be no morepain, or sorrow, or sighing, FOR the former thingswill have passed away.Ever affectionately yours,W. WILBERFORCE."This " great subject " he did not " leave untouched;"one more effort closed his long parliamentarycareer. Its three last years were spent in giving tothe struggle against Slavery that first impulse, whichbefore he left the scene had secured Emancipationthroughout all the British colonies.He now returned at once to his address to theEmperor of Russia. " I am finishing a piece to betranslated and circulated in France, if the new regulationsof the press will permit, with a view of convincingthe people in general of the facts chargedagainst the Slave Trade, and thereby changing bydegrees the public mind of that country. I am notso diffident as many. I expect no immediate decisionin our favour, but I have a pretty full confidence1822. EMPLOYMENTS IN THE COUNTRY. 119that the Slave Trade will not be carried on in Francefor twenty years, and when you have to do with asystem which has lasted two centuries and a half,twenty years is not a long time for putting an end tothe whole of the evil. I, and perhaps you, shall begoneout of this world. But the cause is making aprogress." 4 So hard did he labour that he foundhimself in danger of " neglecting to prepare onSaturday evening for the following Sunday, beingcommonly kept late at letters." 5 The state too ofhis eyesight " greatly hindered his work ;" 6 yetwith his usual spirit he begs Mr. Stephen " not onthis account to lessen your communications.It is hard on a man complaining of the numerousblanks that fall to his share, to take out of thewheel one of the best prizes, and really I know yourhand so well that I read it without difficulty. Whyto-day I have had twenty-two packets, but have readonly yours and Lord Londonderry's. Lord Londonderryhas gained something for us from Spain andHolland, nothing from France." 7Thus engaged, and with his family around him, hewatched from his retirement the advance of publicbusiness. " Feb. 1st. Hearing the State of the Nation,a good pamphlet, evidently written by ministers. Thepart concerning foreign politics [manifestly by LordLondonderry] provokes me by its statesman disregardof the internal happiness of nations. 8 9th. TheHouse has passed the Insurrection Bill for Ireland.To T. Babington Esq. Feb. 2? 5 Diary. 6 jb.7 Jan. 29. Diary.120 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1822.Hume voluble, and people afraid of slighting him lesttheir constituents should be angry. 14th. Blessedbe God, Allen yesterday sent me word that theSpanish Cortes had enacted a severe law against theSlave Trade : [ten years' employment on publicworks." "I quite long," he replies, "to be dischargingsome of the electric fire which you haveaccumulated and set in action too within me, andwere I not restrained by the state of my eyes, Ishould write to all my friends before I closedthem. I really have not for years received suchwelcome intelligence. Thank God for disposing thehearts of the Spaniards to this act of mercy. I reallydid hope well from them, and Torrent assured me inaletter he would do all he could." 915th. Hearing the newspaper debate on SirRobert Wilson. He has been treated very harshly,and especially it has surely been ungenerous not togive due praise to his military services. On constitutionalprinciples I could not have supported the inquiry.But I dare say when he was dismissed from thearmy many reports were believed of him, which arenow disbelieved. March 4th. Two Lords of the Admiraltysnuffed out ; I always supported this, and amglad of it. I wish I had got through my Russianletter, that I might go to the consideration of Africanand such other parliamentary topics as are fitly myown." His work was now soon completed and translatedinto French, " spiritedly and well. But I havebeen obliged," Mr. Macaulay tells him, " to watch9 W. Wilberforce Esq. to W. Allen Esq. Feb. 13. -1822. LETTER TO ALEXANDER. 121the translator very narrowly, on account of his liberalpropensities, and he has a warmth of imagination,which requires the curb. ( Quelle langage ; grandDieu ! ' You cannot imagine how difficult it was tomake him feel how inappropriate such an exclamationwould be from your pen. I cite this as aninstance.Of course the pamphlet must be sent to everymember of the French Chambers, of the States ofBelgium, and of the Cortes of Spain and Portugal.It makes 80 pages. The title stands as follows :< Lettre a 1' Empereur Alexandre sur la Traite desNoirs, par W. Wilberforce, Membre du ParlementBritannique.' Would you wish any alteration?" Hewas now looking forward " to returning, by God'sblessing, after the holidays with confirmed healthto parliamentary duty." 10 This accordingly he did,and was immediately so hard at work, that at theclose of the first week he breaks forth with theexclamation, " Oh what a blessing Sunday is ! Interposedbetween the waves of worldly business, like thedivine path of the Israelites through Jordan." 11His own cause found him much employment.March 19th. An Abolition interview with LordLondonderry, as yesterday with Lord Liverpool. 26th.A contest is coming forward, he says, about colonialintercourse with America, Canada, and the mothercountry. The West Indians are much distressedcertainly. 29th. At the House talking with peopletill half-past nine, when home, seeing no oppor-"> Diary. Ib. March 17.VOL. V. G122 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1822.opportunity of consulting Vansittart about his engagementthat we should have an examination by theBoard of Trade, yet now they are going to changethe system without inquiry." 12He was in hopes of gaining some equivalent concessionfor the improvement of the negro population; but when the debate came on, things lookedmost unpromising. He found " the whole. Housemade up of West Indians, government men, a fewpartisans, and a very few of us sturdy Abolitionists,William Smith, Buxton, Butterworth, myself, andEvans. I spoke, but not well ; out of spirits." 13 Yethe did not despair, and on the following day theAfrican Institution agreed to " stipulate for a reallyeffective Registry Bill, and some terms for the poorslaves. It has got into a strange scrape by askingCanning for twenty guineas as a vice president,in addition to ten guineas originally given a proceedingnot warranted by the rules, any more than bycommon decency and common sense. William Smith,Buxton, and I, are appointed a small committee forwaiting on Canning, and making the amende honorable.I have been preparing him to expect us." 14To his proposal of an interview upon the followingmorning, Mr. Canning answersGloucester Lodge, Wednesday morning, April 3, 1822.My dear Wilberforce,Never surely was so splendid an embassy sentto make atonement for so small an offence, since theDiary. '3 Ib. April 1. M Ib. April 2.1822. CANNING. 123mission of Ulysses, Ajax, and Phoenix, to apologizefor the seizure of Arises, who in those days was probablyworth about 21.I am really very sorry, that Mr. William Smith,Mr. Buxton, and you, should have so much unnecessarytrouble : but I shall nevertheless be happy tohave the pleasure of receiving all three, on any accountwhatever, at the time which you mention ;and Phoenix at any time, and as often as he will. Iam ever, my dear Wilberforce,Most sincerely yours,G. CANNING."He now left town to spend the recess at MardenPark, " riding" however " at single anchor" and whencalled by Mr. Stephen to take his part in an importantconsultation, " I will meet you," is his answer,at Philippi on Monday."TO ZACHARY MACAULAY ESQ.Marden Park, April 8, 1822.My dear Macaulay,e Macbeth has murdered sleep.' And youwho come, if I mistake not, from the same neighbourhood,are abundantly endowed with the sameuseful, though sometimes annoying power. You shareit with Stephen, and to say the truth with anotherpersonage, which, though its voice is still and small,is yet such as to make itself heard I mean conscience.Though engaged to stay here all the recess, yetG 2124 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1822.if any tiling could be done for our cause, no obstacleshould be allowed to stand in the way of my returnto head quarters. I rather believe, however, that allthe members of our committee will be out of town aswell as myself, and that therefore nothing can bedone till they come back again. The Houses are tomeet on Wednesday the 17th instant, and Robinson'sBill to be read a second time on Friday the 19th. Iam clear however, from what passed at the ThatchedHouse, that the utmost we can get our friends to doon the second reading, would be to lay in a claimfor exacting concessions in the committee, and thetime for bringing these forward would probably bebefore the Speaker leaves the chair for the committeeto be formed. I think, therefore, that the beginningof next week will be time enough for our interviewwith ministers. If we were to apprize them of ourwish for a conference too long before, the consequencewould be their telling their West Indian confederates,and these last would hold their privateconsults, and become more obstinate in resisting us.Thus far I am decided that either I or Buxton shallmove to attach the slaves to the soil. (Mackintoshof course bringing forward the manumission facilitating.)But I do really hope we may go further inour efforts, if ,not in our success. But depend on it,the enlightening of the public mind on this subjectwill be highly useful ; and now is the time for usingevery effort for that purpose. I have read, or ratherheard, the Due de Broglie's letter with no little interest.What rascals (to speak plain English) this1822. PLANS OF THE ABOLITIONISTS. 125Christian ministry consists of! I should like to knowwhat Chateaubriand ' holds ' of it. Farewell I muststop.Ever affectionately yours,W. Wilberforce."He was now " much engrossed by Robinson's Billfor opening the trade of the world to the West Indies,and keeping the East India sugar tax. We hope forsome concessions to the slaves. I hope at least to gettheir annexation to the soil, and the removal of therepresentatives to manumission. But I hear that theFrench actually mean to people Guiana with importednegroes, and to reconquer Hayti. Oh for poor Christophe! Yet I hope God will confound such villanyand cruelty, and I think he will, laying together thesigns of the times." 15 " I need not specify to you," hewrites to Macaulay, 16 " what are the particulars whichto me appear to be such, but I think what has passedindicates the gracious disposition of Providence to putan end to the enormous evils of the Slave Trade ; and Iown I am rather expecting that some convulsive anddestructive spasms will accompany the violent deathof this bloody monster."On the 17th of April he returned to town and directlyopened his negociations with the government.The House too now engaged him. " April 25th.Lord John Russell brought forward his motion onParliamentary Reform. I half intended to speak,having thought over the topics an hour or two in theJ* Diary, April 16. 1" April 12.126 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1822.morning, but did not. It was past one when Canningsat down, after speaking quite excellently. Canningcarried me home. April 26th. I am rather sorry thatI did not yesterday explain the principles of my votein favour of Reform ; that it was to put an end to themoral corruption of elections in the smaller towns,where drunkenness and bribery gain the day." 17He w r as now more equal to exertion and no longerspared himself. Mr. Canning whom he wished totake on the 10th of May to the anniversary of theAfrican Institution reluctantly declined, because as hisBill for giving votes to Roman Catholic Peers cameon that very day, he could " not afford the time thatit would take to go to the Freemasons' Hall andback. Pray do not," he continues, " exhaust yourstrength or voice this morning." 18 At the very timewhen this caution was addressed to him he was writingto Mr. Macaulay.Friday, May 10, near half-past ten.I really am sorry that I could not write aconcluding sentence " to the Report " without expendingthe only half-hour I shall have to think over thetopics a little, in order to prepare for the meeting. Ithought it was absolutely necessary for me to he acquaintedwith the Due de Broglie's speech, so it wasread to me. But a long operation it was, and now Ihave not yet gone to breakfast, and callers have comein and I am scarcely fit for reflection.Really however, my dear Macaulay, (I say itv Diary. w TO W. Wilberforce Esq. May 10.1822. ATTENDANCE ON THE HOUSE. 127quite sincerely,) you yourself can make as good a conclusionas any one, and you will not be expected somuch to speechify. I have had very civil letters fromLord Harrowby and the Duke of Wellington, but theydecline" [attending]. "Farewell,Yours ever,W. Wilberforce."That day he was " late at the Institution meeting,"and " then to the House," where he " cleared up a vilecalumny propagated against Wynne, and tried invain to speak on Canning's motion." His morningswere now occupied by the religious anniversaries, atall of which he this year spoke ; though sometimes somuch exhausted as to be forced reluctantly to ownthat he " felt unfit for public business." Hisstandard was as high as it had been of old, when hewas better able to throw off all the effects of labour ;and he would not decide on public questions without applyingto them the full force of his understanding. Heactually condemns himself for not being " able to helpsleeping through great part of Hume's speech aboutthe Ionian Islands, and Maitland's conduct. I wasnot fit for undertaking to judge, so I retired andgave no vote." " 4th. House. Debate on criminallaw. Mackintosh good, but I sleepy. I meant tospeak, and had some good topics in my mind, but Ithink want of spirits kept me silent." 19 Such entriesmark the gradual advance of infirmity ; and arestrikingly contrasted with the undiminished strength19 Diary, June 4.12& LIFE OF wilberforce. 1822.of his affections ; on the very next day he " wouldnot go to the House, because he conceived Sykes'smotion would come on, and I would not take partagainst so old a friend needlessly, though I could notsupport him.' 'But it was not to spare himself that he consentedto postpone until another year his great attempt forthe West Indian negroes. " I think you are quiteright," was Mr. Stephen's judgment, " as to this beingan unfavourable occasion for bringing forward ourcase against the colonists. They have quite overlaidus with their intrigues, and have got some of ourreal as well as nominal friends committed againstus." 20 This conclusion was enforced by the existingdistresses of the planters distresses increasedby the depreciation of West Indian produce, butmainly caused by the inherent vices of a system, inwhich absenteeship was combined with slavery. Itwas no doubt well that his motion was delayed untilcolonial embarrassment had reached its crisis ; or itwould have been more difficult to prove that it wasnot the consequence of his attempt. Never wasthere a falser charge than that of this once prevalentcry. If the motion for emancipation had destroyers.the security of West Indian estates, and soruined their possessors, it must have affected nottheir annual rents, but the value of the fee simpleof their property ; whereas, in truth, it yielded noannual return, and for that reason only was unsaleable.It was not that the present system secured20 To W. Wilberforce Esq. June 2.1822. HIS PARTIAL RETIREMENT. 129their profits, and that this system was endangered ;but that, even as it was, they received no returns.Yet the first full pressure of these difficulties renderedthis an inauspicious year for such a contest,as the temper of the colonists too plainly showedto be at hand, whenever parliament should interferewith the condition of their slaves. For this reasontherefore the motion was deferred; and when thuspostponed on general grounds, he looked forward withno little pleasure to resigning the first place in thecontest to some younger man. He thought " that itwas suitable for an aged Christian to sho$ himselfwilling to retire, and let others take the more leadingstations." " I wish therefore," he says, 21 " that Buxtonor Whitmore should take the chief managementof the Slave Trade concerns, and let me give occasionalassistance as my indifferent health and infirmitieswill allow. Believe me I say this very sincerely.My spirits are low, and I feel quite unequal to thebustle and turmoil, which was nothing to me formerly.In any state, however, my dear Stephen, I ammost affectionately yours."Still it was judged right that something should bedone at once ; and two Addresses which he carriedthrough the House of Commons paved the way to thediscussions of the following year. June 15th. " I talkedwith Lord Lansdown about an Address in the Lords.He prefers an occasional mention. To the House.Abercrombie on the Scotch Lord Advocate's conductmade for near three hours one of the very ablest21 To J. Stephen Esq. June 18.G 3130 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1822.speeches I ever heard. But my Address not beingfinished, and being afraid of being too late, I returnedhome about eleven." 22 It "was not finished till aboutan hour or two before the House," and his " speechonly then thought about : " 23 " but," says he, " blessedbe God, He carried me through not discreditably."Such was his own humble estimate of all his services ;but Mr. Macaulay heard his speech with delight,and tells him that the Baron de Stael, who was present," thought it of the highest importance to haveit well translated into French." " I send you," he said,the account in the Times ; I wish you could infuseinto it something of the vivid vis, the ardent verbaof the speaker." 24His Address was aimed at the conduct of foreignpowers. " Mackintosh very strong against Franceand the Emperor of Russia." 25 His own applicationhad been courteously received by the Emperor,but it had produced no effect, except as it preparedmen's minds for further measures. " CountLeven had desired an interview " with him, " andtold" him that " the Emperor, as a mark ofhis esteem, had sent him an answer under his ownhand." But more effect followed the other Address,(July 25th,) which went to prohibit the introductionof slavery into our own new settlements in southernAfrica. He had spoken of himself before as " sanguinein his hopes of extinguishing slavery at theCape ; " and after the debate his entry is, " the2? Diary. ib June 27.24 Z. Macaulay Esq. to W. Wilberforce Esq. June 28. * Diary.1822. CAPE SLAVERY. 131temper of the House was clearly favourable to theproposal, and we all came back in high spirits."This was the best speech," says Mr. Buxton, " thatI ever heard him make. There was a very thin House,not above twenty members present, but he pouredforth his whole mind on the duty of extending civilizationand Christianity to the savage and the heathen."On this night too he gave some indistinct notice ofhis further views for the West Indies. " Not I only,"he said, " but all the chief advocates of the Abolitiondeclared from the first, that our object was byameliorating regulations, and by stopping the influxof uninstructed savages, to advance slowly towardsthe period when these unhappy beings might exchangetheir degraded state of slavery for that of afree and industrious peasantry. To that most interestingobject I still look forward, though perhapsof late we have all been chargeable with not payingdue attention to the subject."With the beginning of the holidays he entered uponhis usual country residence at Harden Park. Hisfamily and friends were gathered round him, and hewas reading, conversing, writing letters, and composingwith all his usual diligence and vigour. He beganto keep a " time account," and watched over himselfcarefully to employ it to the best account. " To-dayI began the plan, to which by God's grace I mean toadhere, of having my evening private devotions beforefamily prayers. For want of this they have toooften been sadly hurried, and the reading of Scriptureomitted, I have therefore resolved to allot an hour132 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1822.from half-past eight to half-past nine. It is a subtractionof the space to be allowed to business, butGod seems to require it, and the grand, the onlyquestion is, what is God's will? The abridgementof my evening prayers has been a fault with me foryears. May God help me to amend it, and give Hisblessing to a measure adopted with a view to pleaseHim. Amen. Began to-day to keep a journal oftime." 26He was soon deep in various books. " Ranover Cain what diabolical wickedness ! Lookedinto Swift's Letters what a thoroughly irreligiousmind no trace of Sunday to be found in hisjournals, or Letters to his most intimate friends." 27I am going on with Thomas Scott's life in dressing.What a truly great man old Scott was ; acting for somany years on the highest principles, not only abovemoney, but above vain-glory, or any other of the idolsof men ! I always valued him, but now that hischaracter is viewed more distinctly, he really appearsto have been a Christian hero. I never saw a bookwhich I should recommend so strongly to the constantstudy of a minister." " The grand point forimitation, and may we both attend to it," he writesto his eldest son, 28 " is his integrity. He was an Israeliteindeed, in whom there was no guile. No considerationof interest, gratification, or credit could makehim swerve consciously a hair's breadth from the lineof duty. This, depend on it, is the best of all signs.I have often remarked that it has always ended Diary. 7 Ib. as Sept. 3.1822. FORTUNES OF Niger. 133gently well with those in whom it has been visible. Sucha one was Lord Teignmouth. I know no one qualitywhich I always recognise with such heartfelt pleasurein any persons whom I love." Lighter readingoccupied the fragments of the evening. " Scott's newpoem, Halidon Hill very beautiful. I have beenrunning over the Fortunes of Niger, the best, I meanthe most moral in its tendency, of any of WalterScott's stories which I have heard, illustrating theways of Providence, the character of men of theworld, and their unfeeling selfishness ; (though thisis painted almost in too strong colours in Dalgarno.But making him so much the gallant gay Lothariomay be most useful)" 29 " It is strange how muchNiger has haunted me while reading it. In spite ofall my resistance and correction of the illusion bysuggesting to myself that the author may order eventsas he pleases, I am extremely interested by it. But Ithink it is partly because I consider it all as substantiallytrue, giving the account of the manners andincidents of the day. Surely some parts absurd, asmaking the usurer's dry firm daughter marry theScotch servant. Even the watchmaker forced. Butsome admirable strokes of nature and character.Hard on Charles I." 30In the midst of these wholesome domestic occupationshe was startled by the news of Lord Londonderry'sdeath. " I am shocked by it," he tells Mr.Stephen. " How strange is it, that though professingto live under the continual recollection of the ulcersDiary. *> To J. Stephen Esq. Aug. 13.134 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1822.taint of life, yet when such an event as this takesplace, we are as much astonished as if we had expectedthe man to be as sure of a good old age as ofhis actual existence ! Poor fellow ! I cannot tell youhow I feel his loss. Never probably was there anyonecalled away on the sudden, by whose extinctionsuch a complication of threads and lines of humanpolicy were at once cut short full of his plans forpreserving the peace of Europe, and maintaining thesystem of the mutual balancing and dependencies onwhich he so greatly valued himself. I do not seethat at home the event is likely to produce any materialeffect ; abroad the case is different. But, poorfellow, my chief feeling is for himself. It is indeedan awful occurrence. "The particulars of this tragical event had notyet transpired, but the next day supplied moredistinct intelligence. " August 19th. S. broughta report from Croydon that poor Londonderryhad destroyed himself. I could not believe it.The Courier however and several letters too clearlyconfirmed it. He was certainly deranged the effectprobably of continued wear and tear of mind. Butthe strong impression of my mind is, that it is theeffect of the non-observance of the Sunday, both asabstracting from politics, from the constant recurrenceof the same reflections, and as correcting the falseviews of worldly things, and bringing them down totheir true diminutiveness." 31 " All the time that Ihave been writing," he concludes a letter this day to3' Diary.1822. LORD LONDONDERRY. 135Mr. Stephen, " poor Castlereagh has been in mymind. I never was so shocked by any incident. Hereally was the last man in the world who appearedlikely to be carried away into the commission of suchan act ! So cool, so self-possessed. It is very curious tohear the newspapers speaking of incessant applicationto business, forgetting that by the weekly admissionof a day of rest, which our Maker has graciously enjoined,our faculties would be preserved from theeffects of this constant strain. I am strongly impressedby the recollection of your endeavour to prevailon the lawyers to give up Sunday consultations,in which poor Romilly would not concur. If he hadsuffered his mind to enjoy such occasional remissions,it is highly probable the strings would never havesnapped as they did, from over-tension. Alas ! alas !poor fellow ! I did not think I should feel for him sovery deeply."Though now in comparative repose, he watchedanxiously over the progress of his cause, and wassometimes engaged in consultations with the otherAbolition leaders ; sometimes for whole days in " preparinga most important communication for LordBathurst," or in corresponding with the other membersof administration. He received " a satisfactoryreply from Lord Liverpool," of whom he haddemanded " as the head of the government," that theplenipotentiary of Great Britain at the approachingCongress might be " instructed by the Cabinet," 32 tomake the Abolition a point of leading moment. And32 To Z. Macaulay Esq. Sept. 15.136 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1822.ee if I could prevail on them to instruct our naval officersto take the slave ships of France, I would engagenot only to defend the measure in the House of Commons,but to take it on myself as of my own advising."33Early in October he was " urging Canning as " hehad done Lord Londonderry before, to obtain fromthe French government the fair use of the press forenlightening the public mind," and he soon afterwardsreceived a note from the new minister, datedOct. 2nd, which is pocketed " Mr. Canning just inoffice. Answer about enforcing Abolition."My dear Wilberforce,I have been already at work on almost all thepoints of your letter ; I wish I could say with anysanguine hopes of success. But in a few days I willenable you to judge for yourself, by sending to you,(of course in the extremest personal confidence,) bothwhat I have heard from the Duke of Wellington, 34and what I have written to him upon Slave Tradematters since his departure.Ever sincerely yours,GEO. CANNING."He wrote also, and sent through William Allen toVerona, a letter to the Emperor Alexander, seriouslyurging him to exert himself. " He does not I hopebelieve that we are satisfied with him on Abolitiongrounds. My letter, though civil in terms was frank33 To Z. Macaulay Esq. Sept. 19. 34 From the Congress at Verona.1822. LETTER TO THE POPE. 137in matter, and it plainly intimated that we shouldhave no favourable opinion of his religious or moralcharacter if he did not honestly exert his powers inour behalf." 35This intercourse caused him " much business, onwhich " he could ee employ no eyes but" his " own."Canning," he says to Mr. Macaulay, " has sent me acopy of a despatch from the Duke of Wellington, and ofhis own answer. But he has stipulated for secrecy insuch strong terms, that I cannot without further explanationstate the particulars even to you and Stephen." 36"It has often struck me that we ought to endeavour toobtain the Pope's co-operation in our Abolition proceedingswith the Roman Catholic powers. As long agoas when Harford was at Rome, he heard that the Popehad sent to Lisbon a nuncio favourable to our views.Could any thing be effected at Verona in this way ?I lately wrote to Canning entreating his good officesfor the Waldenses, of whose depressed and almost persecutedsituation I heard from a gentleman who hadresided in their country." 37 " What work," repliedhis correspondent, " there is for you still ! I wish wehad thought of the Pope before. I never once dreamedof his existence in all my musings on our affairs. Heought certainly to be got to publish a Bull. Can younot set Canning on this ? He is a favourite with thePope." " I will try," is his rejoinder, " to set Canningon the Pope. The Duke of Wellington," headds, " should consider that he owes us more as aTo Z. Macaulay Esq. Nov. 20. ^ Ib. Oct. 21. 3 ? Ib. Oct. 19.3 9 Z. Macaulay Esq. to W. Wilberforce Esq. Oct. 22.138 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1822.diplomatist, because, as a military man, he did notpress our cause as he might have done, when occupyingParis with his troops. A single word from himwould then have produced not a cold, slow, reluctantpromise, hut a strong and positive assurance, fromwhich they could not afterwards have flinched withoutgreat personal discredit. I really believe hewishes us well, but it may do no harm to remind himof our claims on him." 39He now " read through again Canning's papers,and wrote to him hastily." Most of his suggestionswere adopted, and Canning soon returned to him thedraught of a letter to Cardinal Gonsalvi with theassurance, 40 " I will take any steps that you wish, andthat appear practicable, to obtain access for you tothe press in France ; but I look, for my own part, tosome sense of interest, (if it can be created,) ratherthan to any compunctious sentiment, for the conversionof the French mob, as well as ministry.You argue against the acknowledgment of Brazilunturned of Slave Trade, and are surprised that theDuke of Wellington should not be instructed to saythat we will give up all trade with Brazil, if Austria,Russia, and Prussia, will prohibit her produce. In fairreasoning, you have a right to be surprised ; for weought to be ready to make sacrifices, when we askthem, and I am for making them ; but who woulddare to promise such a one as this without full previousknowledge of the opinions of the commercialpart of the nation ?30 To Z. Macaulay Esq. Oct. 22. 40 Oct. 31.1822. Gingham. 139Be assured however that the Slave Trade shallnot be established by a new compact, even if it cannotbe extinguished by one."He had left home in the middle of September, andin the midst of this negociation was travelling fromhouse to house, visiting many of his friends, each ofwhom in turn delighted to gather round him theirown circle of acquaintance, whilst in addition to theseclaims of society, a tide of letters overtook him ateach halt. Here was no room for idleness. " Ithank you most sincerely for your visit' he heardfrom Mr. Buxton, with whom the series had commenced," I shall disappoint myself if I do not gathersolid benefit from it. I believe I told you how muchsurprised I was at your industry." His progress ledhim on to many of his earlier haunts ; Elmdon, RothleyTemple, Yoxall Lodge, and Apley, " the house ofan honest Tory," were all visited in turn ; and manyinteresting notices are scattered through his Diary.C. knew Canning well at Eton ; he never played atany games with the other boys ; quite a man, fond ofacting, decent, and moral. Dr. Parr violent againsthim in public company ; says, f I know the interiorof the man, and despise and abhor him.' 'From Cromer Hall he paid Felbrigg a visit, andin its library turned over with great interest many ofthe books which were "full of Windham's marks."Windham's mind," he said, te was in the last degreecopious, the soil was so fertile, scratch where youpleased, up came white clover. He had many of thetrue characteristics of a hero, but he had one great140 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1822.fault as a statesman, he hated the popular side of anyquestion." His companion quoted PopeSo much they hate the crowd, that if the throngGo right by chance, they purposely go wrong."It was exactly so' he replied, " and I had a melancholyproof of it in the instance of the Slave Trade.When the Abolition had but few friends, he was allon our side, but as the nation drew towards us, heretreated, and at last on the division in 1807, he wasone of the sixteen who voted against us.""Whilst at S. sat three-quarters of an hour withRobert Hall, who quite himself. He eulogized highlyScott's life, and old Scott himself ; especially a sermonhe heard from him in Robinson's pulpit from 2 Pet. iii.1 Knowing I must soon put off this tabernacle as theLord hath showed me.' ' It was a sermon,' he exclaimedrepeatedly in a most animated way, ' quite above allcriticism'" 41 ff L. off to Birmingham to hear Hallpreach tomorrow; I should have liked it, but thoughtit wrong. In attending public worship we are not to beedified by talent, but by the Holy Spirit, and thereforewe ought to look beyond the human agent". 42 " O.preached on Rom. vii. ( If I do what I would not, it isno more I that do it, but sin that dwelleth in me'. Hedid not join the first verse of chap. viii. with the text,and though not, I hope, intending it, was very dangerousin his doctrine." " At Harley church, built,and I believe endowed, by Evans senior. Never shallI forget the impression made on me by his modest,41 Diary. ib. Oct. 19.1822. FAMILY CONNEXIONS. 141humble manner, and few words, when I expressed thepleasure it must give him, to he conscious that whenhe should be dead and gone, the people would continueto profit from what he had done for them."Many of the letters written during this excursionare full of various interest. From Elmdon he writesto Mr. Stephen on the 11th of October.My dear Stephen,We arrived here yesterday evening, I thankGod in safety. How deeply it ought to impressour minds with a sense of the highly-favoured lot inlife, which Almighty goodness has assigned to meand mine, to be travelling with my family from placeto place, experiencing a most kind and hospitable receptionfrom people of superior worth and respectability,and to be only embarrassed by the number andconflicting claims of the many friends who are pressingus to partake of their hospitalities. I often reflectwith pleasure on the worthy families with which Ihave brought my children acquainted, and trust theywill enjoy the benefit of these connexions for generationsto" come.I assure you, you have excited in me quite a longingto roam with you through the woods of Buckinghamshire,and it gives me real pleasure to think ofthe stores of the purest and best pleasures you therehave within your reach. And this reminds me of J. Iseldom have felt so much pleasure from any similarevent ; and really I have a personal interest in it, for142 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1822.J.'s and her progeny, are naturally .likely to be valuablefriends to my own grandchildren.Farewell. God bless you, as He does and willmy very dear friend. So wishes and prays,Yours ever affectionately,W. WILBERFORCE."From Apley Park he wrote to Mr. Bankes.Apley, Nov. 4, 1822.My dear Bankes,The place from which I am writing is reallywell worth your visiting. I think it one of the firstgentlemen's seats in the kingdom. High banksclothed with wood by the side of the Severn tell wellof themselves ; and the house, a new one not yet indeedfinished, stands boldly on a moderate eminence,with grounds so much higher all around it as to placeit in a valley. Then the rocks continually force themselveson the view by the hill-sides, and the vesselssailing up the Severn, together with the deer, cattle,&c. give life and animation to the whole scene. Iwas really charmed with it both in the evening andthe morning lights. But I little intended when Itook up the pen, to expend my own eyesight or yourtime, in a description of the beauties of Apley, for ofall other compositions, the descriptive is I think theleast satisfactory.You touch on the fatal close of Lord Londonderry'searthly course. I often think of it. Few1822. THE LORD'S DAY. 143events I own surprised me more. I must say that theoccurrence of the same catastrophe, both to Whit-bread,Romilly, and Londonderry, has strongly enforcedon my mind the unspeakable benefit of theinstitution of the Lord's day for I don't like to callit the sabbath, as I do not quite consider it in thelight in which it is viewed by many religious men. Iam persuaded that to withdraw the mind one day inseven from its ordinary trains of thought and passion,and to occupy it in contemplating subjects .of a higherorder, which by their magnitude make worldly interestsshrink into littleness, has the happiest effecton the intellectual and moral system. It gives usback on the Monday to the contemplation of ourweek-day business cooled and quieted, and it is tobe hoped with resentments abated, and prejudicessoftened. Believe me, my dear Bankes, to beEver affectionately yours,W. Wilberforce.To H. Bankes Esq. Nov. 4."Various incidents in this excursion had revivedmore than one acquaintance which time had almostobliterated. " The Duke of called on me, andsat for almost three hours. He and I came into lifeabout the same time, though we have seldom metsince. Oh what thanks do I owe to a gracious Providencewhich provided me with such parents, andguided me through such paths as I have trodden ! "In two other instances this revival of acquaintanceled to a correspondence of unusual interest. " We144 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1822.have formerly conversed on these subjects' he saysat the conclusion of a confidential letter on religioustopics, " why should we not renew the intercourse ?And though in the voyage of life our course has notenabled us to keep together as both of us I hopewould have liked, yet now that we are both on ourtrack home, we may keep company for a while, andrenew our kindly salutations." 43 The other letterwas to his college friend Dr. Frewen. " It is alwayswith a sort of melancholy pleasure, that I addressan old friend after a long period has elapsed withoutpersonal intercourse. The mind naturally casts abackward glance over the retrospect, and in the experienceof all there has been some loss or anotherwhich renders the review affecting. These emotionshave been this very day called forth by breakfastingwith our old friend Carr, whom I had seen but oncefor above thirty years, and now I am writing to anotherold friend in very nearly similar circumstances." 44Dr. Frewen's answer alluded to some coldness whichhe imagined had grown up between them, (" of whichI was quite unconscious") and led him to take afull and interesting review of his life since the time oftheir early intercourse.Elmdon House, near Coventry, Dec. 6, 1822.My dear Sir,Not a single day has passed since I receivedyour interesting letter, in which I have not wished, Imay rather say longed, to answer it. I really amNov. 6. To the Rev. Dr. Frewen, Nov. 13.1822. CORRESPONDENCE WITH EARLY FRIENDS. 145impatient to state to you some, for it would take farmore eyesight than I can spare to state all, of thesentiments and feelings you have called forth. Butlet me begin by expressing that strong confirmationyour letter gives to my favourite doctrine, and I mustdo myself the justice to say practice, when we have todeal with any one of whom we are disposed to think atall favourably, of frankly stating every matter of complaintwe conceive ourselves to have against him, insteadof suffering it to settle on its lees, if I may usethe expression, and acquire augmented strength andcolour by being kept within our own bosoms. Itis really true, that I was not aware of having exhibitedany coldness towards you in my behaviour,and also that I have utterly forgot, if ever I knew, thecircumstance in your behaviour toward me, to whichyou refer, as having originated in a mistake, and fromwhich I am sorry to hear you suffered real pain.I am pressed for time and have been so much inthe same situation ever since I got your letter that Ihave not been able to reflect upon it, or by calling upthe recollection of long-past incidents to bring beforeme, if possible, the circumstances to which youallude. You therefore have my first thoughts, thoughI have had your letter for some days in my possession.Various are the emotions which the retrospect ofmy life is calculated to produce in me ; but those ofthankfulness for the wholly undeserved, and yet multipliedmercies and bounties of God are, I hope, uppermost.You cannot but remember, what I can neverVOL. v. H146 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1822.review but with humiliation and shame, the course Iran at college, and during the three or four first yearsof my parliamentary life which immediately succeededit. Yet in justice to myself it is only fair tostate, that at least as much pains had been takenby my nearest relatives and guardians to make medissipated and vain, and though they did not meanit, vicious also, as are commonly used to counteractthese dispositions ; and forgive me, my dear sir, ifopening my heart to you with frankness, and trustingto your considering my letter as written in confidenceof your secrecy, I add that even at college most ofthose very men who ought to have used both authorityand influence (and of the latter at least I was susceptible)to root out these propensities, and to implantbetter, rather confirmed than abated them. I mustdo both you and Cooksonon the justice to exempt youin a good degree from this charge, though to behonest with you not entirely. For would not thegolden rule have prompted you to use towards me thelanguage of a friend, if not of a father ? (My naturalfather I lost when eight years old, and my grandfatherand uncle soon after I went to Cambridge.) Oughtyou not to have urged me to look forward, and evenon principles of sound human wisdom, much more onChristian principles, to consider what must be the issueof the course of life I was pursuing, and of the choiceI was making of associates and friends ? That thoughwhile my youthful spirits should remain I mightcontinue an entertaining companion, yet that I shouldere long bitterly lament that I had suffered the years1822. REVIEW OF COLLEGE LIFE. 147and circumstances which supplied opportunities foracquiring useful knowledge, and even still more forcultivating and strengthening the intellectual powers,to pass away wholly unimproved ? Ought you not tohave reminded me of the great account I had torender of the talents committed to my stewardship,and to have enforced on me the base ingratitude,to say nothing of the guilt, of making such an unworthyreturn to the Giver of all good for all theuncommon blessings which had been lavished on mewith such exceeding prodigality ? (I allude to myhaving been born in England, in the eighteenthcentury, and not when a man of my weakly bodywould have been useless and contemptible if he hadnot been exposed in his infancy, to my having a handsomefortune, my being born in the middle rank of life,and my having, I hope, a fair proportion of naturaltalent, and a cheerful and not an anxious temper, oneof the greatest comforts in life ; but there would be noend to the enumeration. I may fill up the line with, &c.&c. &c.) You did not spend night after night at cardswith me, but did you suggest to me the fate of theunprofitable servant ?All this went on, with grief and shame I sayit, till by degrees I came to myself; for to no onecan the phrase be more justly applicable. This beganin the summer and autumn of 1785, and wascarrying on in the winter of 1785-6, and in the followingspring, when blessed, for ever blessed beGod, I adopted those principles, to which, though Iam but too well aware very imperfectly, I have everH 2148 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1822.since made it the great business of my life to conformmy character, I should rather say my dispositions,and tempers, and conduct. Of course I then took asurvey of the past and the future. Providence hadplaced me in a situation which I must say I still thinkone of the most honourable that any man can possessthat of member for Yorkshire. How was I toproceed ? My religion taught me the duty of devotingall my faculties and powers as a debt of gratitude tomy reconciled Father in Christ Jesus, as well as ofreasonable service to my Creator, Preserver, and continualBenefactor. And I was to labour more abundantlythan the men of the world, who looked onlyto gain or to glory for their recompence. For ( whatdo ye more than others,' was our Saviour's language tohis disciples. You know but too well how sadlyempty I then was ; how utterly destitute of the habitsno less than of the knowledge I ought to have possessed.My business therefore manifestly was, toemploy as diligently as I could in study as much aspossible of my recesses from parliament ; and as Iknew I could do far less in any house of my own, formany years I quartered myself for nearly all the timeparliament was not sitting with different friends, whosuffered me to breakfast in my own room, and live asmuch as I pleased the life of a student. Once I waswith Cooksonon ; (poor fellow, it is with a sigh that Iwrite his name : he and his wife both gone and Ileft ;) and ever after with Gisborne in Staffordshire,and Babington in Leicestershire. Thus I went onuntil I married in 1797.1322. TREATMENT OF EARLY FRIENDS. 149I have gone into this narrative because you areconcerned in it. You will see at once that havingno house of my own, except that either in or nearLondon, from which I attended the House of Commons,I could not ask any of my old friends tocome about me under my own roof otherwise rememberingour old habits of social intercourse, Ithink it is most probable I should have endeavouredto renew them yet while I am writing, a new ideahas suggested itself. I do not recollect having sentyou a book of a religious nature which I published in1797, just before my marriage ; if not, I gave youreason to complain of me for failing in the performanceof an act of friendship ; for in truth, one of thechief objects I had in view in writing and publishingthat work, was to explain to my friends the causes ofthe change which they witnessed in my e goings-on,'(to use a coarse but expressive phrase,) and the principleswhich I could not but earnestly wish and praythat all whom I valued and loved should also embrace.Now if I did not send it to you, I reallybelieve the omission must have arisen from forgetfulness.But it was an unfriendly omission, and I begyour pardon for it, and will repair the fault. I granthowever, that though the interest I took in the wellbeingof my old friends was even greater than it hadbeen before the change I have been speaking of, yetthat from natural and obvious causes, we were notlikely to be such agreeable intimates to each other asheretofore. There was no longer the ' eastern velle 'and ( eadem nolle ' in the same degree, and therefore150 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1822.we were likely to retain full as strong a desire toSERVE such friends as formerly, but not to have thesame pleasure in each other's society. But as youand I have never to my knowledge been in the sameplace, we never have had opportunities of seeing muchof each other. Thus, my dear sir, I have explainedmyself to you without reserve, and before I concludelet me say a few words concerning that same publicationwhich I trust you will still do me the favourto accept and peruse.It is not from any idea of its literary merit thatI entreat you to peruse it. I am quite aware that itis much too diffuse and even tautologous. But I ammore and more convinced by subsequent experience,that the character and practices which are recommendedin it, are such as the New Testament prescribesto us, and such as alone will bring peace atthe last. You will at once however see, that my mainobject was to endeavour to convince my friends thatthe mere outward profession of Christian principlescould not be all that was required, when such strongfigures were used and expressive explanations givento describe the dispositions and affections which wereto be formed in us here, in order to qualify us for abetter world hereafter.As to the other points to which I drew your attentionin my former letter, I can say but a very fewwords on them. It-is very natural that I should nothave formed a very correct idea of your politicalsentiments, considering our not having exchanged aword on the subject for between thirty and forty1822. PARLIAMENTARY REFORM. 151years. I am myself decidedly convinced that PARTYis one of the chief evils which in politics we havenow reason to regret. This it is, which in the opinionof many well meaning (though I do not think themrightly judging) men, renders governing by influencenecessary; so that it has become a settled contest,whoever is minister, between Crown influence on oneside and systematic opposition on the other. Of courseI do not mean to condemn all co-operation of like-mindedmen, and I know that if I were to have madesuch an acknowledgment in a public assembly, theready reply would be, Why what is that but party ?It is certainly one of the innumerable cases in whichthe fault is in the abuse, in the excess of the thing,not in its nature.As to Parliamentary Reform, it would requiremore eyesight than I can spare to put on paper whatI think on that head. But I doubt not you wouldconcur with me in opinion that the bribery, of allsorts and forms, and the drunkenness, which attendour present system, are those evils which call by farthe loudest for reform. I verily believe, and havelong believed, the constituent body to be more corruptthan the representative.My dear sir, I must say farewell. May everyblessing attend you and yours. I am truly sorry tohear your son is such a sufferer. However, perhapshe may mend as he grows older. At twenty-ninehow weakly I was ; whereas, by the blessing of Godon a very peculiar system of management, which suitedmy case, I have for above thirty years past enjoyed152 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1822.as much, not robust, but comfortable health, as mostpeople ; and have very seldom been unable to carryon my sedentary occupations. The regular use ofopium for above thirty years, with attendants, hasbeen the main instrument of my recovery. But Ihave been drawn into these egotism by thinkingabout your son ; for being myself a father, I can sympathizewith Mrs. F. and you. And now, my dearsir, farewell. If any thing should bring you near anyresidence of mine, it would give me pleasure to seeyou. Cordially wishing you every temporal andeternal blessing, I remain, my dear sir,Yours sincerely,W. WILBERFORCE.Rev. Dr. Freemen."In December Mr. Wilberforce returned to HardenPark, there to decide on the operations of the nextparliamentary campaign. " For many weeks past,"he complains, 45 " we have been paying short visits toseveral friends, each of whom has called his owncircle in to welcome us, very kindly, but was it notErasmus that exclaimed, Amici sures tempore."While on his way he heard through GeneralMacaulay, who was in attendance on the Duke ofWellington at Verona, " of the admirable zeal, perseverance,judgment, and temper," which the Dukehad manifested in conducting what he calls " our businessat the Congress. I am particularly pleased withthe General's confidence in the Duke of Wellington'sTo Z. Macaulay Esq. Nov. 23.1822. HIS EXERTIONS NOT CONCENTRATED. 153plain-dealing honesty, against all the tangled web ofthe French Machiavellian manufacturers. Dieu defendle droit. I shall love all generals the better forit as long as I live, and so I hope will my childrenafter me." 46I am highly gratified by finding so much resolutionand practical zeal in our good cause, in a manwhose life has been spent for very different purposes,but who has been so signally honoured by Providenceas the instrument of our national deliverance." 47Be not uncomfortable on this account," wroteMr. Stephen, to whom he had expressed his self-reproachat being diverted in this manner from an importantobject, " all will be over-ruled for good. Godhas not many servants, nor man many friends, whoseonly fault is the attempting more in their service thanthey have time and strength to perform ; and thereforesometimes not doing the most important part oftheir proper work so well, as with a less grasping love,and more economized zeal, or better calculation, itmight have been performed."He now replied to Mr. Buxton's compliments uponhis diligence, regretting that his efforts had not beenbetter husbanded. His plan he stated to be, " toemploy the evenings only in letter writing, the morningsbeing given to something better meriting the name ofstudy." 48 He was himself the last to perceive thatthe diffusion of his time in minor occupations was butr > To Z. Macaulay Esq. Dec. 2.W. Wilberforce Esq. to Mr. William Allen, Feb. 14, 1823.To Z. Macaulay Esq. Nov. 23.H 3154 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1822.the tax he paid for being the centre of a great moralsystem, and that his multifarious intercourse withmen of all classes formed the ramifications of thatpower which gave an impulse to the age.TO T. F. BUXTON ESQ.You intimated a high sense of my industry.Alas ! my dear friend, truly is it said in Holy Writ,f The heart knoweth its own bitterness.' You littleknow how I reproach myself for not having expendedwisely and economically the many more years ofhealth than from my bodily frame I could reasonablyhave expected to be employed on earth in my Master'sbusiness. I do not mean that I actually waste muchtime ; for, honestly speaking, I am conscious that Ido not ; but I am sadly chargeable with the fault ofnot expending my time with judgment.I must not go into particulars, lest I at the sametime give a practical proof, as well as instance, ofthe truth of the remark. But, briefly, I have sufferedmy epistolary correspondence to run away withfar too much of it ; and, during the hours which Ihave listened to a reader, I have not given the requisitemeasure of attention. Let me just mention asan old fellow, (NARRATIVE old age,) what may perhapsbe not altogether useless, that it is a good planfor any one who, like myself, has different states of hismental powers, to have different employments ready,suited to those various states. I find myself equal tothe importation of facts, and to the lodging of themin my memory, when I cannot work them up into any1822. EMPLOYMENT OF TIME. 155fabric of strength or beauty well then I would takein (call it bonding my raw materials ; and makethem up into a manufacture at some future period,when I could bring into full play my fancy, and mymemory, and my judgment, and all, in short, of mymental machinery, according to the degree in whichI possess it. I humbly hope that for many yearsit has been the fixed desire of my heart, to employmy faculties as well as I could, to the glory of Godand the benefit of my fellow-creatures. But alas, Ihave been, and I still am, continually led into fritteringaway on comparatively speaking trifles, thattime which ought to be doggedly reserved en massefor real work solid, substantial, permanent work,vested labour, if I may so term it ; and yet, in practice,the boundary lines between the trifles and the seriousbusiness are not always very clear, e. g. many lettersare such as I think I ought not to neglect, on principlesboth of Christian charity and Christian courtesy. Twoinstances in point occur at the moment. RobertGrant's canvass cost me many mornings' penmanship,because from circumstances (renewing acquaintancewith long-neglected friends, &c.) I was forced to writerather long letters, and with my own hand, if I wroteat all ; and to-day, when I hoped to finish my letter toyou, and to write to Stephen and Macaulay, c. &c.,a letter arrives which compels me to write to LordBathurst, to Sir Thomas Brisbane, and a friend inVan Dieman's Land, in behalf of a truly Christian andhighly interesting family, who are at Falmouth aboutto sail for and settle in that Australian community.156 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1822.But alas, my dear friend, my want of industry ismost exhibited, (to the Searcher of hearts, at least,)in my not duly availing myself of all opportunities offorming and strengthening the habit prescribed bythe apostle, ( Whatever ye do in word or deed, do allin the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to Godand the Father through Him.' We all are apt to forgetthat the great object of our lives should be to acquirethat new nature which is to qualify us to live in heaven,or, in Scriptural language, is to make us meetto be partakers of the inheritance of the saints inlight. Now this new state is produced, blessed beGod, in various ways, and we are never cultivatingit more efficiently than when, under the influence ofright motives, we are doing good to our fellow creatures,especially if our active services are attendedwith self-denial. But the formation of the right temperand character is the main thing still. God caneffect His own purposes by His own agents as He will.4 They also serve who only stand and wait ; ' andindeed they often are proceeding in the same greatwork of cultivating and strengthening the right dispositionsand tempers humility, submission, patience,love, peace, joy, child-like affiance, far more prosperouslythan those who to the view of their fellow Christiansmay be abounding in all the works of faith andlabours of coverlet this, my friend, be your grandwork and mine, and to this end let our industry bemainly directed. One thing is needful.Now a gracious Providence has kindly allotted tousthe far easier as well as pleasant line of active1822. BURKE'S PLAN. 157service, and let me assure you in a parenthesis, that Ihave often rejoiced of late years in thinking of myhaving you for an associate and successor, as indeed Itold you. Now, my dear B., my remorse is sometimesvery great, from my consciousness that we have notbeen duly active in endeavouring to put an end to thatsystem of cruel bondage, which for two centuries hasprevailed in our West Indian colonies ; and my idea is,that a little before parliament meets, three or four ofus should have a secret cabinet council, wherein weshould deliberate and decide what course to pursue.I can scarcely say what pain it would give me, were Ito be unable before I go hence to declare my sentimentsand feelings on this head. I have often thoughtthat some modifications of Burke's plan would beadvisable. I used to think that, except for its notgoing far enough, it might be no bad plan. The verycircumstance of its being Burke's, would so abateenvy and silence the clamours against us as visionaries,republicans, insurrectionists, that it would onthat ground be almost invaluable.But, my dear friend, here am I writing on the 3rd ofDecember, and really it has been impossible for me toresume my pen since I laid it aside the other day. Bothmy wife and I are cordially rejoicing to hear of yourenjoying a smiling Providence in your domestic circle.Poor dear Babington. His eldest daughter is justleft a widow with six or seven young children, by thedeath of the Rev. Mr. Rose, a fine-looking youngman under forty. He taken, I left. O my friend,how strange is it, that though so firmly convinced in158 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE 1822.our judgments of the precarious tenure by which wehold all our worldly enjoyments, yet when the suddendeath of any one whom we love does occur, we are notonly grieved, but surprised, nay, almost astonished !Such is the moral obliquity. I must stop. Ever,with kindest remembrances to Mrs. B., &c.Your sincere and affectionate Friend, .W. WILBERFORCE."Mr. Buxton informed him that he should be intown " by the 10th of Jan," and expressed his hopethat the " Congress on the subject would not be later.It is exceeding well for you, who have powder andball, i. e. knowledge of the whole subject, and thepow T er of projecting it with force, to be primed andloaded of a morning and fired off at night, but itwon't do with me. I can do nothing in this rapidmethod." 49But no council of war was needful to decide thatthe first step in the new attempt must be taken byhimself, and that the subject must be introduced toparliament and to the nation by the long acknowledgedpatron of the negro race. His friends urged himtherefore " to record and publish his opinions as tothe state of the negro slaves, the duty of improving it,and of gradually emancipating them. Indeed myconscience reproaches me," he says, "with having toolong suffered this horrible evil to go on. We mustnow call on all good men throughout the kingdomto join us in abolishing this wicked system, and striveT. F. Buxton Esq. to W. Wilberforce Esq. Dec. 6.1822. PREPARATION FOR HIS WORK. 159ing to render the degraded race by degrees a freepeasantry. Oh may God bless our attempt." 50My dear Stephen,If you lament your decayed faculties, and yourpresent drowsihood, (as Thomson terms it,) how muchmore cause have I for such lamentations ! I say itsincerely and seriously. Yet still what I can do I oughtto do. But the complaint in my eyes is a sad hinderanceto me in recovering lost ideas and facts. Nowin filling my mind with them, and in warming andanimating me, you would, I doubt not, do me greatgood. And I am one of those substances, like sealingwax and other electric bodies, which require to bewarmed in order to possess the faculty of attractingobjects, of covering and clothing itself with them.I cannot sparkle at all without being rubbed, andthis would be effected by your conversation andspeechifying. Yet I perhaps can revive the old impressionsby meditation and looking at papers.Formerly I had several friends who assisted me tolook out for intelligence, Burgh, Dickson, and others.Pitt used to call them my ( white negroes.'Farewell, my dear friend, olim hee meminissejuvat. I hope you do not shut yourself up thewhole day. Your mind cannot preserve its tone, ifyour body is unnerved and sluggish. May God, whohas inspired you with the love of justice and mercy,and the abhorrence of oppression, prosper your*- Diary, Dec. 27.160 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1822.labours for the promotion of the one and the suppressionof the other.With kind remembrances to your friendly circle,both in your own house and out of it, I amEver affectionately yours,W. WILBERFORCE."Mr. Stephen in his reply expressed his joy that heresolved on a Manifesto. Let us have it as soon aspossible, as our mise en campagne. Most willinglywill I do all I can, and go to Harden Park for thepurpose if you think that best. But most sincerelydo I believe you would do better without me in allrespects but one. My province would be that of thedriver only ; and yet I beg his pardon, for he not onlydrives, but lines out the cane-holes, and I believe youwould also line out better for yourself. Nor is drivingto me a pleasant occupation except in my phaetonin good weather. And then Mrs. Wilberforce willflog the driver every day if she thinks we do toomuch, (she gave me fair warning of it on Sunday,)and I shall flog myself if we do too little. But afterall, I will go if you wish it and think it best." 51Mr. Stephen remained still at Dissenter engagedin similar pursuits, but several friends assembledround their Christmas hearth at Marden Park ; andlong and deep were their deliberations, how best toshape those measures which were to change the structureof society throughout the western world. Mr.41 J. Stephen Esq. to W. Wilberforce Esq. Dec. 31.1823. WITHERSPOON ON REGENERATION. 161Wilberforce was setting steadily to the task onwhich he had resolved, although he found " manyhindrances from having a house full of inmates.All my children and my grandchild are around me,(what cause have I for thankfulness!) yet I am resolvedto sound the charge." 52 On the 1st of Januaryhe was " hearing Roster's plan of amelioratingthe condition of the West India slavery as a preludeto emancipation. Very good. William Smith readingit. I am turning over old subjects to fill mymind, in order to prepare for writing my Manifesto.Alas ! I must lessen my correspondence. On lookingback through the last year, what else have I done butwrite letters ? Lord, help me to glorify Thee more. Imust select, and only write to those who may fairlyclaim answers. Yet Christianity requires courtesy.3rd. William Smith off early to town. How fullof good nature he is ! What a lesson does he giveto evangelical Christians ! I never am with himwithout thinking of talis cum sis, utinam nosteresse, not with a party feeling, but from Christianlove. I never forget his principles, and grieve overthem. 6th. I heard Macaulay's paper on East Indiasugar, and tried to finish my long-promised Preface toWitherspoon, previously to beginning my Manifesto." MThis was a task which he had undertaken atthe request of Mr. Collins, a publisher in Glasgow,the friend and elder of Dr. Chalmers. His engagementhad been to supply a Preface to Witherspoon'sEssay on Regeneration. The title seemed to promise42 Letter to J. Stephen Esq. 53 Diary.162 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1823.controversial discussion, but his sole object was torecommend the practical instruction which had madethis work long a favourite with him ; and " I purposelyabstained," he said, " from using the term regeneration,or expressing any opinion concerning thecorrectness of its application." He was not a littlediscomposed at finding afterwards that his Prefacehad been prefixed to two of the treatises of Dr.Witherspoon. The " Essay on Justification," hesays, " I have never even read, but I am told it isdecidedly Calvinistic, and every year that I live Ibecome more impressed with the unscriptural characterof the Calvinistic system." " It is most worthyof remark," is the entry at this time in one ofhis memoranda, " that God reasons with man inScripture on our own admitted principles. Thispassage therefore, Rom. iii. 6, which implies, thatGod's justice will finally be manifestly consistentwith the condemnation of sinners, is most important.It even intimates that it would be enough toprevent any dispensation on God's part that it wouldbe unjust : ' God forbid ; for then how shall Godjudge the world?' And observe that various passagesof Scripture prove that God has not one standard ofjustice for Himself, arid another for us, but that Hehas the same standard as ourselves."On the 8th of January his Preface was completed,and he at once " began the Manifesto. Preparing forBuxton and Macaulay, who came about four ; I discussedwith them on our plan." 54 " We must have a54 Diary. Jan. 11.1823. STEPS TOWARDS EMANCIPATION. 163serious talk of the interior Cabinet, for the purpose ofsettling the measures to he recommended for preparingthe slaves for the enjoyment of liberty. TheAbolition of the driving system, with the introductionof religious instruction and marriage, and the facilitatingmanumissions, must be, I cannot doubt, our grandmeasures. But of all this we will talk hereafter." 55In the mean time he reports progress to a friend.TO THE LADY OLIVIA SPARROW.Harden Park, Jan. 22, 1823.My dear Friend,I trust you give me credit for thinking of youmuch more frequently than I write. Such is theeffect of the standing impediment to my being a goodcorrespondent, arising from the complaint in myeyes, and from the necessary claims on them whichmust be admitted while I have any eyesight at all,that I seem to myself to fall into arrears with all myfriends, and yet to be always writing up to the full ofmy powers. And while I can at all use my ownpen, it is very disagreeable to write by an amanuensis; it is as bad as talking to a friend through aninterpreter.(t But do not abstain from writing in order to sparemy eyes. The letters I receive from friends bear aless proportion to my whole number, than the saltI consume to the food it seasons; and the epistolary,I assure you, is far more grateful than the culinaryTo Z. Macaulay Esq.1(34 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1823.seasoning. So believe me, your letters are even themore welcome when I am overdone by the multitudeof less acceptable correspondents.You kindly ask after my domestic circle. Of myselfI thank God I can give a very good account in pointof health, hitherto ; just now I am not quite so well, butnot I trust materially otherwise. But if you ask mehow I have improved the long interval of uninterruptedhealth which I have enjoyed since the beginning ofour last recess, I am quite shocked at the answer I feelmyself compelled to return. I know not how it is, Ireally have never meant to be idle, yet I can find no resultsfrom my occupation. I am now only beginning anundertaking which ought by this time to have beenfinished. It is a Manifesto on the present state of thenegro slaves in our Trans Atlantic colonies, calling onall good men (aye, and women too, so you are not to beleft out) to concur with me in endeavouring to improvetheir condition, in order to fit them for theenjoyment of liberty. Really when I consider theheathenish state in which those poor creatures havebeen suffered to remain for two hundred years, wearingout their strength in a far more rigorous thanEgyptian bondage to a Christian nation ; pity, anger,indignation, shame, create quite a tumult in my breast,and I feel myself to be criminal for having remainedsilent so long, and not having sooner proclaimed thewrongs of the negro slaves, and the injustice andoppression of our countrymen. Not but that I unaffectedlyfeel for those who inherit property of thissort. And it is one of my many subjects for gratitude1823. HIS MANIFESTO. 165that this is not my situation. But I am glad to saythat I really believe, if the masters will act reasonably,their loss need not be at all considerable, and theywill possess their property by a secure, instead of asnow, by a most precarious tenure. But let what Iam about be a secret, I beg of you, till I tell you thatthere is no more cause for silence.We have taken a house in St. James's Place, forthe ensuing session. Shall you not be in town occasionally? Farewell, my dear friend. With bestwishes and sincere prayers for your happiness hereand hereafter,I am ever affectionately yours,W. Wilberforce."This address cost him no little labour. " Jan.26th. At work on my Manifesto, but I cannot pleasemyself." 56 " I am become heavy and lumbering,and not able at once to start into a canter, as I couldtwenty years ago. Happily, it is a good road, andin a right direction. I have also been embarrassed bythe quantity of my materials, and by the consciousnessthat, on the one hand, short general assertionswould produce no effect which would not bedone away by equally strong assertions of oppositepositions ; and on the other, that if I should go intoparticulars, I should be lost in detail." 57 " 29th.I get on slowly. Music in the evening. To havefriends in the house sadly consumes time, though noone loves music better than I do; yet the time is^ Diary. Letter to T. Babington Esq. Jan. 28.166 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1823.short with me, and I must husband it." 58 Therewas no moroseness in this resolution. He was tenderlyalive to all the softening charities of life. " Howkindly I am treated by all my children ! Never didany father experience more tender and affectionateassiduities, and such an anxiety both for my healthand comfort. No one, surely, had ever such reasonto be thankful for this great blessing, one of the verygreatest in advancing years."In such natural outbreaks of thanksgiving his fullheart was ever pouring forth its gratitude. He couldnot mark in his Diary " a sharp frost and fine day,"without adding " how charming are the varieties ofour climate !" But in spite of interruptions, he wasdetermined to complete his task. tf Parliament meetsto-day, (Feb. 4th,) but I am come out of town tofinish, if I can, my Manifesto. Brougham's animatedcondemnation of the French, which censured also byall the House, and by Lord Liverpool, quite stirs upmy blood, and makes me sorry I was not present.At work again to-day, but forced to occupy an houror more in writing to the Duchess of Beaufort aboutLord Charles Somerset, who has taken offence at theaccount given in the Times of my speech about theCape slaves and Hottentots." 59Meanwhile his friends in London were at work.We are to have a select party tomorrow at LordCalthorpe's, purposely to talk over slavery," he heardfrom Mr. Macaulay. " If therefore you are drawn totown, you will know where the conspirators are assentDiary. & Diary.1823. HIS MANIFESTO PUBLISHED. 167bled." 60 "I have had two long talks with Brougham,and have gradually opened to him our feelings andviews. I cannot help hoping that we have gainedhim. He offered voluntarily to write an article onslavery for the very next Edinburgh Review." 61His own leisure in the country was not thrownaway. " The further I get on in the case, the moreimportant and heart-stirring I find it. Whenever,which is but rarely, I can get an uninterrupted houror two, and am thoroughly warmed, I feel as if itwas impossible for an honest man to resist us. Butmy eyes have done their do for to-day. Every blessingattend you." 62 He now came up to town, stillbusy on his Manifesto," and " sent a good deal ofhis piece to the press." 63 " I am sadly out of heartabout it, but I humbly trust I am acting agreeablyto the will of God. Considering that when onceunbarred, I should have no peace, I have not yetbeen at the House." 64 " I find my memory sadlyweakened, and the want of eyesight produces ignoranceof the affairs of the day, so that I must confinemyself to my own subject. I am not fit to discussgeneral politics.I gave my name yesterday as a steward to a greatdinner to the Spanish and Portuguese ministers, butdid not attend, because I found some violent thingsmight be said, which I could not then contradict, yetshould not like to acquiesce in, for we must not go to60 To W. Wilberforce Esq. Feb. 5. Cl Ib Feb. 8.<* To Z. Macaulay Esq. Feb. 10.J Diary, Feb. 16. * lb. Feb. 17.1G8 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1823.war. To-day Sunday, is a blessed calm and abstractionfrom worldly objects. I have had a comfortableinterval between church and dinner. O Lord enableme to love Thee more, and serve Thee better."Early in March his Appeal was published. Hethen speaks of himself as " busy for the first time on"his (( Slavery Abolition work. My pamphlet is wellliked, thank God. vf ' 5 No address was ever betterqualified to produce that mighty effect which followedits publication. Its kindness and forbearance towardsindividuals, rendered its earnest expostulations irresistible.The fervour of the writer's natural manner wasso happily tempered by Christian candour, and by thewisdom of age, that no heart could be closed whenhe spoke, " gravitate ilia, qua perfundefet animus,not qua perfringeret." Its perusal, a West Indianproprietor told him, " has so affected me, that shouldit cost me my whole property, I surrender it willingly,that my poor negroes may be brought not only to theliberty of Europeans, but especially to the liberty ofChristians." The Baron de Stael wrote to him fromthe continent, " to express the unqualified admiration" with which he had read the work. " Thereare few stronger arguments," said he, 66 " in favour ofthe immortality of the soul, (setting aside revelation,)than the constant rise, brought in by the progress oftime, in the mental powers of those who direct theircourse towards heaven. Indeed I cannot conceivehow public opinion could resist an attack led on by6A Diary, March 15.66 Baron de Stael to W. Wilberforce Esq. Paris, April 21.1823. SLOW CHANGE IN PUBLIC OPINION. 169you, and I hope that having begun the holy struggle,you will witness the ultimate victory." Not less confidentwere the anticipations of success nearer home.This addition' predicted Archbishop Magee, " to thenoble exertions which you have persevered in makingfor the relief of that cruelly injured portion of thecommon children of the one great Father, will be followedwith the blessing which belongs to such laboursof Christian love."The subsequent fulfilment of these predictions rendersit difficult to appreciate the obstacles whichfor a time delayed their consummation. But thenation was slow to be persuaded of the cruel anddebasing nature of a system which it had so long-maintained,and which was linked with innumerableprivate interests. Mr. Wilberforce had learnt toomuch in his thirty-five years' apprenticeship in Africancontroversy, to expect the chains of slavery tocrumble under a single blow. (e It tasks our historicalfaith," had been lately observed to him by anAmerican correspondent, " to believe that you shouldhave been almost singular not very many years ago insupporting opinions on the subject of the Slave Trade,which at the present period are common throughoutthe civilized world." The general prejudices infavour of colonial bondage he was confident would inlike manner be ultimately dispelled, but he did notdare anticipate so speedy a result as the eagerwishes of his friends besought ; that " though itseemed too great an honour for one man to effect theAbolition of the Trade in negroes and their emancipate.v. i170 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1823.tion, he might yet live to see the fruit of his presentlabours."In his present measures he was but following uphis former steps. He had attacked the Slave Tradeas a monstrous evil in itself, while he hoped that itssuppression would lead at once to an improved treatmentof the race of slaves. He had waited patientlyfor this result ; perfecting the work of Abolition byinternational negociation, and guarding against smuggledimportation by registering the slaves. But hewaited fruitlessly ; whilst the working of the registryshowed beyond all doubt, that the negroes (elsewhereamongst the most prolific of the human race) weremelting away under the driving system by a sure andrapid diminution. Self-interest therefore was not asufficient corrective of the system, and delay wasimpossible. The time was at length come, whenhe must demand that from parliament, to which hehad hoped that gradual improvements would haveimperceptibly led on the planters. The nation mustbe pledged to give the negro freedom, before hismaster could be trusted to treat him as a man.The second act of the drama was now opening ;and on the 19th day of March he presented to theHouse of Commons a petition from the Quakers, whohaving been the first to protest against the SlaveTrade, now led the way in the attack on slavery.His present aim was to bring the subject forward,and having ascertained the temper of the House, preparefor such ulterior steps as it would bear. Butthe cause opened unpropitiously. (f I thought a little1823. CANNING'S GENERALSHIP. 171and looked over topics, but did not make the orderof a speech. Fatigue rather stupefied me, and Iforgot the most important points. But Canning'sgeneralship admirable, and his troops submissive.He let me exhaust my motions that it be received,printed, &c. then merely asked whether I meant tomake a distinct motion ? None of the friends of thecause said a word. I, who had been thinking over thetopics to be ready for reply, was quite confounded.All of us abates. Never almost in my life was Iso vexed by a parliamentary proceeding. I felt asif God had forsaken me, whom just before I had invoked; as if I had been wanting to the cause, &c.I could scarcely get to sleep, and was ashamed to seemy friends, though they tell me the effect was betterthan I had conceived."Mr. Canning had been a steady and consistentAbolitionist, but this new question involved him asaminister in many difficulties, and the influence ofpersonal attachment gave his powerful mind a strongbut secret bias to the wishes of the planters, andhence he was most anxious to put this tryingquestion quietly aside. But though baffled at themoment, Mr. Wilberforce was not of a temper toyield the interests of a great cause to such impediments; and it was speedily resolved that this skilfulresistance required them at once to bring the subjectforward in a simple and definite motion. Whilst thiswas in preparation, he attended parliament as far ashewas able ; speaking on the most important questionsof policy and morals. " March 25th. Hume senti2172 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1823.word to the Society for the Suppression of Vice, thathe meant to attack their conduct. Sir Thomas Aclandand I resolved to take up the business. I called atthe office and got some intelligence, and then at thelibrary of the Royal Institution, hut in vain, tosee Erskine's Speeches. 67 26th. The House beforefive. Hume upon his petition, and spoke some timefor Miss Carlisle, and very strong. Answered wellby dear Acland. Then Ricardo, Attorney General,Burdett; and then I and Wynne."He defended the Society on the ground which hehad always taken, and proved that public moralsrequired the vigilance of such a body. 68 To Mr.Hume, who had asked tauntingly how blasphemycould be defined, he gave the same answer withwhich he had met a like inquiry from a publisherwho tried to learn through him, whether the Attorney-general69 would prosecute a work he was about topublish. " You are right," was his reply, " in believingme an intimate acquaintance of Sir J. Scott's ;but this is not a question I can properly put to him,neither can you have any reason to complain of therestraints upon the press, now that Mr. Fox's Bill hasgiven the law a more popular character, by subjectingit entirely to the decision of the jury." " That, sir,only increases the risk ; the judges might be severe,but they followed fixed principles, whereas now ifpublic feeling sets one way every thing may be condemned,if the other any thing may be published."07 For the Speech against Paine's Age of Reason.65 See vol. i. p. 132. eo Lord Eldon, then Sir John Scott.1823. PROSECUTIONS FOR BLASPHEMY. 173Still," he replied, " I cannot help you, for I musthonestly declare that if you desire to go as near asyou safely can to blasphemy, I only hope that you willfind that you have overstepped the mark, and incurredthe punishment which you have tempted."It was not without indignation that he listened tothe shallow and <e very mischievous speeches " ofthese pretended friends of liberty. " I had hoped,"he said in private, " that had become a Christian; I see now that he has only ceased to be a Jew." 70I have heard," he declared, " some of their assertionswith astonishment ; " and with the authority ofage he added, <e I have sat many years in this House,and if the experience of public life may give weight totiny opinions, I solemnly declare my conscientious conviction,that all which is most valuable to us dependsupon our preservation of the sacred institutions ofthe country."But these peculiar services were often interruptedby his increasing infirmities. " My lungs," he says,(April loth,) " are affected, and my voice weak ; soI am forced to keep the house, though yesterdayCanning's explanation about the Spanish negociations.To-night the motion against Plunket, when, above allthe House, it would have become me to move the previousquestion. I greatly regret that I could not go,but I must accustom myself to be willing to retire.Even a pagan could say, solve senescentem, &c. AChristian, considering himself the servant of God, doeshis Master's business so long as He signifies His will70 Diary174 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1823.by action, and no less by retiring. I hope I have beenacting on this principle (applying ' he must increase,but I must decrease ') to other and younger men. Andoh may I be enabled to walk by faith, not sight ; andthen all will be clear and easy, and not unpleasant." 71How cheering is the consideration that all eventsare under the guidance of infinite wisdom and goodness,and that we are hastening to a world of securepeace and joy !" 72The foundation of this graceful and easy retirementfrom the foremost place which he had so long filled,was laid in the deep Christian humility which gave itstone to the following letter.TO J. S. Hartford ESQ.House of Commons, April 25.11 My dear Friend,Do not measure by the tardiness of my replythe force of the feelings excited by your last friendlynote. The most interesting part I shall like to talk toyou upon. O my friend, you struck a string whichvibrates in my heart in full unison. When I reviewall my past life, and consider ever since it has beenmy general intention to live to the glory of God, andin obedience to His laws, what have been my obligations,and what ought to be the amount and theeffects of my gratitude, what my means and opportunitiesof usefulness, what the scantiness of my performances,and with what alloy my motives have beendebased ; alas, alas, my friend, I have no peace, no7 1 Diary. n To J. Stephen Esq. April 8.1823. SPANISH INTERFERENCE. 175rest, but in the assurances of pardon and acceptanceto penitent believers in Christ Jesus ; and I adopt thelanguage of the Publican, with the declarations ofmercy and grace held out to the contrite and brokenhearted.What a blessed truth it is, that it is ourduty to be confident in the undeserved bounty andoverflowing loving-kindness of our heavenly Father !Farewell.Ever affectionately,W. Wilberforce."Three days later, when the conduct of ministersupon the French invasion of the Peninsula was thesubject of much angry censure, he was in the House,and took in great measure their part. " All historyshows us," he concluded, " that wars are popular intheir commencement and pernicious in their course.In my conscience I believe that the intentions of thegovernment were fair and honest, and I applaud theirpacific language, though I could wish they had assumeda higher moral tone." 73 The debate was twiceadjourned, and as he did not wish to vote upon thequestion, he would have staid away on the succeedingnights, but an urgent note from Mr. Canningagain brought him to the House for the conclusion ofthe matter.(Private and most confidential.)Gloucester Lodge, April 30, ]823.My dear Wilberforce,I have received your note, and in the sameconfidence in which it is written, I venture to say to73 April 28.17G LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1823.you, (for yourself alone,) that you have not undulyestimated the difficulties of my situation.But surely, surely in that case I have the strongerclaim upon your justice. I am upon my trial to-day.Come and hear me ! I had rather that you shouldc hear and vote,' than that you should stay away,and leave your authority doubtful.What you said about the tone of the papers isquite misunderstood. I understand it; but I knowothers do not. I must refer to what you said ;and I had a thousand times rather do so in yourpresence. But, if you mean to be just, you will bethere.Ever sincerely yours,GEO. CANNING."April 30th. By Canning's special desire I attendedthe House to hear his vindication of the papers ;but I was not satisfied, so I went away without votingat four in the morning." 74His own cause was now coming on. It had oncealready been partially discussed since his presentationof the petition of the Quakers, when a strong speechof 'Sir Robert "Wilson's had called up Bright, butCanning had interposed, and by checking the WestIndians had stopped the debate." But this policycould not continue, and the country seemed disposedto favour him beyond his expectation. It is wonderfulhow people accord with us about the slaves;both government and West Indians. May God blessour endeavours. The country takes up our causew Diary.1823. MOTION FOR EMANCIPATION. 177surprisingly. The petitions, considering the littleeffort, very numerous." 75On the 15th of May, Mr. Buxton, to whom he hadnow committed the leading place in this great work,began his Slavery motion about half-past five. Hemoved a resolution declaring Slavery repugnant toChristianity and the constitution. Canning replied,and moved resolutions proclaiming reform of the system,and specifying driving, punishment of females,Sunday work, and market. It was an awkward situation,but I could not learn what our friends thought,and I never "got up so utterly unprepared, but D. G.I believe I hit the point. We certainly could nothave divided well. The debate dragged on till oneand more." 76The issue was not entirely what he had desired,though it was by no means destitute of promise.For myself," (he said,) " I frankly confess that ifthe colonial legislatures would make the reform Ishould greatly prefer it. But how is it possible formeto expect that they will do it ? Have we notlarge experience on this head ; and does not all ourexperience show that they will not do this duty ? Andlet it never be forgotten, as Sir Samuel Romilly usedto exclaim, e these poor negroes, destitute, miserable,degraded as they are, are nevertheless his Majesty'sliege subjects and are entitled to as much, aye, letme remind my right honourable friend, by the principlesof our holy religion, to more of the protectionof the British constitution, because they are deserted,7 Diary, April. ?e Diary.i 3178 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1823.destitute, and degraded. But we now stand in aperfectly new situation. We have now an acknowledgmenton the part of government that the grievancesof which we complain do exist,, and that a remedyought to be applied. I will no longer detainthe House than by expressing my confidence that weshall this night lay the foundation of what will ultimatelyprove a great and glorious superstructure."The event of the evening formed the subject ofdiscussion at the meeting of the African Institutionon the succeeding day, and a party " dined afterwardsat his house and talked over the cause." He thusconveys to one of his sons, who had left town reluctantlybefore the debate, his judgment of its issue.London, May 17, 1823.My very dear ,Now that the day is over, you will experience,if I may judge from my own feelings, no little pleasurefrom having practised a virtuous act of self-denial.You are rewarded also in another way ; for the debatewas by no means so interesting as we expected.Buxton's opening speech was not so good as his openingshave been before. His reply however, thoughshort, was, not sweet indeed, but excellent. I wasmyself placed in very embarrassing circumstancesfrom having at once, and without consultation, to decideon Mr. Canning's offers. I thank God, I judgedrightly that it would not be wise to press for moreon that night. On the whole, we have done I trustgood service, by getting Mr. Canning pledged to cereTO HIS SON. 179tain important reforms. I should speak of our gainin still stronger terms, but for Canning's chief friendbeing a West Indian a very gentlemanly and humaneman, but by no means free from the prejudices of hiscaste.I just recollect that this will reach you on theSunday ; allow me therefore to repeat my emphaticallyvalediction, REMEMBER. You will be in my heartand prayers tomorrow, and probably we shall becelebrating about the same time the memorial of ourblessed Lord's suffer rings.May God bless you, my beloved . The anniversarieswhich have passed, remind me of the rapidflight of time. My course must be nearly run ; thoughperhaps it may please God, who has hitherto causedgoodness and mercy to follow me all my days, to allowme to see my dear sons entered upon the exercise oftheir several professions, if they are several. Buthow glad shall I be, if they all can conscientiouslyenter into the ministry, the most useful and honourableof all human employments ! Farewell, my beloved. I am everMost affectionately yours,W. Wilberforce."For the remainder of the session, which he spentchiefly in town, his bodily strength was taxed to theutmost, and his breakfast table crowded sometimesby " a consultation on our Slave cause," 77 sometimesby most variously assorted guests, " reminded him of77 Diary.180 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1823,the old bustle of a Kensington Gore breakfast." HisDiary and letters will now almost tell their own tale.(( May 16th. I much wished to go to the Greekmeeting ; but the danger of hindering our Slaverycause, consciousness that I might offend otherswhose meetings I had declined, and partly feelingvery weakly, made me give it up and write anapology."21st. Continental Society. Young Perceval spokemost affectingly. Lord Rocksavage also. Rev. Mr,Irving as wild as a Pythian. I spoke also. ThenArchbishop Magee very kind and unaffected.22nd. Breakfast the Armenian, Persian, youngPerceval, Plenderleath, and one or two more. Likean old Kensington Gore breakfast. House W.Whitmore's motion about sugar duty. None interestedfor the question but the East Indians and afew of us anti-slavers, and the West Indians andgovernment against us ; so that 61 a less majorityover 34 than might have been expected. I spoke,and loud hallooed ; yet the reporters began with theusual observation of my low voice."23rd. Archbishop of Dublin called to breakfastwith me sat an hour and a half with me afterwards,giving me information about the Irish Church.House expecting Slave Trade Consolidation business,and Game Bill; but Irish business came oninstead.25th. Sunday. Morning, Lock, and staid theSacrament. Walked home with Lord Rocksavage,S., and , and being overdone staid at home,1823. DIARY. 181evening. Read, enjoyed, and I hope profited, from asermon of Dean Milner's on ' I have waited for thysalvation, O Lord.' Private devotions, I hope, spiritual.Oh what blessings do I enjoy, what cause haveI for gratitude !28th. Poor Pitt's birth-day. A Pitt Club dinner,but the anniversary become a mere party affair,so I don't go. To Paul's Cray, Simonss's schoolsMac Noel sermon, very simple and good was to havemet Bishop Heberr at John Thornton's, but too latehome.29th. Friends at breakfast. Afterwards to NationalSchool anniversary where Archbishop ofCanterbury in the chair, Bishops of London, Worcester,Chester, &c. and a large collection of divines.I suddenly called on to second thanks to the Archbishop,but very kindly received, especially by BishopBloomfield."June 1st. The Lock E. quite in his way, clearand strong, but his words stillatim.2nd. Prison Discipline Society anniversary, Dukeof Gloucester in the chair. Calthorpe spoke verywell. Mackintosh also cleverly. I was kindly receivedbut spoke middling.4th. With Col. Barry and others to Lord Melvilleabout the horrid indecencies in our ships of war ;he gave us fair words. Then Lord Bathurst aboutMalta, the circulation of Bibles in Malta being restrictedby the Roman Catholic bishop and priests.13th. I wished to go to the Christian KnowledgeSociety, to hear the valedictory address to Bishop182 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1823.Heberr delivered by Bishop Kate of Bristol ; but wehad an appointment with Canning we were with himfrom one till a quarter past three, and had, on thewhole, a very satisfactory interview ; he went intoevery point, and showed he wished to concur with us.Evening, House for Slave Trade Laws ConsolidationBill ; but discussion on Rice's motion on the judges,and a debate on government's taking up such casesordinarily and in preference. This, strange to say,supported by Denman. I spoke, and I think well, butwith little effect. Canning most spirited, and on theright side, but not able to use the strongest arguments."On the same day he wrote to Mr. Macaulay. 78My dear Macaulay,Buxton has promised to send you an accountof what passed in our interview of near two hoursand a quarter with Canning. All taken together, Imay fairly term it a very satisfactory interview, because,though on the main point of all (that of thechildren) he intimated no concurrence, and thoughon the next important, (except what respects religionand marriage,) I mean the admission of Black testimony.. . Here enter the Archbishop of Dublin, andhe has kept me so long that I must merely add thatI will thank you for your ideas on the questions putto me just now in a letter from Rush the Americanminister. I am sorry to say that I hear the state ofIreland is becoming still more serious. The speeches79 Jan. 13.1823. IRISH AGITATORS. 183of the Roman Catholic leaders in Dublin are so veryviolent, that if they do not mean to excite the RomanCatholics of the south to actual rebellion, their languageis such as to insure I fear that effect.Give my kind regards to all the circle at theTemple. What discussions you will have ! I desiremy friendly remembrances to that awful creature, (aspoor Robert Hall called it,) the eagle. More seriously,remember me also most affectionately todear L. and her children; but I have no soonernamed one than I am prompted to name another ;so I say, may God bless them all.Ever affectionately yours,W. Wilberforce."Even at these busy times his sons were receivingfrom him the most affectionate and thoughtful letters.TO , 79London, June 14, 1823.My very dear ,I scarcely need assure you, that however muchI am occupied, I am never intentionally long withouttaking up my pen to write to you. There can be nobusiness so important to me as the well-being of mychildren. But not seldom I am cheated out of mytime ; as I am at this moment. The Archbishop ofDublin was to breakfast with me, and I desired Mr.Wilson to come a little before, that I might introduce*> Aged 18.184 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1823.them to each other, in conformity with a principle onwhich I have acted for many years, and which Irecommend to you early in life, that of bringing togetherall men who are like-minded, and may one daycombine and concert for the public good.Never omit any opportunity, my dear , of gettingacquainted with any good or useful man. Moreperhaps depends on the selection of acquaintance thanon any other circumstance of life. Acquaintanceare the raw material, from which are manufacturedfriends, husbands, wives. I wish it may pleaseGod that you may have some good ones to choosefrom on your first settling at Oxford. T seemsa very pleasing young man, but I own I covet a muchhigher praise for my sons ; and oh that I could havereason to believe they were steadily and sturdilysetting themselves to act on that beautiful descriptionof the true Christian's character which we had twoor three mornings ago in our family service, ' amongwhom ye shine as lights in the world ! ' O my dearest, what would I give to see you a ^taa-r^p e v TWKocrpw. The idea has brought tears into my eyesand almost disqualified me from going on with myletter. My dearest , aim high ; do not be contentedwith being hopeful ; strive to be a Christianin the highest sense of that term. How little do youknow to what services Providence may call you ! If,when I was at your age, any one had pointed to meand said, That youth in a few years will be memberfor the first county in England, it would have beendeemed the speech of a mad-man. But I can truly1823. TO HIS SON. 185say I would as much rather see you a Buchanan, aseternity is beyond any given portion of time in theestimate of a reasonable being.But my time and eyesight are expended, andthough I seem as full of matter as ever, I must stopnot, however, without assuring you how earnestly Ishall pray for you tomorrow, (inter sylvas Marten,)that you ' may be strengthened with might in theinner man. 5The young men of our day are in no danger ofbeing called to the encounter of fire and sword toburning at the stake ; but then the consequence ofthis absolution, is their not being prepared for thatmilder form of persecution which they may be calledon to face. But all may be done through prayer almightyprayer, I am ready to say ; and why not ? Forthat it is almighty, is only through the gracious ordinationof the God of love and truth. Oh then pray,pray, pray, my dearest ; but then remember toestimate your state on self-examination not by yourprayers, but by what you find to be the effects of themon your character, tempers, and life. But this opensa wide prospect, and I must stop. Most reluctantly,farewell.Ever most affectionately yours,W. Wilberforce."The conclusion of this letter is a picture of thetone of his religion ; fruitful in the liveliest affections,but tested unceasingly by its more substantial fruits.I should wish to know' he said after hearing of a186 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1823.happy death, " the man's previous character ; for suchexpressions of confidence in the Saviour are not satisfactoryto me unless they are accompanied by othermarks of practical religion. I remember a lady ofhigh rank, who had led a dissipated and I fear immorallife, and yet when suddenly attacked by deathshe desired to be left alone to pray, and seemed in fullpeace and composure." 80 But to return to the Diary.17th. Finding from the bill of fare, and from myletters, that I had no call to town, staid here (MardenPark) to-day also. Hearing House of Commons'papers on Settles also Essays on the Habits of hindoo,and Friend of India.20th. Wrangham, &c. breakfasted afterwardswith him and Basil Montagu to see the late King'slibrary at Buckingham House. Poor Carlisle thelibrarian cannot sleep for vexation. He advisedstrongly its not being taken to the Museum, but putup in Whitehall Chapel. House presenting petitionsthen King's library Mackintosh spoke beautifullyCroker's strong and sharp ridicule of the tasteof the British Museum trustees carried for Museum.23rd. Brougham's speech quite thundering in theperoration magnificent but very unjust declamationon great abuses of Irish justice administration. .July 1st. Came from Tonbridge Wells, and intendedto go home to dinner, but found that Hume'smotion against all prosecutions on religious subjectswas about to come on, so forced to stay at the House.Spoke, but seemed to myself dry and barren.80 Con. Mem.1823. DOMESTIC SLAVE TRADE. 1872nd. Took possession of our new house at CromptonGrove. May God bless our residence here.4th. House Slave Trade Consolidation Bill wewishing to prevent exportation to Trinidad, but beat.All the West Indians' he writes word toMacaulay, " were against us, and notwithstanding allwe could urge, Canning was really convinced, I believe,that he was right in contending for the removalof slaves from island to island, not excluding Trinidad,whenever it should be proved that it would be for thebenefit of the slaves. Hume took part stronglyagainst us, and especially urged that the Privy Council'spower of granting licences should be perpetual,and not be confined to three years, as proposed byWilmot Horton. Canning has since consented thatthe power shall only last till 1826. We have a hopeof obtaining a concession that the slaves so transportedshall be adscripti glebe."There was the greatest danger of a new form ofSlave Trading resulting from this measure, and thosewho were the most familiar with the state of the WestIndies were its most strenuous opponents. " I knowan Antigua planter," Mr. Stephen writes at the timeto Mr. Wilberforce, " who has put the finishing handto his ruin by borrowing money to buy back hisestate and slaves after he had sold them, since hehas found that the Act prohibiting their transportationhad failed in this country, and that if he had theseblack counters to play with, he could make a set atWest Indian rouge et noir, at the tempting gaming-tableof Guiana.188 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1823.I suppose you know that Joseph Hume's brotherhas an estate at Trinidad, and are of course awareof Marryatt's interest in the question. I think itmonstrous that they should be allowed to speak uponsuch subjects. They ought in decency to withdraw.Who would think of empannelling the swell mob onthe trial of a pickpocket?"As the holidays approached, he wrote to HannahMore.London, July 14, 1823.My dear Friend,I am always overdone with business at theclose of a session ; and added to all my public occupations,we have been fixing ; and bringing all mybooks, pamphlets, papers, &c. the accumulated storesof a whole life, into a habitation not previously fittedfor receiving them. Marden Park was in one of themost beautiful countries eye ever beheld ; but we werenear three miles from church ; we had no shelteredwalk near the house, &c. And when people attainthe grand climacteric, unless they be of antediluvianstrength, they are compelled to make convenience theprime consideration in selecting a residence. Comfortsbecome necessaries.You have doubtless heard of the prevailingfashion of resorting to the conventicle to hear Dr.Chalmers's late assistant, Mr. Irving. It is not merelythe opposition members of both Houses, LordLansdown, Mackintosh, &c. that attend him ; theirpolitical nonconformity might be supposed to endear1823. IRVING. 189to them his ecclesiastical dissent : but the orthodoxLord Liverpool, the vindicator of existing institutionsMr. Canning, press into his meeting-house ;and even with tickets you must be at the door anhour before the service commences, if you wish toget in without losing one of your coat pockets bymere mobbing. I have not yet been to hear him.Indeed I did not think it quite of good example toadopt the prevailing rage. It is literally true (Iwas told by one who was present,) that an operafrequenter related as a part of the green room's conversationof the last Saturday night, ' Shall you gotoIrving's tomorrow ? ' It is with no little pleasureI have heard that he is a man not only of extraordinarypowers, (though even once hearing him speak atoneof our anniversary meetings satisfied me that hesadly needs the chastening hand of a sound classicaleducation,) but of orthodox principles and personalpiety, and I am assured too, of a fine, disinterestedspirit. I thought that you would like to receivesome certain intelligence of this extraordinary ' performer;'for such, with all his merits, he now appears.May God preserve and bless you. So wishes,and so prays,Your sincere Friend,W. Wilberforce."Mrs. More's answer was such as might have beenexpected from a friend of Bishop Porteus and Dr.Samuel Johnson.190 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1823.My dear Friend,******For the peerless northern star, Irving, I allow thathe is a man of talents, but but he is as bad a writeras ' ere my conversation coped withal.' He writeslike one of the old Covenanters in zeal, but oh, whereis the clear but deep sense, the pellucid perspicuity ofBaxter and of Howe ? His censure of his brethren forconfining their sermons to certain texts, and overlookingthe rest of the Scriptures, and making theBible a kind of party book, I was much pleased with.You will perhaps blame me for saying I shrink frommany parts of the ( Argument.' That boldly pryinginto the awful mysteries of judgment over which theBible has drawn such an impenetrable veil, I readwith more pain than profit. I almost tremble at hisfamiliar acquaintance with the details of the greatJudge. It brought to my mind some lines, which Iwrote in my copy book at eight years old. I havenever thought of them since. I know not who wrotethem. Les voiciQuery was made, What did Jehovah doBefore the world its first foundations knew ?The answer was, He made a hell for suchAs were too curious, and would know too much.'You will think me severe, but I write as I feel.I hope all your young ones are flourishing like,the green bay tree. My best regards to all. Youreyes I am afraid will suffer from this interrupted and1823. H. MORE'S ARABIANS. 191ill-written scrawl. As I was scribbling, the servantcame up in a hurry to tell me that there was a coachat the door with eight Arabians. I was a littlepuzzled till these Arabs proved to be eight Moravian,no formidable race. These holy sisters made me akind visit.Adieu, my dear friend. Do not forget to commendme to God, and to the word of his grace.Ever very truly and affectionately yours,H. MORE."CHAPTER XXXVI.JULY 1823 TO FEBRUARY 1825.Summer excursion Correspondence Barmouth Moral effectsof a mountainous country West Indian cause Governmentmeasures produce an insurrection Aspersionsthrown upon him Death of Mr. Grant Letter to his sonand to Hannah More Stratton Park Return to LondonLord Eldon and Mr. Abcrcrombie Cruelty to animalsAnti-slavery debate Canning and Lord Nugent Inflammationon the lungs Letter to H. More Return to businessMissionary Smith Illness at Iver Retirement atUxbridge Common Bath Company Christmas at UxbridgeCommon Doubt about leaving parliament Hisfeelings on it Resolves to retire Letters announcing itEffect of the announcement His place in the Housefrom eloquence from character Accepts the ChilternHundreds New writ moved for Bramber His feelings atthe time Last frank.HAVING given up his tenancy of Harden Park,, Mr.Wilberforce was now looking out for some summerquarters, at which to fix his family. No Diary of thenext few months was found amongst his papers ; buthis correspondence will supply the blank, and enableus to trace his steps. Shortly befo leaving London1823. FAMILY AFFECTION. 193he thus mentions to a son 1 the place upon which hehad decided for the gathering of the family.Crompton, July 29, 1823.My very dear ,Your disappointment at the arrangement whichprevented your paying us a pop-visit can scarcely havebeen greater than ours ; but it is a great pleasure to meto think that we shall meet D. V. ere long, and spendsome time together. It will then be your duty to takeplenty of air and exercise ; and in selecting Barmouthfor our quarters I was principally decided by the considerationthat the place would tend to render the dutya greater pleasure to you all. Barmouth, I understand,is very near the most ferocious and untamed of allthe Welsh mountain-lions, though Snowdon may takethe lead a little in mere bulk.In came about an hour ago. She speaks ofyour and 's kindness to her in terms which delightmy heart ; even the world, not commonly a justestimator of the value of character and conduct, alwaysrespects and admires family union and affection.May a gracious God keep you all, my dear children,mutually attached to each other ; the ties of naturebeing strengthened, and adorned, and perpetuated bythe influences of grace. Farewell, my beloved .Praying God to bless you, I amEver affectionately yours,W. Wilberforce."i .details.VOL. V. K194 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1823.On his road to Barmouth he wrote to one who hadshared his excursion to the Lakes, and who had beenthe most intimate friend of his eldest daughter,"July 30.My dear ,Any one whom I love at all, 1 seem to lovebetter in a land of mountains ; and I understand thatof all the Welsh lions, Cader Idris, beside the roots ofwhich Barmouth is situated, if not the most respectablein size, is the wildest and most untameable in hisproperties. Yet certain recollections will chastenthe vivid colouring of this glowing prospect, andthough with a melancholy now become not unpleasing,because so enriched and animated by hope, willalittle sadden the gaiety of the scene. Fancy wouldpaint for itself a renewal of the expedition in whichI rode by your side in scaling the heights of Skiddaw,or in which Southey skipped as light and elastic as abird from stone to stone in tracking his path throughBrothersdale, near Tyburn Water. There was achapel and a school not that school tyrannized overby that Queen Elizabeth of schoolmistress atwhose nod the terrified children trembled in language.How naturally we are drawn into retracingour steps when we look back with interest on theroad we travelled !I have lately been hearing the first hundredpages of Southey's Peninsular War, in which hegives you a bird's-eye view of the French principles,and character, and conduct under Buonaparte ; and1823. AUGEREAU. 195they have rekindled in me that warmth of gratitude,which I own I think is far too little felt by my countrymen,even by the considerate and serious of them,towards the great Disposer of all things for havingdelivered us from the imminent danger to which wewere exposed, if not of becoming the prey of thatferocious and unprincipled tyrant, yet of having ourcountry the seat of warfare, with all the unspeakableand almost innumerable evils and miseries which wemust in that case have endured, though we had beenultimately victorious. One of Buonaparte's generals,in the true spirit of his school, (Augereau, I think,)is said to have declared in speaking of this very subject,f Let me land with 100,000 men in England,and I do not say I will keep possession of the countryfor France, but this I say, that the country shall bebrought into such a state, that no Englishman shallbe able to live in it with comfort for a hundredyears to come.'What a fiend-like spirit ! to contemplate withsavage joy the pains of his inflicting, which shouldbe felt by generations yet unborn. The mind thatcould cherish such a sentiment must indeed be enmityitself against God, whose nature and whosename is love. O my dear friend, what emotionsare called forth by the very mention of that infinitelyglorious and gracious Being, the sum of allperfection, who condescends to grant us even here ameasure of His Spirit and nature, and of whom we aretold that when He shall appear we shall be like Him,for we shall see Him as He is. Oh may we verifyK 2196 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1823.our title to that blessed distinction, by our practicalobservation of the apostle's declaration, that everyonethat hath this hope purified himself even as Heis pure. May we be enabled to prosecute our endeavoursafter this blessed state with more unceasingand strenuous vigour, and may we have reason hereafterto look back with mutual thankfulness towardseach other on account of our having been mutuallyuseful to each other in this greatest of all lines ofservice. Believe me to beEver very affectionately yours,W. WILBERFORCE."In a postscript to the same letter, he alludes to sometrifling presents, adding, " I own I love both togive and receive them from real friends, though fromforgetfulness I am sadly apt to neglect the former.Real friends have already given me that cordiality ofregard which makes all other presents appear asnothing, except as pledges and memorials of attachment; and in that view they have a great value, and avivid, efficient influence."Soon after his settlement at Barmouth he wrote toMr. Buxton.Barmouth, Sept. 3, 1823.My dear Buxton,Oh how much I wish you and yours were all atthis place ! If you have any passion for rocks andmountains here it might be gratified to the utmost ofyour desires. And there is another, and to your1823. MR. NORTH. 197friendly heart I know a still more powerful attractive,in the person of Mr. North the Irish barrister, whois staying here with his lady (the sister of LeslieForster) for a short time. I own I had formed a verydifferent idea of his exterior and manners. YourIrish man of genius commonly has somewhat volcanicabout him ; flash, and fertility, and now and then apuff of smoke too, though often also with fine coruscationsand aspirations of flame and starry scintillations ;but North's manner is so quiet, and soft, and insinuating,that I should never have guessed him to be anIrishman ; though you cannot hear him converse evenfor a few minutes, without conceiving both respectand regard for him.(< I hope you are not as much out of humourwith me as I am with myself for not having writtento you sooner. Really my eyes have been muchworse than usual. Indeed the sea commonly disagreeswith them. As for one or two queries whichyou put to me, it was rather the effect of yourkind wish to make me an associate in your speculations(which I assure you I love to be) than any needyou could have of my counsel, which led you to putthem. For your going to the West Indies, mostdecidedly, No. And I own I should require argumentswhich have not occurred to my own mind tomake me approve of your sending out any one toinquire into facts. Though if you could employany confidential person there to inquire after goodwitnesses if we should need them, that might be avery useful search. As to your Review, it must be198 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1823.a useful occupation to yourself, if even you shouldnot print it, since you will thereby accumulate andapply valuable stores of information. The seasonhas been very ungenial, and there has been muchillness passim. I have been hoping for summertill the almanac calls it autumn. But as we havebooks here, we may set bad weather at defiance.We are almost on a meridian. I sincerely say, thatit would greatly gratify me to be able to join parties.Our high west wind would this very day carry us toyou in a balloon in a few hours.But, my dear friend, I don't like to conclude withoutone serious word. Indeed were I so to do, myletter would be a very unfaithful picture of my mind,and a letter to a friend ought to be quite a copy of it.For my most affectionate thoughts and feelings aboutyou and yours are serious; far above the region oflevities and frivolities. May it please God, my dearfriend, to bless you with a long course of usefulness,and honour, and comfort ; and may you and I, and allthat are most dear to us respectively, after havingfilled up our. appointed course according to the will ofGod, in His faith, and fear, and love, as redeemed andgrateful purchases of the blood of Christ, be receivedinto that world of peace, and love, and joy, where allwill be holiness and happiness for evermore sowishes, so prays,Your sincere and affectionate Friend,W. WILBERFORCE.1823. MOUNTAINOUS COUNTRIES. 199P. S. I have not time to say what I ought aboutyour article on Captain Manby's plan. But I admireand love Manby.T. F. Buxton Esq."TO LADY OLIVIA B. SPARROW.Barmouth, North Wales, Sept. 16, 1823.sf My dear Friend,I need not assure you, that you and yours havebeen much in my mind, and are at this time peculiarlyso. Though you are a resident of a flat country,you are as full as any one ought to be of kind feelingstowards your friends. But I really believe it isnot a mere imagination, that in the case of a morecold-blooded creature like myself, a country of lakes,arid 'rocks, and mountains, like that which I am nowinhabiting, appears to call forth all the affections intoaugmented animation. The feeling extends to thosethat are absent from me, and as when I was a veryyoung man, (a very young man understand,) I wasalways in danger of falling in love when I was an inhabitantof romantic countries, so even now the samesublime scenery warms my heart with a doublemeasure of friendship, and I can call around me theimages of the friends I love, though hundreds of milesasunder, and climb with them in imagination themountain's brow, and watch the rushing of the waterfall.I wish however that you were here. I neverwas at any sea place at all to be compared with this ;and the only objection to the place that is at all reasonable,I mean that of the sand being so fine that200 LIFE OF Wilberforce. 1823.it blows like the whirlwind of the African deserts,does not at all apply to two or three houses that arebuilt on an eminence above the village, in the best ofwhich we reside.And now, my dear friend, farewell. May the bestblessings be continued to be poured out on you, andon those most dear to you. Believe meEver sincerely and affectionately yours,W. Wilberforce."From this retirement he watched with intenseinterest the progress of his cause. " I am expectingtidings of the reception given in the West Indies tothe account of the parliamentary proceedings, andmore especially of Mr. Canning's proposals." 2 " Myheart and head are full of .West Indian matters." ?Barham's pamphlet has been read to me, and youwere right in remarking that it is in our favour. It isreally creditable both to his understanding and principles,and shows that he must have spent much timein devising his plan." 4 ' ' I wish that I could be aseasy about insurrections as you and Stephen. Thatthey would not happen if the people on the spot reallyapprehended them, and would take reasonable meansof guarding against them, I verily believe, but rebussic stantibus, I have ever been, I own, and still am,afraid on that head. Yet what can we do but act ascautiously as justice and humanity will allow?" 52 To Charles Grant Esq. Sept. 13.3 To J. Stephen Esq. Oct. 20.1 To Z. Macaulay Esq. Sept. 20. * Ib. Oct. 13.1823. FEAR OF INSURRECTIONS. 201His anxiety had been increased by the measures intowhich government had been led by the fallacious representationsof the colonists. His complaints ofthe cruelty of the driving system, and of its destructiveeffect upon the negroes, had been warmly met bythe assertion that the whip was carried into the fieldas a mere badge of authority. This positive assertionwas unhappily believed by ministers ; and assuch a sign of office was painful and degrading, theyat once ordered its disuse in the Crown colonies.The arrival of this order caused such alarm amongthe whites, that the local governors would not ventureon its publication. Yet the domestic slavessoon gathered from the violent language of theplanters, that some great measures which concernedtheir race had been urged upon their masters. Famemagnified the rumour, and it was whispered that theyalone stood between the black and liberty. The excitementwas soon general, and broke out in Demerarainto open insurrection, in which some white men losttheir lives, and for which many blacks afterwardssuffered. These results Mr. Wilberforce had dreaded,as soon as he heard the measures which governmenthad taken. " What ! " he at once exclaimed, " havethey given such an order without preparation, andwithout explaining their purpose to the slaves whyit is positive madness ! "The mischief however, as usual, was charged uponhimself. Even " Mr. Canning's private secretarystated that the insurrection in Demerara had beeninstigated by Wilberforce, Buxton, and Co. NowK 3202 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1823,I," adds his informant, " have no scruple in saying,that in whatever degree the disturbances inDemerara are connected with England, they arethe work of Canning, Bathurst, and Co., and notof your firm. You may remember how I heldup my hands in utter astonishment at hearing thatthey had begun their operations by an act of directinterference between master and slave, and thatof the most delicate and difficult description. Thewhip is the grand badge of slavery in the apprehensionof the slaves, who feel it as the prominentmark of their servile state ; its removal wouldnaturally be but another name for emancipation.Our plan was certainly of a very different kind.They should have begun with all those reforms whichwould have had a wonderful influence, without seemingdirectly and suddenly to weaken the master'sauthority. These acting silently and progressivelywould have prepared the way for the great change ofsubstituting some other impulse to labour for thewhip." 6I am clear," replies Mr. Wilberforce, 7 "thatwe should become the assailants, and charge governmentwith provoking the insurrection. As tothe mode of carrying reforms into operation, I havethought precisely with you. The slaves it appears tome should be called together, and told that henceforththey :would not be flogged at the time, (in the field,)but at night after the day's work, if they had not6 Z. Macaulay Esq. to \V. Wilberforce Esq. Nov. 11.7 To Z. Macaulay Esq. Nov. 13.1823. PERSONAL ATTACKS. 203conducted themselves properly. Surely if they couldunderstand the proclamation read to them from theKing after the Barbadoes insurrection, they couldcomprehend this."This was not the language of one who had trifledwith the safety of the whites. But no moderationcould disarm his opponents. Private calumny, theestablished weapon of West Indian warfare, awokein all its strength ; and the virulence of Cobbett,who amongst his many changes was constant onlyin his hatred to the friends of Africa, was reinforcedby fresh allies. Even his retirement inNorth Wales could not withdraw Mr. Wilberforcefrom these attacks. On settling at Barmouth hefound that a clergyman officiated in English in apublic room, when the service in the parish churchwas in the Welsh language. Like the other visitors,he availed himself gladly of the opportunity.But for this simple act he was, a few weeks afterwards,declared by a Sunday newspaper to have setupa conventicle in opposition to the Church, andwas held forth as a secret enemy of all our mostvalued institutions. Nor were these his sole assailants; a scurrilous "voice from Jamaica" chargedhim with the grossest falsehood ; while its authorboldly denied, from his own personal experience, thereligious destitution of the slaves. 8 These personalattacks he was disposed to leave as usual without8 " I have myself," said Mr. Bridges, " celebrated 187 marriagessince I came into this parish." On inquiry it proved that all but threeof them had been got up at the time, in order to furnish an answer toMr. Wilberforce' s Appeal.204 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1823.any notice. " John Bull for three or four weekspast has been abusing me grossly. Blessed be God itis groundlessly. One of his paragraphs was sent methe other day, with only these three words, ' Thou vilehypocrite ! ' I should have been thirty or forty years inpublic life to little purpose, if this discomposed me." 9My judgment is clearly as to myself that it willbe best to let him go on ; to give him rope, accordingto the common saying. Indeed if I have been rightlyinformed, such general abuse would not be deemed alibel by the lawyers. And really any personal feelingswhether concerning you or myself," he tells Mr.Macaulay, 10 " are lost in my sense of the malignityof attempting to deter people from becoming the advocatesof a public question, by pouring forth uponthem all the venom they can secrete or imbibe. Butreally I am falling into John Bull's trap, for I am expendingon him my eyesight of which I have toolittle, and keeping too long in the house, instead ofbreathing the fresh air of the country." " Bridges'spamphlet has been read to me, but it is really belowcriticism, though shamefully discreditable in someparts." 11 " The joke about the Virgin Islands is butmiddling, but for a hoax, (a word which I abominatehowever, and would express by a still shorter monosyllable,)the statement itself is not bad, and I thinkyou assign to it too severe an epithet in styling itmalignant." 12The conduct of St. Paul in sending back the fugitDiary, Nov. 23. w To Zachary Macaulay Esq. Oct. 31.11 Ib. Sept. 8. 12 ib. Oct. 8.1823. MR. BRIDGES'S PAMPHLET. 205time Onesimus was brought against him in one ofthese attacks. " St. Paul," he answers 3 " directedPhilemon to regard him as a brother. He did notrend the civil tie that bound him to his master by individualpower. No more do we ; but by directinghim to be treated as a brother, did he not substantiallyclaim for him even more than we ask for negroslaves ? And Onesimus had been a thief as well asarun-away. Yet to these gentlemen I would reply,in Johnson's language to Miller, I am glad they readthe Scriptures at all, and for any purpose."One error was found in his Appeal which he beggedmight be corrected in a new edition. " It was inadvertence,for I knew it was Penn and Enables, notEnables and Vernon, who were the captors of Jamaica.Mr. Bridges has hit the blot, and so diddear, kind Inglis. But Bridges erroneously imputesto me a mistake as to the Caribs of St. Vincent's,whom he confounds with the yellow Caribs, of whomI knew more than he did ; poor Sir William Younghaving often shown me a picture of the last family ofthem. I wish," he concludes his letter, " that youcould view the prospect from my window. CaderIdris in all his grandeur. But you, my dear friend, arebetter employed; brightening a crown I trust forfuture honour, and benefiting your fellow-creatures."14Mr. Macaulay, who was about to notice Mr.Bridges's pamphlet, begged him to point out someof its misrepresentations. " Such a performance,"13 Private Mem. * To Z. Macaulay Esq. Sept. 18.206 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1823.he replied, "could, I should have thought, do noharm with any who were well affected to our object.My chief difficulty in thinking over it was, that thewriter had subjected himself to charges so grave thatI scarcely liked to urge them. However tomorrowD. V. I will take it in hand again. In truth I mustbegin by having it read through to me, for dearGrant's death has forced it entirely out of mythoughts." 15 "How easy a dismission, and how desirableto one so assuredly prepared as he ! Oh hewas indeed a true Christian." 16 " I can sincerelysay," he told Mr. Harford, " that he was one of thevery best men I ever knew. And had he enjoyedin early youth the advantages of a first-rate education,he would have been as distinguished in literatureas he was in business. He lived so habituallyabove this world, as to be ready to be called at anymoment into the next ; and I cannot but believe thatit was in mercy he was spared all those bodily sufferingswhich were likely to be very great in the dissolutionof a frame so firmly compacted as his. Hewill be a great public loss, though we are called uponto praise the goodness of God in not taking himfrom us till he had been enabled to sow and cultivatethe good seed in India, so as to insure, humanlyspeaking, a large and continually augmenting harvest."These bold imputations of hypocrisy and falsehoodfurthered in the end the cause they were intended toobstruct, by forcing on the defenders of the negro a15 To Z. Macaulay Esq. Nov. 17. l6 Diary, Nov. 2.1823. HIS PARTIAL RETIREMENT. 207still more searching investigation of the colonial system.Then was laid open that prison-house abhorredby God and man, and those secrets were revealedwhich posterity will view with equal wonder and abhorrence.But from this tale of horrors we may turnaside. Age, and increasing infirmities, prevented Mr.Wilberforce from bearing here that main part whichhe had occupied in his warfare of twenty yearsagainst the Slave Trade. To superintend the productionof evidence, to watch the changes of thepublic mind, to procure or circulate information, tofix the stations of his various instruments or coadjutors;these had then been his care, and they hadoften cost more labour and anxiety than the merefighting of the cause through parliament. But thesehe now resigned to other hands."What a good pamphlet that is," he tells Mr.Macaulay, 17 " which is taken from the Imperial Magazine! Do you know its author ? I half supposethat it is only yourself in another form, for I knowthat it cannot be Stephen, and you and he are for our cause. I am almost good fornothing, and I rejoice that there are younger andbetter labourers." " The decay of my memory isenforced on me continually, and indeed, I perceivedit as long ago as before I resigned the representationof Yorkshire. It powerfully strengthened my determinationto relinquish that honourable and useful station,though I did not talk much about it at thetime." 18 But though he thought it most expedient'7 Sept. 30. ' '8 TO J. Stephen Esq. Aug. 30.208 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1823.to commit to other hands the main conduct of theincreasing controversy, he would not shrink fromsuch exertion as was still within his power, and returnedtherefore to London in December, to take hisshare in the approaching discussions.On his road he halted at Lord Grosvenor's, andstaid afterwards with several friends whose neighbourhoodhe entered. During one of these halts hewrote to a son at college.Yoxall Lodge, Nov. 30, 1823.My dear ,I enclose you the halves of the bank notes ; theremaining halves shall follow. Always, I repeat itmy dear , open your heart to me without reserveon this as on any other subject. There is a vile andbase sentiment current among men of the world, thatif you wish to preserve a friend, you must guardagainst having any pecuniary transactions with him ;but it is a caution altogether unworthy of a Christianbosom. It is bottomed on the supposed superiorvalue of money to every other object, and in a verylow estimate of human friendship. I hope I do notundervalue money, but I prize time at a far higherrate, and I have no fear that any money transactionscan ever lessen the mutual confidence and affectionwhich subsists between us.As to dear 's approaching trial, I am muchless anxious about the result than might be expected,considering my warm affection for him and the valueI set on learning ; but I am satisfied because I am1823. UNIVERSITY HONOURS. 209sure he has been employing his time well. There isoften in the result of public examinations much ofwhat we improperly call chance ; giving it that namebecause we cannot assign the facts to any knowncauses. But 's mind may be easy so far as I amconcerned, though I certainly should rejoice in hissuccess.It is late, and my eyes give indication that it istime for me to stop ; so I will only say, may Godbless you both. I am now in the house at which formany years I used to pass several weeks, sometimesmonths, in my bachelor state, and it affects me deeplyto be now corresponding with four sons, one of thema husband and a father, and two of them at college.So life passes away. May you, my dearest , beever aware of the rapid flight of time, and of the uncertaintyof life, that whenever the summons shall beissued, you may be found ready. Farewell.Ever your most affectionate Father,W. Wilberforce."An affectionate greeting from his old friend HannahMore welcomed him again to London. " I hear,"she wrote, 19 " from others a favourable account of yourhealth. I thank God for this comfort amidst the sadreports I receive of other dear friends."He replied from Lord Calthorpe's seat in Suffolk,to which he had carried down his children for aChristmas visit."> Dec. 26.210 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1824.Suffolk, Jan. 8, 1824.My dear Friend,The string you touched in your last truly kindletter has been vibrating ever since, and makingmusic most delightful to a parent's mental ear; anorgan not commonly noticed, but which is full asmuch in daily exercise as the mind's eye, of which wespeak so familiarly. As I believe my dear son'sgreatest pleasure from his academical success hasarisen out of that which he sees his mother andI have received from it, so my greatest gratificationhas been from the cordial congratulations of kindfriends, and not one of them I can truly say has givenme such sober certainty of waking bliss, as your letterand its enclosure.I do not think I thanked you for your formerhighly entertaining letter, in which you manifestedthat your critical powers are in no degree ' dulled.'I had formed the same estimate of Irving's book ;and I must say I never was more agreeably disappointedthan by the two sermons I heard from him :and, by the way, let me state that I would not gowhen all the town was mocking around him, as theyhad done to Master Betty, or Mr. Kean, nor till Ihad been assured by a very sensible inhabitant ofGlasgow, who had watched him there for three orfour years, that he was a truly good man and activepastor, particularly attentive to the poor. I cannotconceive a more attentive audience than he had for afull hour and a half; and his language (free from all1824. IRVING. 211the affectation and bombast which his ( Orations ' andArgument ' exhibit) was remarkably and even felicitouslyforcible and impressive. I am not so self-conceitedas to suppose that his knowing I was to bepresent, which he did, could dispose him to be morechaste and reasonable than in his printed discourses,but he might have learned from some of the critiquesthat had been published, that his style would not take.I own I think he cannot be a scholar ; no classicaltaste could have borne his turgid affectation. But asyou truly say, it is faulty not merely in point of style.But I have expended on him much more of my littlestock of eyesight than I meant ; and I must not forgetto tell you of the fresh proofs I have receivedduring my summer's peregrinations, of the greatlyimproved state of society in this country since I cameinto life, and of the hopeful promises of future good,which this moral advancement holds out to us. Everywhereschools ; and schools in which religious instructionis attended to I met fresh traces, my dearfriend, of the blessed effects of your writings.As for John Bull, I can truly say that I am fullas callous as I ought to be to the calumnies of partybitterness. The Barmouth story of my helping to setupan irregular church service, and forsaking that ofthe parish, was not only not conformable to truth, butopposite to it. But this justification must be to yousuperfluous. I am indignant, however, to hear thatthe vile falsehoods circulated against our dear, excellentMacaulay, have obtained credit in some circles inwhich one would have hoped there would been more212 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1824.of the spirit of English justice, if not of Christiancharity, than to suffer people to give credence to unprovedassertions to the discredit of a man who hadpreserved the good opinion for twenty-five years of anumber of respectable friends, who had witnessed hisconduct in domestic and social life. If any thing canmake the people of this country submit to a censorshipof the press, it will be this cannibal malignity inthe devouring private characters. The false judgmentsof our character and conduct that are sometimesformed even by good men, often endear tomethe idea of that blessed world where, at least,justice shall be done us, and where I trust many willembrace each other with mutual love, who are herescowling at each other, as Dr. Chalmers would say,with jealous defiance.But I must lay down my pen, which I have used forsome time almost without looking at it. Your eyeswill be taxed I fear to spare my own. Farewell, mydear friend, may Heaven's best blessings be abundantlypoured forth on you. Lady Olivia Sparrow ishere ; speaking of her son-in-law in very gratifyingterms. Simeon just gone ; better than usual. Hereis a large house, collecting from all quarters. Youare not forgotten by any of us. My dear wife andchildren, if they knew of my writing, would send theassurance of their respect and attachment.Ever affectionately yours,W. WILBERFORCE."Jan. 28th. We returned from Stratton Park1824. CANNING'S PLAN. 213never were we received with greater kindness than bySir Thomas and Lady Baring, and the whole family.They appear the benevolent fosterers of the distressed,and promoters of the improvement of the lower orders.Went there chiefly to bring my dear children acquaintedwith such worthy people." 20In February parliament met, and Mr. Wilberforcewas at his post. " Feb. 3rd. House met. Dined atlodgings Buxton and several others. Then HouseBrougham clever first day's speech and address :inculcating on the House to be temperate. 4th.Webster and Hanker with me about the Demerarainsurrection. 5th. Stephen's book out to-day. 6th.Galling on Lord Melville about the naval abominations; and conferring with Brougham about circuitquestion. 14th. Meeting at African Institution. Wewaited on Canning about twelve. Sadly disappointedby his plan of merely setting up the particulars heconsented to last year by an Order of Council inTrinidad ; not in Guiana because of the insurrection.With Canning till two. At lodgings till three.Then Duke of Gloucester's, where Lord Lansdown,Stephen, and Brougham added to our consultation tillfive. Then home. Dined at Duke of Gloucester'sLord and Lady Lansdown, Lord and Lady Roseberry ;Brougham and Mackintosh were to windward ofme most pleasant conversation. Home latish." 21I drew the highest prize in the lottery ; I sat by SirJ. Mackintosh." 22March 1st, Went to the House for Martin's Bill*> Diary. Ib. March 1. Con. Mem.214 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1824.on cruelty to animals. It is opposed on the ground ofthe rich having their own amusements, and that itwould be hard to rob the poor of theirs a most fallaciousargument ; and one which has its root in a contemptfor the poor. I would zealously promote the realcomfort of the poor. I love the idea of having comfortablecauseway walks for them along the publicroads. This is most strictly congenial to the Britishconstitution, which, in its political as well as its religiousregulations, takes special care of the convenienceof the poorer classes. The great distinctionbetween our constitution and that of the ancientrepublics is, that with them the general advantagewas the object, without particular regard to individualcomfort : whereas in England individual comfort hasbeen the object, and the general advantage has beensought through it." 23The debate which he expected was put off byAbercrombie's coming forward with a case of breachof privilege against the Chancellor, for charging himon the bench with falsehood. Brougham spoke admirably,and Abercrombie excellently ; indeed Scarletttalso, and all the lawyers, did well. Canning spokeadmirably in mitigation, and Peel defended as well ascould be, but the case was too strong to be put by withoutan authorized apology. So though I longed to goaway I staid and voted, 102 to 150. I seldom recollect,certainly not for many years, suffering so much pain."I could not forget the friendly intercourse of formerdays, when Sir J. Scott used to be a great deal at myss Con. Mem.1824. LORD Eldon. 215house. I saw much of him then, and it is no morethan his due to say, that when he was Solicitor andAttorney-general under Pitt, he never fawned andflattered as some did, but always assumed the toneand station of a man who was conscious that he mustshow he respected himself if he wished to be respectedby others." 24He was now about to come forward again as an advocatefor the personal protection of the most despisedportion of his fellow-subjects. " March 3rd. Hearingan anti-pamphlet by a Dominica planter, imputingto me the grossest falsehoods, and making the mostunfounded assertions. Busy with architect and builderabout the great nuisance we have discovered' in thishouse." It is in little things that men are seen. Someof his family were evidently much discomposed at thediscovery here alluded to, but Mr. Wilberforce wascheerful and happy, saying, " It is only as if I hadlost 4 or 5000. These are the things that are toseason the insipidity of life. Johnson says, ' All menhave their troubles and annoyances, but the man ofthe world is too wise to talk about them.' I am surean old man should be too wise to feel them." Atthe same time he received a letter from a gentlemanin want asking for 100, " Ah," he said, " these arethe things which go to my heart."His own cause was now coming on. " Buxton, andMacaulay, and I consulted about the tone to be takenwhen Canning should bring his plan forward." 25 Thedebate came on by the 16th. " Canning opened in a** Con. Mem. * Diary, March 5.216 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1824.very guarded speech. Buxton strong, above concertpitch. I was better voiced and better heard thanusual." 26 He was " determined to wash his hands ofthe blood which might be spilled by thus trifling withthe hopes of men." 27 He spoke out therefore freely.He condemned strongly the uncertain tone of government,as mischievous alike to the slaves and to theirowners, and warned them, as the fruit of his own longexperience, that no effectual reforms would be made bythe colonies themselves. " I fear that, despairing ofrelief from the British parliament, the negroes willtake the cause into their own hands and endeavour toeffect their own liberation. No man living would moresincerely lament such conduct than myself. I canmost solemnly declare that the subject of my dailyand nightly prayer that the hope and desire whichI feel from the very bottom of my soul is that sodreadful an event may not happen. Still it is a consequencewhich I cannot but apprehend, and as anhonest man I feel it my duty to state that apprehension.Let the House only consider what a terriblething it is for men who have long been strangers tothe light, when the bright beams of day have begunto break in upon their gloom, to have the boon suddenlywithdrawn, and be afresh consigned to darkness.Whatever parliament may do, I implore themto do it speedily and firmly. Let them not proceedwith hesitating steps ; let them not tamper with thefeelings and the passions which they have themselvesexcited. ' For hope deferred maketh the heart sick'"26 Diary. 27 Mr. Buxton's Con. Mem. of the preceding day.1824. CANNING. 217On this occasion he spoke long and powerfully, butthe effort seemed greater than his strength would bear,and left behind evident traces of over-exertion. Hewas in the House indeed a few days later, and heardLord John Russell's motion about the Frenchevacuating Spain. He made no hand of it. Canninginvincibly comic." ** He had gone to the House unwell,and not intending to remain, but had been enchainedby Mr. Canning's admirable humour. He returnedhome quite full of it ; and as he repeated to his family theexquisite raillery of the " light horseman's uniform,"and " heavy Falmouth coach," was overpowered, ashescarce ever was, with laughter which he could notrepress. " Canning's drollery of voice and mannerwere inimitable ; there is a lighting up of his features,and a comic play about the mouth, when thefull fun of the approaching witticism strikes his ownmind, which prepares you for the burst which is tofollow." 29 Yet he would not allow himself the use ofthese effective weapons, though he had them alwaysat command. " Often during a debate," says Mr.Buxton, " would he whisper to me hints and witticismswhich would have filled the House with merriment,and overwhelmed his opponent. But whenhe rose to speak, though he went close to the verythoughts he had poured into my ear, he restrained himselffrom uttering them, nor would he ever give ventto any one allusion which could give another pain."This night he went to his room unwell, though not,it was hoped, seriously ; but an insidious disease was2s Diary, March 19. 29 Con. Mem.VOL. V. L218 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1824.already secretly at work, and he was soon in the utmostdanger from an inflammation of the lungs. Hisperfect patience, and the bursts of love and thankfulnesswhich were ever breaking forth throughout thisseason of restlessness and languor, can never be forgottenby those who watched with the deepest anxietybeside the sick-bed of such a father. He was continuallyrepeating what shortly before he had observedto Mr. Stephen ; 30 " No man has been more favouredthan I, for even when I am ill my complaints occasionlittle suffering." Beckoning to him one of hissons when he was scarce able to speak, he whispered,At this moment I have your face before me whenI left you at school in Leicestershire." 31To Mr. Babington, who had expressed his pleasureat witnessing the great affection borne him by hisfamily, he wrote in reply " No physician can devise,and no money can purchase, such a cordial restorativeto a sick man. And then how exceedingly favourableare these domestic blessings to a state of heart pleasingto God ! " " How much have I seen some charactersimproved, even independently of all religiousprinciples, by the softening and stimulating powerwhich He has graciously imparted to these strongaffections." 32It would indeed be strange if it had been otherwise.He was beloved in general society ; but if hesparkled there, he shone at home. None but hisown family could fully know the warmth of hisheart, or the unequalled sweetness of his temper.so Nov. 29, 1823. 21 yid. vol. iv. p. 73 3 * Con. Mem.1824. DOMESTIC CHARACTER. 219With the strictest truth they can affirm, that neverin the most unguarded moments of domestic privacydid they see obscured, in word or action, the full sunshineof his kindliest affections."His every deed and word that he did sayWas like enchantment, which through both the eyes,And both the ears, did steal the heart away."One of the first letters which he wrote when convalescent,was to Hannah More.TO MRS. HANNAH MORE.Near London, May 10, 1824.My dear Friend,I should disobey conscience alike and feeling,if I were not to assign to you the priority over all mynumerous correspondents, and except a few lines toour sweet Lady Olivia, into which I was seduced bythe grateful impulse produced by a most kind letterfrom her three days ago, this is the first of my epistolaryperformances since my long disuse of my pen.Not that I consider myself as having now resumed it.Mrs. W. still franks for me, (by post-office permission,)and I do not even yet open my own letters,much less do I read, or rather hear them. And I amconscious there is some ground for the excessive solicitudewith which my dearest wife and most affectionatechildren warn me against overworking. Forthe present I am completely animalized ; and havingnearly re-entered upon all my natural tastes andrelishes as to food, (in sickness we learn expert2220 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1824.mentally that such ' little things are great to littleman) I am eating, and drinking, and sleeping, andairing, and exercising, as the main business of life.But for this I have Lord Bacon's authority : indeedI trust a still higher than his. For each and all ofthese is associated with a grateful sense of the loving-kindnessof that gracious Being, whose goodness andmercy continue to be so profusely poured out on me,and who thus bountifully strews with flowers theway the narrow way, I humbly hope, that leads, ifwe obey his blessed drawings, to that better worldwherein all will be congenial with the unalloyed andunobstructed influences of the God of holiness andlove.But I am scarcely leaving myself room to sayhow deeply I feel your kindness, and that of manydear friends, in taking such an affectionate interestin my recovery. Really were there no loss of time,it ought to be a sufficient recompence for all thesufferings of sickness, (but my sufferings were by nomeans such as yours,) to have experienced such un-excitable,(I find no word ready made, so I mustfabricate one,) such unexceedable attentions by nightand by day as were incessantly lavished on me. Howoften did I think of the state of poor soldiers, ornegro slaves, who undergoing pains and miseries fargreater than mine, were destitute of almost all mybodily alleviations, and still more of all my mentalcordials !My dear friend, I must say farewell. Prayfor me, that I may endeavour to use to the glory1824. TEMPER IN ILLNESS. 221of God and the benefit of my fellow-creatures, whatevermeasure of efficiency His good providence mayallot me. The seventy-first Psalm is often in mymind. May it be more and more applicable to meinits best purposes. Though in this letter I havebeen such an egotist, I assure you I am not such inmind. On the contrary, both my head and heart areteeming with sentiments and feelings called forth bythe contemplation of the correspondent to whom Iam writing. Your sheaves scarcely admit of an addition; but may you be spared to us yet a season, ifit please God, to excite the sympathies of the largecircle of those who esteem and love you for yourwork's sake. You will witness I doubt not hereafterin your paradisaical state the blessed harvest whichyour labours will long continue to be the instrumentof bringing into the granary of God.Ever affectionately yours,W. Wilberforce.I must go and get a frank. Friendly remembrancesto Miss Crowd if with you."The last entry of his Diary before he was confinedwholly to his bed, was, " Poor Smith the missionarydied in prison at Demerara ! The day of reckoningwill come;" and the first public business he attempted,after leaving his sick room, was, (June 1st,)Preparing for Smith the missionary's business. Iwas at the House the first time for eight weeks ormore. Brougham made a capital speech, by MakingLIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1824.tosh well termed impregnable. I doubt not he willbe great in reply. Mackintosh's own was most beautiful,his mind teemed with ideas." 33 The decisionwas postponed till the 11th. In the interval he says,I very much wish, if my voice should be strongenough, to bear my testimony against the scandalousinjustice exercised upon poor Smith." 3 * " The caseproved against him is greatly short of what I thoughtit might have been. I myself once saw a missionary'sjournal, and its contents would have been capable ofbeing perverted into a much stronger charge of promotingdiscontent amongst the slaves. Had I happenedfor instance to correspond with Smith, thatalone would have hanged him." ^On the day of the adjourned debate, he " wentto Stephen's to be quiet for three or four hours,and was so, and read papers, and thought. YetI quite forgot my topics for a speech, and madesad work of it. Brougham, Lushington, Williams,Denman all else did well, Canning also well. Igreatly doubt if I had not better give up taking partin the House of Commons." Once more he solemnlyrecorded his conviction, that the only real hope ofthe negro slaves must be from the British parliament.To the House, and during Mackintosh's speech onthe South American Independence petition, I arrangedmy own protest on presenting a petition from Carlow.Baring at first strong, but afterwards most kindlycomplimentary to me. I felt it my duty to enter mysolemn protest against the plan of government as33 Diary. 34 TO J. Stephen Esq. June 4. MS. Mem.1824. HIS LAST SPEECH IN PARLIAMENT. 223hopeless and dangerous. It is nothing short of infatuationto depend on the colonial assemblies forimitating a model to be set up in Trinidad. If mischiefhappens, as I fear, it will not be chargeable onme." 36The West Indians," he said, " abhor alike theend we have in view, and the means by which wehope to reach it. They frankly avow that from theemancipation of their slaves they look for inevitableruin ; whilst all their prejudices are revolted by eachof our remedial measures. If they agreed with us asto our grand object, we might hope to lessen bydegrees their aversion to our several steps ; or werethose measures singly acceptable to them, we mighthope gradually and almost insensibly to lead them toour end. But what can we hope, when they abhoralike both means and end ? It is with reluctance andpain I come forward, but I esteem it my boundenduty to protest against the policy on which we arenow acting. ' Liberal animal mean.' May it pleaseGod to disappoint my expectations, and to renderthe result more favourable than I anticipate."These prophetic words were the last which heuttered in the House of Commons. Ten days laterhe set off, after attending a meeting held in honourof James Watt, for Lord Gambler's seat at Iver ;and on the road was seized with a new attackof illness. When he reached Lord Gambler's, hewas " but just able to be helped up-stairs to bed," 3Twhere he lay in an alarming state for almost a month.3<3 Diary, June 15. 37 Diary.224 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1824.This second attack left him in so shattered a condition,as to enforce upon him the necessity of absoluterepose, and as soon as he could move with safety,he took possession of a small house bordering on UxbridgeCommon.Here he lived in entire seclusion, though by nomeans in idleness. " We have been living veryquietly ; never visiting, scarcely receiving a singlevisitor. Often we have a little family readingin the evenings after tea, (Robertson's America,)which I should always like, if it did not compel meto write my letters in the morning, when I wish tobe employed in more solid work. Oh that God wouldenable me to execute my long-formed purpose ofwriting another religious book. I have also a wishto write something political ; my own life, and Pitt'stoo, coming into the discussion." 38He seemed almost to think that this temporary intervalof rest needed some excuses ; and evidently beganthe following letter with that feeling on his mind.TO ZACHARY MACAULAY ESQ.My dear Macaulay,I hope my old friends do me the justice tobelieve, that if for health's sake I estrange myself somuch from them, it is of necessity, not from choice.I am much obliged to you for the New Times ; butyou need only name the paper, for I take it in, andthe signature of Angles would alone have sufficed formaking me set my reader to work.ae Diary.1824. SIERRA LEONE. 225You did not mention the subject of the laboursin which you are now engaged. I cannot help wishingSierra Leone and its history may be one of them.Government is far too economical in its African expenditure;and by enlightening the public you wouldlay the ground for a more liberal use of the meansboth of civil and spiritual improvement. You haveyourself seen so much of the interior of our publicoffices, as to supersede the necessity of my unveilingtheir actual state ; but from permanent causes, thoughthe effect may be a little varied according to thecharacter and habits of the principal and the undersecretary,there are vices in the Colonial Office,which, according to one's state of spirits, make oneweep with grief and vexation, or knit one's brow withindignation. Farewell, my dear friend, and believe me,Sincerely and affectionately yours,W. Wilberforce."As the year advanced he moved by Dr. Chambers'sadvice to Bath " the worst of all places for gettingany business done. There is walking between theglasses and after the glasses, and then in rolls the tideof visitors full as regularly as that of the ocean, andlike that, this human influx makes its way throughand over every obstacle . . . Continual knockings whileI have been writing, and at last one intruder hasactually made a lodgement." 39 But against the annoyancesof these interruptions were to be set thosegrateful meetings with old friends into which no man39 Letter to his daughter.L 3226 LIFE OF Wilberforce, 1824.ever entered with a keener relish than himself. Somesuch he was now enjoying. " Oct. 19th. VenerableRowland Hill dined with me aetas 80. 22nd. JohnSmith called yesterday and talked very pleasingly,full of benevolence, intelligence, and informationvery kind to me has got an Artillery cadetship formefor the son of poor Lieut. S., and with an affectionatespirit that quite warms me with gratitude andaffection." 40Not unfrequently he fell in here with some friendor acquaintance of his early life. " I talked withMr. Neville in the Pump-room, whom I had metat Ex ton near fifty years ago : he 82 eetat anastonishing man." It was a striking sight to witnesssuch recognitions, in which general courtesy unfoldeditself gradually into a more intimate exchangeof early recollections. The sunshine of his own oldage was shed for the time at least over his companion;and day after day as his eye found withpleasure his recovered friend, he would join his sideand delight him with his powers of conversation ;watching all the time for every opening by which hecould lead on their intercourse to higher subjects, andgild, if need was, the latter days of his companion withthe peaceful hope in which he walked himself. Hisstay at Bath was closed by visits to Blaize Castleand to Barley Wood. " Nov. 29th. Reached it at aquarter-past four saw our friend for about half anhour before dinner. dined with us. He was inthe army when young ; has since taken orders and10 Diarv.1825. CHRISTMAS IN HIS FAMILY. 227seems intent on acting consistently with his profession,though the interest he manifestly takes in militarymatters reminds one of an officer in clergymen'sclothes. Some relations in the army bring him acquaintedwith military men and anecdotes. Nov. 30th.Sat with Hannah More about an hour and half, andshe as animated as ever I knew her, quoting authors,naming people, &c. off about one after prayingwith her."After a few days he " had returned again to hiscottage retirement near Uxbridge, to collect hischildren round him, according to the good old Englishcustom. I lay no little stress on the bringing togetherat Christmas all the members of the family ifit can be effected. Such an anniversary, annuallyobserved, tends to heal any little divisions, and tocherish mutual attachment." 41 The new year openedaccording to his wish. " Our dear boys living inmuch harmony. What cause have I for gratitude,seeing my five children, my son's wife, and two grandchildrenall round my table ! Praise the Lord, O mysoul." 42 Never did any man live in more perpetualsunshine, or shed its cheerful light more constantlyaround him ; yet there was a deep vein of pathoswhich mingled with his gaiety of temper, not perceivedperhaps by the superficial eye, but discernibleto close observers in his great tenderness ofspirit. " I sometimes think," he said of himself,that I have the art (though I am sure undesigned)of concealing from my most intimate associates my41 Letter to his son. Diary, Jan. 1, 1825-228 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1825.real character. One particular I doubt if you haveever observed. I ought however to say that it is notconstant : but I am at times much more disposed tomelancholy than you would imagine." " The accountI hear of you all from my son is very comfortable ; atthe same time I know that the young hands do notlook very deep in their view of people of our time oflife, and that while all is outwardly cheerful, andtherefore to their eyes unclouded sunshine, we parentsmay have our secret anxieties and griefs." 43One important question had occupied his thoughtsall through the autumn. His strength had beenvisibly impaired by the severe attacks of the springand summer ; and he was strongly recommended toretire from public life. He could not bring himselfat once to acquiesce in this decision. " The idea ofretiring and not endeavouring to bear " his ( ' testimonyonce more in support of truth and righteousness' hefound " very painful." 44 This was not from any restlesswish to be in action. " There was no particular,"he had three years before this time declared to Dr.Chalmers, " in which his estimate of things had beenmore corrected than in his judgment of the comparativeusefulness of different individuals. To expressmy sentiments briefly I may say that I more and moreenter into the spirit of that beautiful sonnet of Milton'son his blindness, ending,Who bestBear his mild yoke, they serve him bestThey also serve who only stand and wait.' "43 To T. Babington Esq. Dec. 23. Letter to Z. Macaulay Este.1825. PEERAGE. 229This quietness of mind was increased by his habitualreference of all that concerned himself to the leadingof God's providence. In the course of this autumn,an arrangement was suggested to him by the friendlyzeal of Sir John Sinclair, which would have removedhim to the calmer atmosphere of the Upper House.To your friendly suggestion," was his remarkablereply, ee respecting changing the field of my parliamentarylabours, I must say a word or two; premisingthat I do not intend to continue in public life longerthan the present parliament. I will not deny thatthere have been periods in my life, when on worldlyprinciples the attainment of a permanent, easy, andquiet seat in the legislature, would laye been a prettystrong temptation to me. But, I thank God, I wasstrengthened against yielding to it. For (understandme rightly) as I had done nothing to make it naturallycome to me, I must have endeavoured to go to it ;and this would have been carving for myself, if I mayuse the expression, much more than a Christian oughtto do."His reluctance to retire sprung from deep humility.It was not so much that he wished to do more, asthat he regretted he had done so little. " You kindlygave me," he answers Mr. Harford, " in a moreChristian dialect, Horace's adviceSolve senescentem mature sans equura.Believe me, I clearly recognise the wisdom as well asthe kindness of your counsel, though I scarcely daretrust myself on the topic of my wish, that any LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1824.manning particle of efficiency may be employed morethan my faculties have ever yet been to the gloryof God." " When I consider that my public life isnearly expired, and when I review the many yearsI have been in it, I am filled with the deepestcompunction, from the consciousness of my havingmade so poor a use of the talents committed to mystewardship. The heart knows its own bitterness.We alone know ourselves, the opportunities we haveenjoyed, and the comparative use we have made ofthem. But it is only to your friendly ear that Ibreathe out my secret sorrows. I might be supposedby others to be fishing for a compliment. Well, itis an unspeakable consolation that we serve a graciousMaster, who giveth liberally and upbraided not." 45This was no passing feeling. A year later he wroteto Mr. Gurney.TO J. J. GURNEY.Oct. 24, 1825.My dear Friend,My eyes are indifferent, and were they everso strong I should wear them out, were I to attemptto give expression to the sentiments and feelings withwhich my bosom is overcharged* Let us rejoice andbless God that we live in a land in which we are ableto exert our faculties in mitigating the sufferings, redressingthe wrongs and above all, promoting thebest interests of our fellow-creatures. I sometimesfear we are not sufficiently thankful for this most44 To T. Babington Esq. Oct. 5.1825. DIMINUTION OF OATHS. 231gratifying and honourable distinction ; and perhapsI feel this the more strongly, because in the privateear of a Christian friend I will whisper, that though Ishould not speak truly if I were to charge my parliamentarylife with sins of commission, (for I can callGod to witness, so far as I can recollect, that I alwaysspoke and voted according to the dictates of my conscience,for the public and not for my own privateinterest,) yet I am but too conscious of numerousand great sins of omission, many opportunities ofdoing good either not at all or very inadequatelyimproved. Particularly, from an early period ofmy parliamentary life, I intended to propose a billfor greatly lessening the number of oaths, and onceI carried on a previous inquiry, and had a committeeformed for the purpose. But, alas ! alas ! I havebeen forced to retire from public life re infecta,though I must say that several times I had reason tobelieve that some other members, chiefly officialmen, would take the measure off my hands, and Ialways preferred employing others on such occasions,that I might not be said to be trying to monopolize.But my friends deceived me. Believe me to be ever,my dear friend,Yours very affectionately,W. Wilberforce "Thoroughly had he imbibed the spirit of the precept,which bids us " when we have done all, say webe unprofitable servants," who after forty years ofsuch service could see only his omissions. More LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1825.deed he might have effected if his habits had beenstrictly regular and business-like j but it would havebeen at a great sacrifice of incidental good. Hisdaily tray-full of letters, which in 1806 so alarmedhis colleague Mr. Fawkes, that he exclaimed onseeing it, " If this is to be member for Yorkshire thesooner I am rid of it the better' consumed manyof his best hours ; but they were given up toChristian courtesy," and " the relief of individualdistress." 46 He might have closed his doors againstthe tide of interruptions which flowed in upon himday by day ; but if he had, many a friendless suffererwould have " cried unto the Lord against him." Hegave way therefore to these interruptions upon principle." It appears to me," he said in the review ofhis political life, 47 " that public men in this countryshould consider it one of the duties imposed on themby Providence, to receive and inquire into the caseof distressed persons, who from finding them interestedfor suffering individuals, or classes of mankind,are naturally led to apply to them for the redressof their own grievances, or the supply of theirown wants."On this principle he strictly acted, and by a multitudeof daily charities, as much as by his publicconduct, " urged on the lingering progress of thehuman mind." 48I was with him once," says Lord Clarendon,11 when he was preparing to make an important Diary. v To T. F. Buxton Esq. M. P. May 12, 1825.49 Lord Erskine of W. Wilberforce Esq. Preface to Fox's Speeches.1825. ATTENTION TO INDIVIDUAL DISTRESS. 233tion in the House of Commons. While he was mostdeeply engaged, a poor man called, I think his namewas Sinking, who was in danger of being imprisonedfor a small debt. He could find no one to be boundfor him. Wilberforce did not like to become hissurety without inquiry ; it was contrary to a rulewhich he had made ; but nothing could induce himto send the man away. ' His goods said he, ' willbe sold, and the poor fellow will be totally ruined.'I believe, at last, he paid the debt himself; but I rememberwell the interruption which it gave to hisbusiness, which he would not resume till the case wasprovided for."This was a sample of his life ; and if he now lookedback on many plans of usefulness which he had leftunaccomplished, it was not because his time had beenpassed in ease or self-indulgence, but because he hadnever learned to " stop his ears at the cry of thepoor." Yet though he thought with pain of leavingthese things unattempted, he weighed carefully theadvice of his friends, and set down at this time forserious reflection the followingREASONS FOR RETIRING NOW FROM PARLIAMENT.(FEB. List, 1825.)I have long meant to retire when this parliamentshould terminate ; consequently, the only doubt is,whether to retire now, or at the end of the approachingsession.The question then is, whether my qualified LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1825.tendance during this session affords such a prospectof doing good as to warrant my continuance in parliamentfor its term ?Dr. Chambers does not deem it necessary to forbidmy attendance altogether, but intimates fears thatif an illness should occur, I might not have strengthto stand it.Had I no other promising course of usefulness,it might or rather would be right to run the risk of aseizure, in my present line. But,"I.I hope I may employ my pen to advantage ifI retire into private life ; and,2. My life is just now peculiarly valuable to myfamily all at periods of life and in circumstanceswhich render it extremely desirable, according to appearances,that I should be continued to them.I am not now much wanted in parliament ; ourcause has powerful advocates, who have now takentheir stations.The example of a man's retiring when he feelshis bodily and mental powers beginning to fail him,might probably be useful. The public have been sousedto see persons turning a long-continued seat inparliament to account for obtaining rank, &c. thatthe contrary example the more needed, and it oughtto be exhibited by one who professes to act on Christianprinciples."1825. REASONS FOR RETIRING. 235On these grounds his resolution was soon taken,and forthwith announced to his most intimate acquaintances.TO LADY O. B. SPARROW.Near Uxbridge, Feb. 7, 1825.My dear Friend,Be it known to you, that I have at lengthdetermined to withdraw from parliament. My physiciandid not absolutely require this, but he wouldallow me to attend only on genial days, &c. ; andeven this permission he accompanied by a declarationthat if I should bring on such another attack as I hadlast spring, I probably could not stand it. Thus I hadto balance any little good I might hope to do by thisoccasional attendance in the House of Commons 1 ,where in truth I am not wanted, against the risk oflosing all the benefit and comfort my family, and perhapsa wider circle, might derive from my prolongedcontinuance in private life ; and these being theweights in the two scales, could I doubt which preponderated?I know I need not apologize for presumingthat you will not be indifferent about anyincident that concerns me so deeply. I hope not tobe idle in private life, though less noisy.I have much more to write than my eyes can getthrough, but I did not like to use my amanuensis inwriting to you. It is worse than shaking hands witha friend with one's gloves on. But I must say farewell.I rejoice (we rejoice) to hear Lady Mandeville236 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1825.is going on so well. So this world passes, one retires,another comes forward. But there will be a worldwhere there will be none of these changes, but inwhich, when once, through the infinite goodness ofour God and Saviour, admitted, we shall continue foreverin happiness and glory. May you and I, mydear Lady O., and all we most love, be of that happynumber.Ever yours sincerely and affectionately,W. WILBERFORCE."The same announcement was made to a son at college,in the following letter.Near Uxbridge, Feb. 1.My dear ,I should not like you to hear from commonrumour that I have decided to retire from public life,and therefore, though much pressed for time, I announceto you this to ^me important, and what fromthe affectionate concern my very dear takes inall that belongs to me, will be to him very interestingintelligence. It is to me almost like a change of natureto quit parliamentary life, all the particulars ofwhich have been formed into habits during a courseof almost forty-six years. But after mature reflection,the good I was likely to do in the House ofCommons appeared to be outweighed b y the probabledanger to my life, and the consequent loss of anygood I might yet do in a private station, either to myown family, or to a still wider circle. And it should1825. RETIRES FROM PARLIAMENT. 237be borne in mind, that in this comparison, all thatmay be done in private life was to be balanced, notagainst the effect of the labours of even a single session,but to that of the occasional attendance to which alonemy medical adviser would accede.What cause have I for thankfulness, that in withdrawingfrom the political circle, I retire into thebosom of a family whose affectionate assiduities wouldbe sufficient to cheer the lowest state of poverty anddepression, while I have all around me that can administerto my comfort, or rather enjoyment, in the eveningof life ! Praise the Lord, O my soul. Indeed I hopeI am in some degree, though not sufficiently, gratefulfor all these blessings. No one perhaps has suchcause as myself to adopt the psalmist's declaration,Surely goodness and mercy have followed me allthe days of my life.' Good night, my dear .Our friends the Barrington are staying with us,which leaves me less time for writing even than Ihave eyesight. I know I shall be much pressed tomorrow,so I have taken up a very bad pen to-night.May God bless you the constant wish, as in a fewminutes it will be the prayer, ofYour most affectionate Father,W. Wilberforce."The news of his determination was received withmingled feelings, which were well expressed bySouthey. " I will not say that I am sorry for it, becauseI hope you have retired in time, and will thereforelive the longer as well as more for yourself; but238 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1825.that House will not look upon your like again." 49Your removal gives much pain to me," he heardfrom the member for Hull 50 " in common with thousands.In myself it excites peculiar regret, becauseI have had frequent occasion to confirm the proprietyof my own vote by an appeal to yours, and I nowrecollect with pleasure that I never walked into thelobby and left you in the House." In those whowere now pledged to that great cause which had beenpeculiarly his own, this sorrow was still keener.In the conduct of this cause, he had two yearsbefore named Mr. Buxton as his heir. " I thendevolved my advocateship of the negro slaves onhim, because it would have been wrong to have appointedan oppositionist." 51 He felt most deeplythe importance of keeping this great cause inpossession of its old honourable distinction of beingone in which all party differences were extinguished,Pitt and Fox fighting in the samerank." 52 In this same spirit he now committed toMr. Buxton, rather than to any leading member ofthe House of Commons, 53 (as a " testamentary designation,and to hold him forth as the depositary ofhis principles on West Indian matters," 54 ) his applicationfor the Chiltern Hundreds. " It is the first placethat I ever asked for myself, and for near thirty yearsfor any one else. When the day on which I am toRobert Southey Esq. to W. Wilberforce Esq.*> D. Sykes Esq. * Diary. Letter to Z. Macaulay Esq.53 Mr. Canning, Charles Grant, and Henry Brougham, were respectivelypressed on him by various friends.l To T. F. Buxton Esq.1825. REGRET AT HIS RETIRING. 239lose my franking privilege is fixed, be so good as toletme know, that I may not send heavy packets topoor and distant correspondents after I lose my powerof sending them without cost." 55 Mr. Buxton remindedhim, in his reply, of the inscription which theCarthaginian placed upon the tomb of Hannibal,We vehemently desired him in the day of battle."And Mr. William Smith wrote, " I do hope that ourcause stands well. But I am sure that when it losesyou it suffers a calamitous deprivation. We haveindeed the prospect of brave and able recruits to fillour ranks, but the guiding spirit will long be missed."Scarcely less keen was the regret of others, wholooked forward to the loss of his authority on moraland religious questions.Bedford Square, Feb. 7, 1825.My dear Sir,It is with much regret, though I cannot sayit is with any great surprise, that I hear of your intentionto retire from parliament. It will be a painfulloss to your very numerous friends and to thepublic, but it may be a wise decision as it respectsyourself. After the arduous services in which youhave been engaged for so many years, a little reposemust be very desirable for the sake of your health, forthe comfort of your family, and for the tranquillity ofyour own mind. If, as Lord Coke says, " every manis a debtor to his profession," yet I do not think youare now v any debtor to the public whom you have soTo T. F. Buxton Esq. Feb. 17.240 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1825.long, so faithfully, so disinterestedly, so beneficiallyserved. It must be a satisfaction to you to haveobserved, that the moral tone of the House of Commons,as well as of the nation at large, is muchhigher than when you first entered upon public life jand there can be no doubt that God has made youthe honoured instrument of contributing much to thisgreat improvement. There are I hope some youngmen of promise coming forward, but, alas ! there isno one at present who can take your place ; wouldthat there were many Elisha on whom your mantlemight fall. The prayers of thousands, my dear sir,will follow you into retirement, and mine will be continuedamong the rest, that your valuable life may beprolonged to the latest period as a blessing to yourfamily, to the church of God, and to the world.With earnest desires that your latter years may bethebest, and of course the happiest, and with mostsincere and cordial respect and affection, I ever remain,my dear sir,Your faithful Friend,devoted and grateful Servant,JOSEPH BUTTERWORTH.W. Wilberforce Esq."This was no exaggerated estimate of the value ofhis present services. His place as a mere orator wasstill amongst the very first. When he spoke indeedon the common subjects of political dispute the effectsof age were in a degree visible ; but, to the very last,when he lighted on a thoroughly congenial subject,1825. POWERS OF SPEAKING. 241he broke out into those strains which made Sir SamuelRom illy esteem him " the most efficient speaker inthe House of Commons' and which had long beforeled Pitt himself to say repeatedly, " Of all the men Iever knew, Wilberforce has the greatest natural eloquence."56 Mr. Morritt seems to have formed a veryaccurate conception both of his ordinary powers ofspeaking, and of that measure of decay which they atlast exhibited. " I find' t lie says 7 " that I haverecorded my own general opinion of his oratory andparliamentary exertions, in terms which, though intendedonly to commemorate for my own future reflectionthe more recent impression they made, Iextract from their privacy in my drawer, that youmay be more sure of their being my genuine and impartialjudgment.Wilberforce held a high and conspicuous placein oratory, even at a time when English eloquencerivalled whatever we read of in Athens or in Rome.His voice itself was beautiful'; deep, clear, articulate,and flexible. I think his greatest premeditatedefforts were made for the Abolition of the Trade inSlaves, and in supporting some of the measuresbrought forward by Pitt, for the more effectual suppressionof revolutionary machinations, but he oftenrose unprepared in mixed debate, on the impulse ofthe moment, and seldom sat down without havingstruck into that higher tone of general reasoning andvivid illustration, which left on his hearers the impressionof power beyond what the occasion had calledM Communicated by Lord Harrowby. *7 June 19, 1836.VOL. V. M242 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1825.forth. He was of course unequal, and I have oftenheard him confess that he never rose without embarrassment,and always felt for a while that he waslanguid and speaking feebly, though he warmed as hewent on. I have heard the late Mr. Windham expressthe same discontent with himself, both probablyfrom the high standard of excellence at which theyaimed. I always felt, and have often heard it remarkedby others, that in all his speeches, long or short,there was generally at least from five to ten minutesof brilliance, which even the best orator in the Housemight have envied.<e His own unaffected principles of humility, andhis equally sincere estimate of the judgment and goodintentions of others, which became in advancing lifemore and more predominant, influenced both his lineof oratory, and his reasoning when not in the Houseof Commons. He gradually left off the keenerweapons of ridicule and sarcasm, however well appliedand justly aimed; but with the candour that gavewhat he thought due weight to an adversary's argument,he sometimes (as it seemed to me) with unduediffidence neglected or hesitated to enforce his own.Sometimes also, as on the questions involving peaceor war, the wishes of his heart were at variance withthe conclusions of his understanding, and ( resolutionsof great pith and moment,'Were sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought.'I have more than once remonstrated with him forgivingus in his speech the deliberation which passed1825. HIS INFLUENCE IN THE HOUSE. 243in his own mind, instead of the result to which it ledhim, thus furnishing his opponents with better weaponsthan their own arsenal could supply. Of coursethis led to many an imputation of inconsistency fromthose who loved him not, which those who knew himnot received ; but the real difference was between themanly decision of his conduct, and his unfeigned distrustand diffidence of his own opinions."But if his powers of oratory had been in some measureimpaired by age, the authority of character hadonly ripened with his years. He had been long astanding proof of the fallacy of the assertion, that withoutconnexion with a party, no man can attain politicalimportance ; and the " moral compulsion " 58 whichhe exercised continually strengthened. Here he wassure of his conclusions, and neither in word or deedwas there any doubt or indecision. " It is the fashionto speak of Wilberforce," said one of the heads of theColonial Office, whom in his later years he had beencompelled to weary with his demands of justice forhis clients, " as a gentle, yielding character, but I canonly say that he is the most obstinate, impracticablefellow with whom I ever had to do." A friend methim once returning from an audience with one of theministers, with whom he had remonstrate on an improperappointment the nomination of a man of notoriouslyimmoral character to a responsible office abroad.38 See Chalmers' Civic Economy, 1. 5. "But after all, it may be askedof what possible use are such men in parliament," &c. ? " In which passage,"he tells Mr. Wilberforce, " I have attempted to sketch just what Iconceive to be your own line of politics in parliament." Letter to W.Wilberforce Esq. Jan. 17, 1821.M 2244 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1825.I conceived," he said, " that the honour of thecountry was involved, and therefore I plainly told himmy mind, and that he would have to answer hereafterfor his choice, but he was so angry that I thought hewould have knocked me down."Such a man could not bid farewell to public lifewithout much observation from his fellows, and withoutbeing followed into his retirement by the sincere regretof multitudes. It is not a little interesting toturn to the various intimations of the state of his ownfeelings at this trying moment. Nothing can exceedtheir simple quietness.I staid quietly at Uxbridge, spending the timevery pleasantly. My chief business the preparing toquit parliament, which I settled to do about Sundaythe 5th. The House on Thursday, Feb. 3rd, sittingfour nights on the Bill prohibiting the Roman CatholicAssociation. Mackintosh seems to have beenbrilliant, Peel good, North and Leslie Forster full ofmatter and argument from facts, Plunket very able,and Tierney himself m reply to him. A Mr. Doherty,a lawyer, good. Dawson and Brownlow strong Anti-catholicspeakers, with striking facts. Robinson seemsto have spoken ably, and Williams the lawyer. Neverwere there so many able speakers, though none sopowerful as Pitt or Fox. Canning a more finishedorator, but less impressive." 5gThe veteris vestigia flame are kindled," he tellsMr. Buxton, " into a sort of dull heat, by the reportsof your new debates." 60 Yet on the very day on which59 Diary, Feb. 7. <*> Feb. 15.1825. HIS LAST FRANK. 245the new writ was to be moved, he was enjoying peacefullythe simplest pleasures. " Foggy in the morning,"says his Diary, 61 " but it cleared up and becamedelightful. The sun full out all day. The beesseduced to fly about into the crocus cups. Theblackbirds singing."To two of his sons who had requested him to sendthem his last frank, he wrote on the same day.TO ROBERT ISAAC WILBERFORCE ESQ. AND SAMUELWILBERFORCE ESQ. ORIEL COLLEGE, OXFORD.My dear Boys,When Charles the First was on the very pointof exchanging, as I trust, a temporal for an eternalcrown, he was forced to be short, so he said but oneword and now I have but a moment in which to usemy pen, and therefore, my dear boys, I also will adopthis language, and add as he did, REMEMBER. Youcan fill up the chasm. I will only add, that with constantwishes and prayers for your usefulness, comfort,and honour here, and for glory, honour, and immortalityfor you hereafter, I remain,Ever your most affectionate Father,W. WILBERFORCE.Robert Isaac and Samuel Wilberforce Esqrs.I am not clear that this letter will pass free, andtherefore I make it single."ci Feb. 22.246 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1825.One more extract in a higher tone will completethe exhibition of his feelings. After speaking 62 inglowing language of the " full harvest " younger menmight live to see, from " the good seed now sowing inthis highly-favoured land and its dependencies, letme check' he continues, " this random sally of theimagination ; and for you, though much younger thanme, as well as for myself, let me recollect that wemay humbly hope through the infinite mercies of ourGod and Saviour, to behold all the joys and gloriesthat I have been anticipating for the generations tocome, but to behold them from a higher elevation,and through a purer medium. We are not told thatMoses was to experience after death any thing differentfrom mankind in general ; and we know that hetook part in the events of this lower world, and on themount of transfiguration talked with Christ concerninghis death which he was to undergo at Jerusalem. AndI love, my dear friend, to dwell on this idea, that afterour departure from the scene of our earthly pilgrimage,we shall witness the development of the plans wemay have formed for the benefit of our fellow-creatures; the growth and fruitage of the good principleswe have implanted and cultivated in our children ;and above all, the fulfilment of the Prayers we havepoured forth for them, in the large effusions on themof that heavenly grace, which above all things we haveimplored as their portion. It is almost, I fear, totouch too tender a string, but there is one within my& Letter to Lady O. B. Sparrow.1825. TO LADY O. B. SPARROW. 247breast also, which vibrates in exact unison with yours;and may I add, that I cannot doubt our own dearchildren are now taking a tender interest in all thatconcerns the real happiness of those parents, thevalue of whose Christian instruction, and prayers, andtears, they are in a situation to estimate more justly,and therefore to feel for them a more lively gratitude,than while they were our fellow-travellers throughthis transitory world. I must no longer trespass onmy slender stock of eyesight, but say, farewell."CHAPTER XXXVII.MARCH 1825 TO OCTOBER 1827.Retires from London Purchase of Highwood Spring atUxbridge Common Visits Dropmore Sandgate WalmerMechanics' Institutes London University and religiouseducation Bath and its company T. Moore BlaizeCastle Return to London Presides at the Anti-Slaverymeeting Beckenham West Indian matters Diary Scott'snovels Bath Quakers' meeting Hampton Correspondencewith his children Journey into Yorkshire Affectionatereception Loss of friends Wentworth House andLord Fitzwilliam State of the clergy Return to Highwood.WHEN Mr. Wilberforce quitted parliament he determinedto withdraw from London altogether. Histemporary retirement near Uxbridge was exchanged,therefore, for a freehold residence at Highwood Hillapleasant spot, just " beyond the disk of the metropolis."" We have bought a house about ten milesnorth of London," he tells Mr. Gisborne. 1 " I shallbe a little Zemindar there ; 140 acres of land, cottages,of my own, &c."His feelings when purchasing this place are expressedin his comments on the habits of a friend.> April.1825. HIS PRIVATE LIFE. 249How rational is his mode of life ! Domestic charitiessweetening and cheering the defilements of worldlyaffairs. I partake in his longing for repose ; andoh may I be enabled more and more to walk duringthe years which may yet remain for me in the fear ofthe Lord, and in the comfort of the Holy Ghost."Oh may I only walk with God during my closingyears, and then where is of little consequence." 3His new purchase was not yet ready for thereception of his family, and he spent the spring of1825 in the quiet of his Uxbridge cottage, and rejoicedto find more time than heretofore for miscellaneousreading. "Hearing Southey's Book of theChurch, and Butler's Answer excellent for its purpose,as assuring the Roman Catholics that theircause good." " Parts of Clarendon and Baxter."With the most unaffected simplicity he rejoiced toassert that " he was now no politician," and onlyread the newspapers to be master " of manners andopinions, in short, of the public mind, which to becollected undiquaque."Many of his friends were now again his guests, andthe notice of these visits in which he delighted, occupiesa large share of his Diary. " March 24th. Inglisand two Thornton came in the evening staid all nextday. Inglis extremely entertaining, and most kind.Not out of my dressing-room when they went, butInglis chatted with me, and the girls shook hands.27th. Macaulay and Tom came to dinner, and night.Tom infinitely overflowing with matter on all subDiary, March 4. 3 jb. July 12.M 3250 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1825.sects, and most good-humoured. 28th. Macaulayoff. Tom fertile and fluent to the last, and with unruffledgood nature. Sir Stamford and Lady Raffles,and Dr. Morrison the Chinese scholar, came betweenone and two Lord Gambier called, and we had anentertaining confabulation. Ward dined, and we hada very interesting evening. Good Morrison stronglycensuring the lukewarmness of Christians, which preventstheir devoting themselves to God's service, asmissionaries for China. His plan that persons shouldbecome ministers of Chinese, and then settle on theborders. The Chinese a reading people ; and hethinks by degrees you would introduce your knowledgeand religion. Dear seems touched ; mayGod direct him. Singular criminal law of the Battas,by which persons committing great crimes sentencedto be eat up alive ; the injured party having the firstchoice the ear claimed and eat, &c., until the massfall on. The coup de grace, except in strong cases,given early. When Sir Stamford contended againstthe practice, the people urged, ' what defence can wehave for our morals? 5 April 18th. I fear that I amwasting my precious time, and the night is comingfast with me. Oh may I strive to be ever aboundingin the work of the Lord. May He enable me to commencesome useful work. 30th. When breakfast wasjust over my attached old friend Creyke came over inachaise and announced his staying till four. To sokind a friend I owe much more than the sacrifice ofa single day. Made the time less a blank by gettinghim to read with me W. Whitmore's speech on the1825. VISITS. 251Corn Laws. Evening Mr. and Mrs. North, andLeslie Forster, and Buxton, and Calthorpe, arrived.Much talk. May 20th. Butterworth dropped in withProfessor Tholuck from Berlin."As the year advanced, his own house not being yetrepaired, he took the opportunity of paying severalvisits to his friends ; beginning with his presentneighbourhood. " To Dropmore, where receivedvery kindly ; walked with Grenville for an hour beforeand after dinner; it grieved me to see him sofeeble said he had profited more from Aristotle'sRhetoric than any other work. Spoke in favour ofReid and Stewart as right against Locke." 4 He wassoon embarrassed by the multitude of friends whoaffectionately claimed a share of his first year ofleisure ; and excuses himself to Mr. Gisborne formerely paying these touch-and-go visits, so to termthem, to his various midland friends. But this isbetter than not doing homage to their lares at all,especially in your instance, under whose roof I formerlyspent months of tranquil, and I trust friendly,enjoyment, which can never be forgotten."With this kindly and cheerful spirit did he alwayslook back on long-past days; and every excursionbrought some such reflection into his mind. Thus inthe earlier part of the summer he was for some timeat his old Sandgate quarters, whence he went over toWalmer " to see the Castle, where I had been abovethirty years ago, in poor Pitt's time. It was muchimproved." On his road to Dover he was " hearing4 Diary.252 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE, 1825.Sumner's Records of the Creation, and dictatingNarrative of Life' and "returned with Gerard Noeland two of his daughters in his landau, and littleblack Swiss horses walking part of the way. Fullmoon and not a cloud sea-view magnificent. AtDover saw wild beasts." 5 Another excursion tookhim " to meet Mr. W. who had been in Jamaicafor a few months, and about to go there again.He spoke of West Indian abuses, and of the strongthings that had been said against them, with aChristian frankness which I never saw surpassed. 55<24th. Being on the point of quitting Sandgate Icould not spend the day 7 as I wished. Lettersreading and despatching in the morning. HearingLords' Committee on Irish matters, Magee, and Archbishopof Dublin's evidence : Clipperton and Den-ham'sletters about African discovery, kindly sent byLord Bathurst. Evening, made calls. Let me tryto find ( a convenient season.' Miss W consultedme lately about the point of duty respectingher attending her parish church. I urged it, on theground of the prayers composing the chief purpose ofsocial worship.Sept. 2nd. Dressing, heard Edinburgh Reviewof Roscoe's (Boccaccio) Italian novelists. What anoccupation for a man of talents in advanced age !After dinner to Tallow, where arrived before ten.4th. I hope I felt the blessed use of the Lord's dayin the interval between the churches. 5th. CalledLord Grenville's. Thought him better. He conDiary, Aug. 6 Jb Aug. 20. ? His birth-day.1825. BATH. 253cursed with me as to the impropriety of Castlereagh'sbeing at once the negociator and the minister, insteadof sending some propositions to he discussed and canvassed,and having light thrown upon them. Muchinterested hy Pepys's Journal. Mrs. C. S. verypleasing sang and played sweetly very unaffected.8th. At Ecclesiast most kindly received. 10th.Lord Harrowby rode over to see me, and I walkedand sat with him, and he with me at my four o'clockdinner afterwards ; very clever, and entertaining asalways. Talked for an hour or more with Lord San-don.The dear Bishop quite happy, and on goodgrounds."By the 12th of October he was fixed at Bath, ofwhich as usual he complains, (t that of all placesin the world it afforded him the least uninterruptedtime. You are required to second the influenceof the waters before, between, and afterthe glasses, by a liberal quantity of air and exercise ;and if in despite of the doctors, you go to your desk,you cannot write for five minutes without a rat-tat-tatby the knocker, reminding you that you are in alarge city, in which it is the practice to carry on mostdiligently an incessant system of calling and carding,against which both payer and receiver inveigh." 8His Diary fills up this sketch. " 15th. Introducedto Tom Moore by Sir T. Lethbridge, who walkedwith us a little. Moore's eye bright, his whole countenancevery animated; but rather joyous than indiaLetter to a son at college.2-54 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1825.eating sensibility. 17th. Here I have little leisure.My time, alas ! is sadly frittered away. Henceforth Iwill note down each day's occupation. To-day heardMacaulay's Abstract of the Parliamentary Papers onthe West India Colonies' Reform newspapers alittle letter-writing. Hearing Walter Scott's Heartof Mid Lothian in the afternoon, and a little in theevening. 18th. Breakfasted with Lord Camden atthe York Hotel, and talked over old matters. 20th.Hearing Macaulay's Abstract of the Papers laid beforeParliament about the Slaves; a most useful work.How he shames me ! Yet my eyes could not performit, or any thing that requires eyesight. Toomuch time taken, and interest too, in Walter Scott'sHeart of Mid Lothian. Yet I only hear it in afternoonand evening. Much the best of his novels thatI have heard. Jeanie Deans a truly Christian character,and beautiful, as far as it goes. Yet I have beentempted to bestow some eyesight and time upon it,which should have been better employed." Neverscarcely did he lay down these fascinating volumeswithout repeating his complaint " that they shouldhave so little moral or religious object. They remindme of a giant spending his strength in cracking nuts.I would rather go to render up my account at the lastday, carrying up with me ( The Shepherd of SalisburyPlain,' than bearing the load of all those volumes,full as they are of genius." 9You asked me in a former letter," he now wrote9 Con. Mem.1825. EDUCATION WITHOUT RELIGION. 265to a friend, " whether I was executing the intentionI threw out, of endeavouring once more to use my penfor the benefit of my fellow-creatures. Alas, alas,Infaudum regina jubes.'I dare not say that procrastination may not have hadsome share in it ; hut still the work exists in intentiononly. Yet I have always had more work on myhands than I could execute satisfactorily, though Ihave no vested labour to show for it.There is one subject on which I am just nowdeeply interested, and on which I should be glad toexercise your mind. You are aware that a plan is inprogress for instructing our artisans in general in thevarious branches of philosophy. I was friendly tothe design, but I have been endeavouring to obtainan addition to it, without which I fear it will be muchmore injurious than beneficial to the community, thatI mean of having lectures on the evidences of theDivine authority of Christianity. I cannot but entertaina strong persuasion, that to instruct any classof men, but especially our artisans of all sorts, in thevarious branches of philosophy, leaving them altogetherignorant of the grounds on which we rest theDivine authority of Christianity, will be but too surean expedient for training up a race of self conceitedsceptics. Hitherto our religion has been taken ontrust ; but now there will be a boast that no opinionsare to be received implicitly and by prescription.Indeed it is a Scriptural injunction, that we should beable to render a reason for our hope. And as it has256 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1825.pleased God to make ours a reasonable service, and togive us a religion which will stand the strictest scrutiny,surely we shall be unpardonable if we suffer ouryouth to be wholly uninstructed in this particular only."So strongly did he feel, that " could he have pleased"himself, he <( would have published a short pieceupon the subject." He was soon privately at workupon it ; for the Mechanics' Institutes were followedby the London University, and on its first projectorshe at once pressed his views. Instruction in religion,they replied, was incompatible with their first principleof receiving alike men of all faiths or of none.If you reflect on the composition and plan of ourLondon University," wrote the framer of the scheme, 10after declaring that his countenance would be ofthe highest importance to them, " you will perceivehow impossible it is to have our doors open to all,and yet teach even the most general system of Christianity.It will not bear near inspection, though itsounds easy enough to say in general terms, all sectsagree as to the evidences. They do not so agree. . . .But look to our plan, and you will at once see how inconsistentwith it any necessity of religious instruction is.In Oxford and Cambridge it is far otherwise. Oxfordand Cambridge take youths wholly under theirwing, and away from their families. We, acting on abetter and more natural and moral plan, leave themwholly under domestic superintendence. To teachreligion is necessary in the former case, but not inthe latter."10 Aug. 17, 1825. '1825. EDUCATION WITHOUT RELIGION. 257These arguments he warmly combatted. " I amwaiting with no little solicitude the result as to theChristian evidence professorship. The very idea ofkeeping the most influential class, in the most influentialposition of our country, ignorant of theirrefragable arguments by which the truth of Christianityis established in order to obtain the support ofthe Jews, appears to me rendering a measure abominablein itself, still worse by the motive assigned forits adoption." 11 He so far succeeded that a lectureon these subjects for such as chose to attend it wasadded to the plan. And upon this a friend in Londonventured without his permission to put down hisname as a supporter of the scheme. But such a compromiseby no means contented him ; he dreaded educationif it was not based upon religion ; and thoughhe doubtfully left on his name awhile, in the hope ofpromoting some change in the system, he declared in1829 that he must remove it, adding, " I retain myold opinion of the evil of such a system of education."12He continued still at Bath in his usual course oflife surrounded constantly by friends " makingcalls above and below," complaining that " therenever was such an enemy to all business as the water-drinkingwas to a man with a large circle of acquaintance,"yet writing a multitude of letters, and hearingwith much care no slight quantity of lighter reading.Hearing Macdonald's Demerara book artful andfalse Quarterly Review, and Edinburgh Swiss Per-letterto Z. Macaulay Esq. " Ib.258 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1825.section an able article by Tom Macaulay on Miltonrather too crowded, but several beautiful andforcible illustrations on colonial policy, &c. aboutCharterhouse in Old Mortality Sheridan's Life byTom Moore. Moore's gross injustice to Pitt is onlywhat must be expected from party, and indeed theinjustice is not known to be such by the dispenser."Above one third," he tells Mr. Bankes, " of Moore'sLife of Sheridan has been read to me. Had I eyesightat command I could with pleasure dilate on that subject.I sometimes wish you and I could comparenotes, and that your better memory could aid myfading powers of recollection, for the ascertainment offacts that really ought to be stated. Of Pitt bothyou and I have probably been often silent, becausethough disposed to bestow on him more honest praisethan nine-tenths of his eulogists, we could not joinin the fulsome and general panegyric of those whopraised him formerly, and still praise him for theirown purposes, and in the way of trade."With these are mingled other entries full of pregnantintimations of his state of mind. " Butterworthbreakfasted; full of matter and good works allactivity ; God bless him 1 Dear Simonss in full feather,but too wild, and in prayer too familiar. Saw a delightfulletter from Bishop Heberr 200 native converts,and he never saw meeker Christians, or of moreintense and touching piety." t( at Jay's, whereI greatly wished to go, but thought it wrong."Octagon chanting and singing wretched prayersvery disagreeably because not in the least devotionally1825. HOUSE OF COMMONS RECOLLECTIONS. 259read." This ardent love for the Liturgy grew manifestlywith his years. He breaks out this winter in aletter to a friend, into a warm expression of hisdelight in the principles of our various formularies.Though they are sometimes unconsciously possessedand used, and their nature and qualities often misconceived,and at times calumniated ; yet in circumstancesof depression and desolation their sanative excellencedisplays itself like some rich unguent that had beenfrozen and torpid ; they begin to emit their healingfragrance, and to supply an antidote to the poison,that would otherwise consume the vitals." iaLeaving Bath in December he spent a few dayswith Mr. Harford at Blaize Castle ; and here " heslid," says his host, " insensibly into continuous descriptionsof parliamentary scenes with which he hadbeen connected.When Lord Londonderry was in his ordinarymood, he was very tiresome, so slow and heavy, hissentences only half formed, his matter so confined,like what is said of the French army in the Moscowretreat when horse, foot, and carriages of all sorts werehuddled together, helter-skelter; yet when he wasthoroughly warmed and excited, he was often veryfine, very statesman-like, and seemed to rise quiteinto another man.'Our general impression of Sheridan was, that hecame to the House with his flashes prepared and readyto let off. He avoided encountering Pitt in unforeseendebating, but when forced to it usually came off well.'>3 Jan. 12, 1826.260 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1825.Fox was often truly wonderful. He would beginat full tear, and roll on for hours together withouttiring either himself or us.'Pitt talked a great deal among his friends. Foxin general society was quiet and unassuming. Sheridanwas a jolly companion, and told good stories, huthas been overrated as a wit by Moore.'Fox was truly amiable in private life, and greatallowance ought to be made for him : his father was aprofligate politician, and allowed him as much moneyto gamble with as ever he wished.'1 asked him if he remembered the miser Ewesin the House of Commons ? ' Perfectly ; and thatquestion reminds me of a curious incident which oneday befell that strange being. In my younger dayswe often went to the House in full dress, on nights, forexample, when we were any of us going to the opera.Bankes, on an occasion of this kind, was seated nextElwes, who was leaning his head forward just at themoment when Bankes rose hastily to leave his seat,and the hilt of his sword happening to come in contactwith the miser's wig, which he had probably pickedoff some scare-crow, it was unconsciously borne awayby Bankes, who walked in his stately way down theHouse, followed by Elwes full of anxiety to regain histreasure. The House was in a roar of merriment, andfor a moment Bankes looked about him wondering exceedinglywhat had happened. The explanation wastruly amusing, when he became conscious of the sword-hiltwhich he had acquired.'(f As we were one day talking of devotional poetry,1825.HIS CONVERSATION.Dr. Johnson said he, ' has passed a very sweepingcondemnation on it, and has given his opinion,, thatsuccess in this species of composition is next to impossible.And the reason which he gives for it is,that all poetry implies exaggeration, hut the objectsof religion are so great in themselves, as to be incapableof augmentation. One would think howeverthat religion ought to be the very region of poetry.It relates to subjects which, above all others, agitatethe hopes and fears of mankind ; it embodies everythingthat can melt by its tenderness, or elevate byits sublimity ; and it has a natural tendency to callforth in the highest degree, feelings of gratitude andthankfulness for inestimable mercies. His prejudice,poor man, appears to me to resolve itself into the samecause, which prevented his deriving comfort from thecultivation of religion. The view which he took ofChristianity acted on his fears, it inspired him withterror, it led him to superstition, but it did not animatehis affections, and therefore it neither duly influencedhis conduct, nor imparted comfort to his feelings.'We were talking of the levity and gaiety of heartof the French, even under the severest misfortunes.This drew forth an anecdote, which had been relatedto him by Mr. Pitt. ' Shortly after the tragical deathof Marie Antoinette, M. Period, an emigrant ofsome consequence, who had made Mr. Pitt's acquaintanceat Versailles, took refuge in England, and oncomingto London went to pay his respects in DowningStreet. The conversation naturally turned uponthe bloody scenes of the French Revolution; on their262 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1825.fatal consequences to social order; and in particularon the barbarity with which the unfortunate Queenhad been treated. The Frenchman's feelings werequite overcome, and he exclaimed amidst violentsobbing, ( Ah Monsieur Pitt, la pauvre Reine ! lapauvre Reine ! ' These words had scarcely beenuttered, when he jumped up as if a new idea suddenlypossessed him, and looking towards a little dog whichcame with him, he exclaimed, ( Cependant, MonsieurPitt, il faut vous faire voir mon petit chien danser.'Then pulling a small kit out of his pocket, he begandancing about the room to the sound of his little instrument,and calling to the dog, ( Fanchon, Fanchon,danse, danse,' the little animal instantly obeyed,and they cut such capers together that the minister'sgravity was quite overcome, and he burst into aloud laugh, hardly knowing whether he was mostamused or astonished' 3He was now pressed urgently to come to London,and take the chair at a great meeting of the AntislaverySociety, in Freemasons' Hall, on the 21st ofDecember. "Above all we feel the loss of you,"wrote Mr. Macaulay, after detailing the difficultieswhich beset his cause. " Heart-stirring occasionsare in prospect, when I should have delighted to seeyou engaged comines sense."He shrunk greatly from this public part now thathe had retired from parliament. While he had conductedthe cause of Abolition, he had been the primemover in all operations, and he declared himselfunwilling to "take the lead, when I can no longer1826. BECKENHAM. 263direct the measures." 14 " It seems like wishing toretain the reins, when I can no longer hold them." 15When solicited to take part in the deputations togovernment, which it had hitherto been his provinceto conduct, e< I am a bee," he playfully replied,"which has lost its sting." To Mr. Stephen heopened himself more fully. 16 " I shrink from thesepublic assemblages, partly perhaps from decliningspirits, and that love of ease of which Paley speaksas the natural appetite and gratification of old men,and which it will be many years, I hope, beforeyou begin to verify by your personal experience."Yet rather than throw any damp upon the cause, heyielded to the pressing urgency of friends. " Got tothe meeting at twelve. Took the chair. Very kindlytreated throughout, both by the very full room, andthe speakers." 17The " love of ease" never tainted his old age. Hehad entered private life with the remark, " A manneed not be idle because he ceases to be loquacious."Alas ! " he complains at the beginning of the newyear, 18 " life is stealing away. It ought to shock meto think how all are at work endeavouring to promotethe poor slaves' well-being. But all my friends advisedretiring. Well, let me at least try to act in thespirit of that verse of this evening's family reading,Be ye always abounding in the work of the Lord'"He now occupied until the spring a house at Beckenham,which had been lent him by a friend, whereTo R. Wilberforce Esq. Dec. 1. To T. Babington Esq. Dec. 1.'6 Dec. 5. 7 Diary. w Ib.264 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1826.he enjoyed much of that retirement which he solong had coveted. <( Few callers here. I have mytime more to myself than I can expect almost anywhere."19 " May I especially strive against thatfatal trifling away part of the closing hour at night.Let me employ an hour in spiritual exercises, prayer,meditation, Scripture reading, and other serious hooks,as Lives, &c."Here his rarer intercourse with society was underthe same rules as when he moved in the full streamof London life. " Mr. and Mrs W. came in theevening. How little did I improve the opportunity,though indeed I know not what could be done, hut toshow civility, and that I had no horns or tail ! " 20Through the Christmas holidays his family allgathered round him ; and with them and visits from hisfriends in London, his time was fully occupied. Histhoughts too turned watchfully to the progress ofthe cause with which his life had been identified;and he was often busy with his pen in guiding thedecisions of its chief conductors. " Macaulay givingme useful intelligence. We differing about FemaleAnd Slavery Associations. Babington with me,grounding it on St. Paul. I own I cannot relish theplan. All private exertions for such an object becometheir character, but for ladies to meet, to publish, togo from house to house stirring up petitions theseappear to me proceedings unsuited to the femalecharacter as delineated in Scripture. And though weshould limit the interference of our ladies to the cause19 Diary, Feb. 4. so ib. Feb. 3.1826. MR. Escort's RETURN FOR OXFORD. 265of justice and humanity, I fear its tendency wouldbe to mix them in all the multiform warfare of politicallife." 21 But though averse to this peculiarscheme he was full of zeal towards the cause ; andwithin a week from writing thus, he replied to hisson at Oxford, who had been employed to securehis interest in Mr. Escort's favour in the followingterms.Beckenham, Feb. 6, 1826.My dear ,##* *###*#It is really hard on Canning, yet it is honourablein men to vote against a Prime Minister (forsuch Canning may be termed) on a ground of publicprinciple. But has any attention been paid to Mr.Escort's ' holdings' on the Slave Amelioration andEmancipation subjects? Surely there cannot be amore proper question for the University to patronize,than one which involves the continuing 800,000 ofour fellow creatures (our subjects and labourersforced into our service from their country and friends)in that state of paganism and immorality, in which,to the disgrace of this professedly Christian country,generation after generation has been passing away fornear 200 years. It may be of great service to thecause for the University to manifest an interest in itsfavour. Unhappily, government is under the influence,from personal friendship, of some great WestIndian proprietors, and therefore I fear they will not21 To T. Babington Esq. Jan. 31.VOL. V. N266 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1826.follow up their own resolutions. As to committingthe reform to the colonial legislatures, it is muchworse than doing nothing. In 1797, Mr. Ellis, thegreat West Indian, Canning's best friend, moved anAddress to the Crown, recommending reforms in thetreatment of slaves, which the House of Commonspassed unanimously, and the Secretary of State, avowedlyfriendly to the West Indians, recommended tothe colonial legislatures, enforced by the powerfulconsideration, (communicated confidentially, but whichtranspired through a blunder,) that unless they reformedtheir system, the Abolition of the Slave Trade,which they declared would be ruinous to them, wouldcertainly take place. Yet not one of the thirteen coloniallegislatures would do any thing, though sostrongly urged ; and can they be reasonably expectedto make greater reforms, which are brought forwardby us hated Abolitionists for the avowed purpose ofpreparing the way for emancipation, which in theirvocabulary is synonymous with destruction ? But Iam straining my eyes, I trust, needlessly. I cannotdoubt, that in Oxford University the slaves will findprotectors.Ever your most affectionate Father,W. WILBERFORCE."Some time later he complains to Mr. Macaulay,just when I was going to read over a second timeyour most interesting letter, who should enter but oneof the most merciless visitors that ever robbed me ofa full hour and a half, in the person of my neighbour1826. PORTUGUESE SLAVE TRADE. 267Sir C. F. Were such invasions frequent, I must cutand run. I am not so much depressed as some of ourfriends respecting the state of our cause, though Iown I have many gloomy forebodings of mischief inthe Antilles ; many a dread, lest the Almighty shouldtake the cause of the poor oppressed blacks into his ownhands. And really when I hear of the horrors of theFrench, Spanish, and Portuguese Slave Trades, I involuntarilyexclaim, Lord, how long ! Surely, surelythe abominations will not be much longer tolerated.I have been most indignant on hearing the article onthe Slave Trade in the last Quarterly Review. Somuch shabby complimenting of Canning, and an utterforgetfulness that Castlereagh might have secured thesuppression of the existing evils. And even still ifCanning would personally speak in a proper tone tothe Portuguese and Brazilian ambassadors, muchmight be done."His Diary as the 'year advanced will supply, withoutany formal connexion, a sketch of his chief movements,and of the tone of his mind and feelings."April 10th. The Bishop of called on me, andI walked with him till almost four ; when I had barelytime to write a letter to C. Grant about teaching theEvidences of the Christian Religion to the youngmen educating for writers. Greatly pleased withhe in a very emphatic manner begged myprayers, and said he should reckon much on them."They were promised; " and never since," he saidshortly before his death, " to the best of my belief,omitted for a single day."N 2268 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1826.12th. Hearing the Workhouse Boy's Letters,given me by Mrs. Samuel Hoare. Oh how humiliatingthey are, when I reflect on the few advantageshe had enjoyed, and the improvement made of them !But what a blessed proof of the grace of God ! Whatreligion but Christianity can produce such blessedeffects such extinction of self such a desire toplease God to perform the relative duties to his unkindfather such elevation of soul, with so littleknowledge !"22nd. Bath. Hearing Old Mortality after dinner ;the story of the Covenanters. It has made me sit uptoo late, and interested me too deeply ; oimoi ! Scottis certainly a distinct exhibiter of human charactersand affections. But I hope his delineation of theCameronian is too dark, and more especially hismaking them scruple at no means when the end isgood (as, wronging Edith Bellenden of her right tobuy the old hypocritical scoundrel Basil Oliphant).23rd. At chapel. C. rather affectedly solemn,evangelical, but as if trying to give weight by languageand manner to what was in itself unsubstantial.26th. Heard some of Rob Roy ; but a merenovel so far vol. i.30th. Morning, M. good matter, but too theatrical.Afternoon, Harvey Harriot excellent, simple,grave, impressive.May 1st. To my surprise in came Joseph Gurney,who on a professional tour.2nd. Finished Rob Roy, the last volume of whichis very graphical, and gives a striking picture of .QUAKERS' MEETING. 269land feeling and manners about 1716, also the consequentialairs of a naturally brave, good-natured GlasgowBaillie a true commercial man. His ways finelycontrasted with the rude, proud, shrewd, and harshmanners of the Highland chief. A good picture tooof the feuds of those times.3rd. Began Peveril of the Peak, because it gives,I am told, a picture of the Oliverian times.5th. Mr. Johnson breakfasted, and gave me muchinteresting intelligence about Ireland. Evening, Butterworthcalled, and gave me interesting missionaryintelligence. 6th. Archdeacon Digby breakfasted,and much talk till twelve o'clock, when a publicmeeting for relief of manufacturers. They wished meto move the resolutions, but I declined in favour of aBath man subscribed 25. Joseph Gurney came inafternoon to stay till Monday. Evening, Butterworthalso, and Mr. White, New Zealand missionary amost interesting evening. Hearing from White howhe and his companions proceeded on their first arrival,and the dangers to which they were exposed theirlives suspended on the vibrating beams of the balance.With Joseph Gurney to the Quakers' meeting. Wefirst sat still .they all with their hats on) for abouttwenty minutes. Then Gurney slowly rose, and prayedfor about five minutes an opening prayer. Then hepreached as we should say for about an hour (no text,and for want perhaps of divisions it appeared rambling,and left no deposit, only impression). Then after ashort pause he prayed about ten minutes, and after ashort pause notice given that service at six, and neighingLIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1826.hours shook hands with each other. We all cameaway thankful that not Quakers. No Scripture reading.No common prayer. The prayer himselfkneels, the rest stand. Afternoon to chapel ;an excellent, sound sermon.8th. Breakfast Count R. and Mr. D. a good-naturedbut molesting man : a soi-disant poet, trulypious ; but whimsical, and writes doggerel verses.12th. Heard from dear Lord of his son'sdeath, but in such a state of mind as to cause joy aswell as peace.15th. Finished Peveril the humours of the versatile,unprincipled Buckingham the acuteness ofCharles his easiness of temper ; unprincipled, wild,and variable as the winds, admirably delineated. Thecavalier character in broad and strong colours welldone, but no nicety. I am glad we have finished thework ; this class of writings is too interesting ; itmakes other studies insipid, or rather other light reading; but yet much to be learned from this class ofwritings, which I will state in a separate piece.23rd. Going to Cheveron to dinner, meaning tosee the neighbouring woods and hear the nightingales.Drew into talk, wishing to learn if the Tom-lineshad said any thing to her about Pitt's religion,but they had said nothing, and she fairly owned shedurst not ask them about it.27th. Busy, getting off for Clifton." A letterwritten the same evening gives a happy sketch of thisgetting off" from Bath.1826. TAKES POSSESSION OF Highroad. 271Clifton, May 27.My dear ,Your letter found us in what have been termed,with scarcely any exaggeration, ' the horrors of departure.'All the callings, the leave-takings, the apologiesfor the omission of both, and all the other external andinternal variety and complication of social contrivancesfor manifesting civility, and wasting time, anddiminishing comfort ; and to close the whole, billupon bill, and new claims coming forward, when yousupposed all had been satisfied, while the supplieswhich you expected to carry away with you growless and less, and you doubt if you shall have enoughto go off like an honest man.I did not take up my pen to call on you to sympathizewith my miseries, but writing to a friend and myvery dear has enabled me to address him in thatcharacter is like talking to him, and in such I always observe that if we are in circumstanceswhich allow us to obey the natural impulse we beginby relating our grievances ; but I came from the to reply to your letter. Your times and placesare likely to be peculiarly agreeable to us, in that theywould bring you to us about the time of our settlingat Highwood; and coming first to reside in a newhouse, without any of her children round her, wouldbe very likely to infuse into your mother's spirits asecret melancholy, which might sadden the wholescene. It quite grieves me to think that we are not272 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1826.to be long together ; but let us do right and all willbe well. Farewell. God be with you.Ever your affectionate Father,W. WILBERFORCE."On the 15th of June he took possession of hishouse at Highwood Hill, with the characteristicentry " Late when got home, and had a too hastyprayer for first settlement in a new house all in confusion."He was now here only for a week, and thenwent on into Suffolk. "22nd. Reached Hamptonthe place in the highest possible beauty an exquisiteoasis. Saw the infant school, and great improvementsof the place. The family hymn and prayervery pleasing."July 1st. Lord Rocksavage and Mr. Calcraft cameto dinner and stay. My ' Practical View ' I am toldfirst made useful to Calcraft, a very superior man. It isdelightful to see men in such high connexions becomingtruly Christian. D. too is an excellent young man,but of an unfortunate appearance, soft and effeminatein voice and manner tongue too large for mouth.9th. The sacrament. I had a delightful Sundaysolitary walk."20th. To Norwich, and called at the palace.The old Bishop 82 aetas quite clear and animatedscarcely a wrinkle his memory very remarkable."On the 22nd of August he was fixed at High-woodHill. The next day, Aug. 23rd, " Mr. MarkRobinson came in the evening, and I forced to ask1827. PARTICULAR PROVIDENCE. 273him to stay all night. Much talk about a wish of histo establish Church Methodism, in opposition to thearistocracy of the Conference. A sensible Yorkshiretradesman, speaking true East Riding in sounds. Hisplan if it could be carried into effect, excellent, but weought to hear what can be said e contra. He with otherswho have deserted him, had engaged for three chapelsin Beverley, Cherry Burton, and Woodmansea.26th. Dined at Samuel Hoare's at Hampstead, withDr. and Mrs. Lushington, and William Allen, who stillgoes on doing good. Miss Joanna Baillie came in theevening so like the Doctor, as quite to affect me. Dr.Lushington acting a most important part in changingthe condition of the coloured class through the wholeWest Indies, by contending against the oppressionexercised towards Demesne and D'Escoffery. Oh whata glorious thing it is for a man to be a member of a freecountry ! He and Miss Baillie were asked if they believedin a particular Providence. ( Yes,' they replied,on great occasions.' As unphilosophical as unscripturalmust not the smallest links be as necessary formaintaining the continuity, as the greatest ? Greatand little belong to our littleness, but there is nogreat and little to God." 22A letter from his correspondence with his children,will carry on this sketch into the following year.Feb. 19, 1827.""My very dear ,It quite cheers me to hear that we are likelyto see you so soon; though in all such cases I rejoiceDiary, Aug. ' *3 To a son, aetas 22.N 3274 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1827.with trembling. Mr. Leslie Forster, M. P. forLouth county, who has been staying here, was at FifeHouse by appointment on Saturday, when a servantcame into the room where he was waiting, and toldhim that Lord Liverpool could not be seen that day.The newspapers will probably state that having beenremarkably well, he was suddenly seized by apoplexy orpalsy, (found on the floor, his countenance convulsed,and he insensible,) so that his political life mustbe at an end. I fear Canning also is more seriouslyindisposed than I had hoped. It always affects medeeply, when either from advancing years, or suddenillness, this world appears to be slipping out of thegrasp of an eminent public man, who (we have reasonto fear) has been making too little preparation for hisentrance into another. Lord Liverpool, I trust, hadserious thoughts. I well remember the former LadyLiverpool's telling me at the Pavilion, many yearsago, that she and Lord Liverpool used to contend,each for the favourite of each, Pascal or Fenelon ; andPascal is an author who has many ' pregnant propositions,'as Lord Bacon calls them. I must stop.Ever affectionately yours,W. WILBERFORCE."The chief feature of 1827, was a progress which hemade after an interval of almost twenty years throughhis native county.He had a strong wish, as he told one of his contemporaries," to revisit the scenes of his childhoodand early youth ;" 24 a purpose which, unless accord*To T. Thompson Esq. June 18.1827. DEATH OF MR. CANNING. 275polished speedily, he could never hope to realize. Butas yet he was able to renew his acquaintance withhis early haunts " with undiminished pleasure ; andfrom Yoxall Lodge, where he halted for a time, hewrote to Mr. Stephen " Well as I thought I knewthis place, and much as I had admired it, I never sawits riches displayed in such overflowing profusion. Inever was here before till late in the year, or saw thefirst foliage of the magnificent oak contrast with thedark holly, the flowering gorse, and the horse-chesnut."" A fine tree always seems to me like a communityin itself, with the countless insects which itshelters and nourishes in its roots and branches. Itis quite a merciful ordination of Providence, that theforests of our country (to which as a maritime nationwe look for protection and commerce) should be soadmirable for their beauty. Instead of a beautifulornament, they might have been a disagreeable object,to which we were compelled to be indebted." 25This country" [he was passing through Derbyshire]" has been greatly improved during the lastforty years, and so long it is since I was here last, bythe growth of extensive woods on the sides of hillswhich had been barren." 26 Other alterations, callingup far deeper feelings, soon occupied his mind. Hehad reached a time of life when recollections of thepast are interwoven with the thought of long-departedfriends. " Poor Pitt dead above twenty-oneyears," he says this summer, " to-day he would havebeen sixty-eight." The death of Mr. Canning turned25 Con. Mem. 9G To J. Stephen Esq.276 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1827.his thoughts into the same channel. " Oh what alesson is it on the vanity of placing our chief viewsof happiness on this uncertain world!" 27 Many ofhis letters are coloured more or less by the same toneof thought. " Whatever span of life may yet be leftto us' he said to Hannah More 8 (f may we bothbe using our remaining days in preparation for thelast. My friends are daily dropping around me.The companions of my youth, then far stronger andmore healthy than I was, are worn out, while I stillremain." And to Mr. Babington he says, " Whenyou last wrote to me, you were under the influence ofa feeling that has of late been often called into exercisewith me also ; that which is excited by seeing ourold friends dropping off one after another while we areleft behind.Haec data poena diu licentious, ut renovateSemper clade domus, multisque in lucius, cinquePerpetuo marre et nigra veste senescant.'But how different are the emotions with which wemay regard the deaths of our friends from those ofthe heathen poet ! And it is one of the indirect rewardsof such religious principles and habits as leadus to select our friends from the excellent ones of theearth, that we are not compelled to seek for comfortby forgetting the companions of our choice that aretaken from us, but may follow them in our thoughtsand sympathies into that paradise into which wetrust they have been received, and may hope at nodistant period to see them once more."27 Diary. May 5.1827. LETTER TO A SON ABROAD. 277Something too of the same tone, blended touchinglywith the liveliest affections, may be traced in aletter to a son on the continent.York, July 22, Sunday, at Mr. Gray's,a true Christian and old friend.My very dear ,It fills my heart with thankfulness, to beassured that my dear children are on this day withdrawnfrom worldly occupations. I fancy to myselfmy dear, my very dear , (for dear at home becomesvery dear abroad,) calling up before his mind'seye the images of absent friends, and I am encouragedby a better feeling than vanity, to cherish the hopethat your old father has a place among them. Evenwere it a common day, (a week day as it is termed,)writing to you at such a distance, when the thoughtthat perhaps even at the very time in which I am addressingyou, you may be no more, the thoughts andfeelings of my heart would naturally be of a seriouscolour ; and when in relation to all my friends presentor absent, my mind on this day is conversant withtheir highest interests, it must be peculiarly so incommunicating with a very dear child who is perhapsa thousand miles off, and of whom I have not heardfor several weeks. Whilst thinking of your geographicaltrack, if I may so term it, I am led to the ideaof your spiritual track your track honey as it isphrased on the globes in the line that describes thevoyages of our great circumnavigators. My mindhas been the rather drawn to this reflection by278 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1827.yesterday's having been the birth-day of our belovedand, I confidently hope, sainted Barbara alreadyjoined by our sweet little grandchild. There issomething very affecting to my mind in this way ofconsidering life, as a voyage in which ( track out ' and6 track home ' designate its opposite periods of youthand old age. Oh what cause have I for gratitude inthe blessed influences of the Divine Spirit which hasdirected your course, and kept you from the rocks onwhich many, alas ! make shipwreck ! And He willstill I trust watch over, and guide, and guard youeven unto the end ; and if it be consistent with theDivine will, may I be spared to see you engaged inthat most dignified of all services, that of superintendingthe best interests of your fellow-creatures,and guiding and guarding them through this dangerousworld to the haven of everlasting happiness andpeace, to the rest that remaineth for the people ofGod. May God bless you. I am everYour most affectionate Father,W. WILBERFORCE."These feelings were called into the liveliest exerciseas he passed on through Yorkshire. Here andthere indeed he found still left those who had enteredlife with him. At Huddersfield, amongstothers, Smart came in, an honest, warm-heartedshopkeeper, originally from Hull knew me whenhimself a boy remembered the ox roasted whole, 29&c. the joke about my dear sister" 30 and such& At the time of his coining of age, A. D. 1780. *> Diary.1827. VISIT TO YORKSHIRE. 279were always gladly welcomed ; but the greater partwere gone. Even in the Cloth Halls where he wasreceived enthusiastically, it was by another generationof men ; and while he felt a natural warmth of heartat " living it thus over again on the old ground andin the old circles where his youthful days were spent,and where his memorial will endure with the soil, andbe reverenced from generation to generation;" 31 yetother thoughts would mingle with these pleasurablefeelings. " How many far stronger and healthierthan I, died early, while I still survive in spite ofWarren's statement thirty-nine years ago ! The twoSt. Johns and Chaplin Acklom, whose place wepassed George Anderson, died in 1784, Sir Edmund,1799, aetas forty. It is very affecting to meto inquire after numbers of my contemporaries, andhear, ( O he has been long gone' or, ' He died yearsago,' men commonly far younger and stronger thanmyself." es I have not time to state to you the reflectionssuggested by our visit to Wentworth House.But it is a topic on which I shall like to expatiate alittle at some future opportunity. I will now only sayit is quite a palace, and the whole apparatus in proportion.The domestic chaplain, a truly good, and fromagea venerable man, told me that they dined dailyin the servants' hall about seventy-six of Lord FitsWilliam's own household." 32No visit gave him greater pleasure. " Lord Fitshe says at the time, 33 " is all benevolence ;31 Letter from James Montgomery Esq. to W. Wilberforce Esq. Aug. 17.31 Letter to S. Wilberforce Esq. = Diary.280 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1827.really there is a seraphic benignity about him."And to Mr. Stephen, who had expressed his gratificationat this kind reception, adding in allusion tothe watchword of the great election, " Milton aplumper," " I myself if I had a vote would give yourquondam opponent a plumper for it." 34 He repliesfrom Wentworth House :My dear Stephen,I can truly say that the magnitude, wealth,and industrious population of our vast county, havemade me feel even more than when I represented it inparliament the importance of the trust then committedto my care. The cordiality and kindness with whichI have been received at this place (WentworthHouse) has deeply affected me. Lord Fitzwilliammight well have been forgiven if he had conceived anunconquerable antipathy to me. When I was firstelected county member it was in defiance of his oldhereditary interest I, a mere boy, (but twenty-four,)without a single acquaintance in the county, and notallowing him the recommendation even of one member,though with Sir George Savile's family connexionand name superadded to the Rockingham interest.And then I must have appeared to him to beidentified with Mr. Pitt, against whom, not altogetherwithout cause, he had conceived a deadly hostility,even imputing to him, (though this was not merelydifferent from the truth, but opposite to it,) that Pitthad from the first disliked him. Yet in spite of alla*To William Wilberforce Esq.1827. RETURN TO Highroad. 281repelling principles so strongly has worked the generalkindliness of his nature, that he, the old gentleman,(gentleman I may truly term him, for a finergentleman cannot be conceived,) has behaved to uswith an unaffected, unassuming friendliness, that attimes has brought tears into my eyes. It has reallybrought powerfully to my feelings that better state inwhich all misconstructions will be done away, and alltruly good men will love one another."With Wentworth House his tour concluded. Ithad included every part of Yorkshire, and been entirelyprosperous. Not the least pleasing feature hehad noticed as he passed on, was the improved religiouscharacter he traced among the clergy. " Ihear, thank God, a highly satisfactory report of it ;it is solid and Scriptural, not fanatical or tincturedwith partiality. A fault by the way which I never sowell understood as of late years." 35On the 3rd of October, after looking "into R.Ramsden's Museum," and dropping " a sovereign intohis missionary box," he travelled on "to Northamptonto breakfast. The day charming, and reachedHighwood Hill at half-past nine in safety, and foundall there well. What cause for thankfulness, afterabove six months' absence and thirty-six visits ! " 36Oct. 4. 30 Diary.CHAPTER XXXVIII.OCTOBER 1827 TO APRIL 1832.Settlement at Highwood First feelings Mode of spendinghis day Love of flowers Business Evenings ConversationSociety Letters descriptive of his life Bishop ofCalcutta Lord Byron Visit to London AnniversariesSouthey Marriage of his third son Sussex His chapelOpposed by Mr. Williams His temper under falsehood andabuse Reduction of his income Anti-Slavery SocietyHis religious character at this time.HE returned to Highwood in the height of theIndian summer." The next morning was "delightful,dewy like autumn, hut the sun full out and warmas summer." l This was a very picture of his stateof mind, with some of the dews of autumn, hut stillbrightened by a noon-day sun. He had not yet becomefamiliar with his Highwood residence, and hisreturn to it not unnaturally weighed somewhat on hisspirits. " It is so long since I was here that I reallyfeel a stranger in my own house. As yet we have notgot our things about us ; and I know not where thoseare which have been sent at different times. For thelast six months we have lived as if such matters were1 Diary, Oct. 4.1827. HIS OLD AGE. 283the natural produce of houses, just as grass is that ofthe earth ; and as I have had little leisure lately forreading, or rather for hearing, my life has been spentin chatterton, and I feel strangely awkward in returningto my ordinary duties. My spirits quite sinkat the idea of being here when my boys leave me.Oh how I long for a quiet lodging any where, whereI might live as a collegian, having every thing foundfor me, and I only trying to do a little good with whatpoor powers are left me, and to work out my ownsalvation ! Oh let me not distrust that mercy of Godwhich has never failed me. I want to allot a day todevotional exercises." 2These were not his habitual feelings ; they werethe diapason tones of a mind of infinite compass ; butfor the most part his later years were eminently brightand cheerful. Never indeed was he more evidentlyhappy than in that calm old age on which he enteredwith the elasticity of youth, and the simplicity ofchildhood. Gay, busy, social, and affable, tenderwithout softness, and witty without sting, he was stillthe delight of old and young ; and whether he wasjoining in the " animated talk amongst the younghands," or discoursing with his remaining equals,it was in the busiest and happiest groups that hewas always to be found. His days at Highwoodwere very regularly spent. He rose soon afterseven, spent the first hour and a half in his closet ;then dressed, hearing his reader for three quarters ofan hour, and by half-past nine met his household for2 Letter to J. Stephen Esq. and Diary, Oct. 4.284 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1827.family worship ; always a great thing in his esteem.At this he read a portion of the Scriptures, generallyof the New Testament, in course, and explained andenforced it, often with a natural and glowing eloquence,always with affectionate earnestness, and anextraordinary knowledge of God's word.After family prayers, which occupied about half anhour, he never failed to sally forth for a few minutesTo take the air and hear the thrushes sing."He enjoyed this stroll exceedingly. "A delightfulmorning. Walked out and saw the most abundantdew-drops sparkling in the sunbeams on the gazon.How it calls forth the devotional feelings in themorning when the mind is vacant from worldly business,to see all nature pour forth, as it were, its songof praise to the great Creator and Preserver of allthings ! I love to repeat Psalms civ. iii. xlv. &c.at such a season." 3His habits had long since been formed to a latehour of breakfast. During his public life his earlyhours alone were undisturbed, and he still thoughtthat meeting late tended to prolong in others the time6*f morning prayer and meditation. Breakfast wasstill prolonged and animated by his unwearied powersof conversation, and when congenial friends weregathered round him, their discussions lasted sometimestill noon. From the breakfast-room he wenttill post time to his study, where he was commonlyemployed long about his letters. If they were fmish-3 Diary, Oct. 23.1827. HIS DAY HOW SPENT. 285ed he turned to some other business, never enduringto be idle all the day. " H. is a man," he says aftera wholly interrupted morning, " for whom I feel unfeignedesteem and regard, but it quite molests me totalk for a whole morning. Nothing done, and noaccession of intellect." 4 Soon after his retirementhe was invited as an idle man to an amateur concert.What ! " he exclaimed, " music in a morning ? Whyit would be as bad as dram-drinking." Yet his lovefor music was as strong as ever. This very year hespeaks of himself as " quite overpowered by theHallelujah Chorus in the Messiah, a flood of tearsensued, and the impression on my mind remainedthrough the day." 5 But a long continued conscientioususe of time had stamped its value deeply on hismind, and he could not forbear expressing his compassionwhen he " called at T.'s and saw the pooridle young man." 6 He was planning in this leisureseason some further employment of his pen ; a workon the Epistles of St. Paul, especially. " I have readWhatever's Essays on Scripture Difficulties. Thaton St. Paul's Epistles exactly my own thoughts twentyyears ago, and often about to be published." Weakhealth and his infirmity of sight still defeated his intention,and neither this work nor an additionalchapter to that on Christianity, in which he wishedto address the old, were ever actually completed forthe press.About three o'clock, when the post was gone,he sallied forth into the garden, humming often toDiary July 14, 1830. * Ib. Oct. 9, 1828. 6 Diary.286 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1827.himself, in the gladness of his heart, some favouritetune, alone, or in the company of some few friends, orwith his reader. Here he would pace up and downsome sheltered sunny walk, rejoicing especially in onewhich had been formed for him by a son, and wascalled ever after, with some hint of affection, by Thisname.The picture which the dead leave on the mindsof their survivors," says Mr. Gurney, 7 " is not alwayslively or distinct. Although we may have fondlyloved them, and may hallow the memory of theirgood qualities, we cannot always summon their imagebefore us ; but I venture to express my conviction,that no one who has been accustomed to observeWilberforce will ever find the slightest difficulty inpicturing him on the tablet of the mind. Who thatknew him, can fail to recall the rapid movements ofhis somewhat diminutive form, the illumination ofhis expressive countenance, and the nimble fingerwith which he used to seize on every little objectwhich happened to adorn or diversify his path ? Muchless can we forget his vivacious wit so playful, yet soharmless ; the glow of his affections ; the urbanity ofhis manners ; and the wondrous celerity with whichhe was ever wont to turn from one bright thought toanother. Above all, however, his friends will nevercease to remember that peculiar sunshine which hethrew over a company by the influence of a mindperpetually tuned to love and praise. I am ready tothink there .could be no greater luxury than that of7 Mem.1827. LOVE OF FLOWERS. 287roaming with him in solitude over green fields andgardens, and drawing out of his treasury things newand old."This was most true of his hour of daily exercise,Who that ever joined him in it cannot see him ashewalked round his garden at Highwood ? Now inanimated and even playful conversation, and thendrawing from his copious pockets (to contain Dalrymple'sState Papers was their standard measure)some favourite volume or other ; a Psalter, a Horace,a Shakespeare, or Cowper, and reading, and reciting,or ' refreshing ' passages ; and then catching at long-storedflower-leaves as the wind blew them from thepages, or standing before a favourite gum cistus to repairthe loss. Then he would point out the harmony ofthe tints, the beauty of the pencilling, the perfectionof the colouring, and run up all into those ascriptionsof praise to the Almighty which were ever wellingforth from his grateful heart. He loved flowers withallthe simple delight of childhood. He would hoverfrom bed to bed over his favourites ; and when hecame in, even from his shortest walk, deposited afew that he had gathered, safely in his room before hejoined the breakfast table. Often would he say asheenjoyed their fragrance, " How good is God to us !What should we think of a friend who had furnishedus with a magnificent house and all we needed, andthen coming in to see that all had been providedaccording to his wishes, should be'hurt to find thatno scents had been placed in the rooms ? Yet so hasGod dealt with us. Surely flowers are the smiles ofHis goodness."288 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1827.He staid out till near dinner, which was neverafter five, and early in the evening lay down for anhour and a half. He would then rise for a newterm of existence, and sparkle through a long eveningto the astonishment of those who expected, athis time of life, to see his mind and spirits flag,even if his strength was not exhausted. The wholeevening was seldom spent in conversation, for he hadcommonly some book in " family reading" whichwas a text for multiplied digressions full of incidentand illustration. His own hand has drawn a pictureof these rational and happy evenings.I did not put down my pen," he concludes aletter, after annexing as the date "Friday night,forty minutes after eleven," 8 " till the announcementof dinner rendered it necessary. After dinnerI lay down, and through the kind care of my friendswas suffered to sleep, as too commonly it happens,for an hour and three quarters. 9 I then came down,and after a little business heard the young Macaulayread passages from one of those numerous Annualswhich the wealth and animation of the presentday supplies for interesting the faculties without labouror effort. We went to prayers, and after abouthalf an hour, surely well spent, we returned tothe common room and renewed our reading, whichI just now stopped, finding how late it was, andbeing in the singularly favoured circumstances ofan old fellow, who is allowed to say ' Come oraTo Rev. R. I. Wilberforce, Feb. 26, 1830.9 An hour and half was his regular time, which he was rather jealousof exceeding.1827. HIS EVENINGS. 289go, do this or do that without the appearance offretfulness. Then by saying, c Surely you willnot think of finishing your letter at so late an hourreminded me that it was still on the stocks, and wasto be launched into the post stream tomorrow morning.I owe however so much respect to her reasonableremonstrances, as to endeavour to abridge allthat I might have added, if I had taken up my penin more favourable circumstances.One word of what we have been reading an articlein one of the Annuals on Gibbon and Madamede Stael, and latterly also on Voltaire. You remember,I doubt not, the last sentence in Gibbon's Autobiography; I have engaged my young friend to writeunder it Dr. Watts's beautiful hymn, ending with theline f Foretells a bright rising again.' This is one ofthe ' Hymns for Children,' but surely it is for the childrenof God, for the heirs of glory ; and when youcompare it either in point of good sense, or imagination,or sterling value, or sustaining hope, with theconsiderations and objects which feed the fancy, orexercise the understanding or affections, of the mostcelebrated men who have engaged the attention orcalled forth the eulogium of the literati of the lastcentury, you are irresistibly forced to exclaim in thespirit of my grand favourite,O happy hymnist, O unhappy bard ! 'Farewell, my dear .Ever affectionately yours,W. Wilberforce."VOL. V. O290 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1827.As the evening wore away his thoughts took commonlythis colour. "After prayers as he walkedup and down the room, he would have read to himmissionary accounts, and journals of what was doneby foreign Christians." 10 This was his usual Sundayevening reading. " It is the most deeply interestingof all subjects, to observe how the contest is going onbetween light and darkness, what different spots ofthis rebellious province are being brought into subjectionto their rightful Sovereign." nA few more of his remarks during this visit havebeen preserved by the same hand. " What light itthrows upon the philosophy of the human mind in itspresent fallen state, that while the writings of Rousseau,Voltaire, D'Alembert, &c. abounded in sentimentalityand supposed refinement, they actually preparedthe way for all the horrors of the Revolution.The guillotine was in perpetual operation at the verytime when these books were so read and admired."I heard much of the state of France from Sir JamesMackintosh, when he visited it during the short peace.He came back full of information, and sparkling likethe fire-fly." He then spoke of his own early visit toParis, of the splendour of the court, and the fascinationsof Marie Antoinette. " But they did not muchattract me," he said, " they were not enough of amoral kind." Then taking up a nutmeg from thetable, " How wonderful," he exclaimed, " are theworks of God, in enduing with such a scent a merepiece of dust ! "1 Nov. 1827, Mem. of a friend. Con. Mem.1827. LOVE OF BOOKS. 291His love of books was still extreme. Though he couldread little continuously he would pick out the pith ofmost works by a rapid glancing through the pages,and in every house he visited, he knew commonlywithin two days the full amount of its literary stores.His great complaint against his feeble eyesight wasthat it prevented his maintaining an accurate acquaintancewith the great writers of antiquity. There werefew modern works which he did not either thusrun through, or have read to him, except "merenovels ; " and his short criticisms show how little theacuteness of his mind was blunted. " Reading LaurieTodd, but disliked and left it off a stupidly told storyattempt at delineations of character very indifferentlyexecuted no touches of nature or marked discriminations.Hearing Hallam's Constitutional History ofEngland in Quarterly. Southey a bitter critic, andworks him with great acuteness and force." " HearingLord Orford's Memoirs of George the Second'sreign very bitter, and prejudices great, yet accountscurious." " Scott's novels useful as the works of amaster in general nature, and illustrative of the realitiesof past life. Looked at Pelham most flippant,wicked, unfeeling delineations of life to read suchscenes without being shocked must be injurious. I amsorry read it. For very shame I would not haveit read to me." " We finished Sir Jonah Barrington'sAutobiography. A true picture of a thorough man ofthe world, who professing to believe in Christianity,shows throughout his whole life not one single referencein thought or feeling, word or deed, to anyo 2292 LIFE OF Wilberforce. 1827.Scriptural principle or precept. On the other hand,Scripture says, f Whatsoever ye do in word or deed,do all to the glory of God.' " 12In such occupations as these he would go on till verylate; for from long use in parliament " the midnighthour was his zenith, and like the beautiful nereus withallher petals expanded, he was then in full bloom." 13This was especially the case when old and valuedfriends had gathered round him. Old age had scarcelylessened-his relish for society, but it had drawnstill closer the bonds of his affection for his earlyfriends. " As I grow older," he told Mr. Gisborne,I find myself growing more attached to such of thecompanions of my youth as are still left to me ; andthey are, I need not say, still more valued, when theyare such as we may humbly hope we shall meet againin a better world." 14 " When I was a younger man Iwas tempted to make intellectual conversation my allin all ; but now I can truly say, that I prefer thesociety of the simplest person who fears God, to thebest company of a contrary kind." 15 This happypreference was the result of early watchfulness. Afterreceiving a "very clever and entertaining man" manyyears before, " I must record the truth," he says, " Iseldom have found myself more unspiritual, more indisposedto prayer, than after my party had left me.I could not somehow raise my mind to heavenly objects,alas, and so it has been partly this morning also.Is it that the society of an able worldly man is heretoDiary, Dec. 13. 13 Mr. Gurney's Mem.i* Feb. 18, 1830. 15 Con. Mem.1827. HIS ASSOCIATES. 293by indicated to be unsafe to me ? I had a sort ofstruggle about inviting him, as if intimating the wishto be acquainted with an irreligious man, was showingtoo great a deference for talent. Is it as a punishmentthat I have since felt so cold and wanderingin my mind? I would not be nervous and superstitious,but I ought to watch and keep my heart withalldiligence. O let me deal honestly with myself.Let me give up, however entertaining, even howeverinstructive, whatever it seems the intimation of Godthat I should relinquish. O Lord, cause me to be sofull of love, and zeal, and grateful loyalty, and childlikeaffection for my Saviour, that I may love themthat love Thee ; and may I thus become more inmy tempers and frames of mind an inhabitant ofheaven." 16In great measure had this prayer been answered.Do invite to come and see you," was therequest this year of some of his family, naming one ofthe first men of the age for intellectual powers. Hemade no answer at the moment, but said afterwards inprivate, " I am sorry not to do what you wish, but sofalse and hollow as I think the man, I could have nocomfort in his company. Only think what truth is ;it is the very principle of gravitation in the moralworld." Yet there was nothing of austerity abouthim. The playfulness of his good-tempered humourwould often gild even serious remarks. " In theafternoon heard Mr. . A true sermon of hisschool, made to the receipt." 17 " Good old Mr. C.16 Journal. 17 Diary.294 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1827.preached uniformly rapid, like a watch-hand whenthe spring-chain broke." " What a world of peaceand happiness would it be if every body were likeLord ! Yet I must confess there is a certaindegree of dulness about him. It would be a sort ofPrayer-book and Homily Society temperature, if theworld were made of such." " I sat next to D. whogives you the idea of a great mental eater with adefective digestion." 18Thus did he continue from year to year exhibitingto another generation what had lately struck LordMilton as the most instructive feature in his character,the close union between the most rigid principles,and the most gay and playful disposition." 19 " Mayyou be spared," was the desire of Dr. Chalmers,to spend among us a long old age of piety andpeace. May you still," he goes on, " have manydays of rest, and of rejoicing on the borders of heaven.And may that book which spoke powerfully to myself,and has spoken powerfully to thousands, represent youto future generations, and be the instrument of convertingmany who are yet unborn." 20It is not a little interesting to trace the impressionhe now made on those who staid with him at High-wood." I remember," says the present Bishop ofCalcutta, " his walking with me up and down his3 Con. Mem.19 Letter to J. Stephen Esq. Nov. 12, 1830. The writers feel moredeeply than any who may read these pages, that to this great and leadingfeature of Mr. Wilberforce's character, they have been unable to do anyjustice in the necessary coldness of description.Rev. Dr. Chalmers to W. Wilberforce Esq. Jan. 22, 1828.1828. HIS CONVERSATION. 295drawing-room some time beyond midnight ; his figureis now in my mind, his benevolent eye, his kind, consideratemanner of speaking, his reverence for Scripture,his address, the pauses he made in his walkwhen he had any thing emphatic to say, I recollectone sentiment was, that the passages so frequent inScripture, importing the unwillingness of the Almightythat the sinner should perish, the invitations addressedto him to return, the remonstrances with him on hisunbelief, &c. must be interpreted strictly and literally,or they would appear to be a mockery of man'smisery, and to involve the most fearful imputationson the Divine character. Evasions of the force ofsuch passages were, he thought, highly injurious, andwent to sap the whole evidence and bearing of theChristian revelation.<e He had a delicate yet penetrating and microscopicinsight into character. Observations minute,accurate, graphical, and often with a tinge of humour,dropped from him in conversation, and when quiet inhis family he would imitate the voice and manner ofthe person he was describing (generally some publicman) in a way to provoke profuse merriment. Thenhe would check himself and throw in some kind remark.His charity indeed in judging of others, isa trait in his Christian character, which forces itselfon my recollection. Of his benevolence I need notspeak ; but his kind construction of doubtful actions,his charitable language towards those from whom hemost widely differed, his thorough forgetfulness oflittle affronts, were fruits of that general benevolence296 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1828.which continually appeared. The nearer you observedhim the more the habit of his mind appeared obviouslyto be modest and lowly. He was in as little measureas possible elated by the love and esteem of almostthe whole civilized world, which long before his deathhad been fixed upon him. It required some managementto draw him out in conversation, and thereforesome of those who saw him only once, might go awaydisappointed. But if he was lighted up, and in asmall circle, where he was entirely at his ease, hispowers of conversation were prodigious; a naturaleloquence was poured out, strokes of gentle playfulnessand satire fell on all sides, and the companywere soon absorbed in admiration. It commonlytook only one visit to gain over the most prejudicedstranger."The following letter is an instance of this kind.Its writer came to Highwood Hill prejudiced againsthim by some who had maligned his character. Afterspending two days at the house, she wrote to a sister.Highwood Hill, April 12, 1828.You would hardly believe, my dear sister, thatI find it much more difficult to write from this quietcountry place, than from London. Yet I havethought of you more than ever, and how have I wishedfor you here, where there is so much that would interestand charm you ! It is now past twelve, yet I amsitting up to finish what I began this morning ; in noone moment before have I been able to do so, and Iwrite after such a fatiguing day, that I feel as if all1828. HIS OWN HOUSE. 297my powers of expressing myself were gone. IndeedI think I have been in a delirium all the time that Ihave staid here, from the excitement of beinghappier than for a long time past. Yet my happinesscannot be complained of, as it has consisted somuch in watching the admirable conduct and feelings,and listening to the excellent conversation,which appears to bring religion more near to theheart, and the heart more near to God.I can perfectly believe that those who havenot seen Mr. Wilberforce in his own house, amonghis own family, and who have heard all the storiesthat have been told of him, may not give creditto the sincerity and purity of his intentions, butno one could see him as I have done without beingcharmed. I wish I could send you something ofwhat I have heard in the beautifully simple explanationsthat he gives every day of a chapterthat he reads from the Testament. Then if youcould hear him reading, as he does, the poems in theChristian Year ! ' I shall have much to tell you atsome future time, of sentiments and ideas of his, allso beautiful, and so true, and so indulgent, for I thinknothing more striking in him than that spirit ofgeneral benevolence which governs all that he says ;joined to the extreme beauty of his voice, it doesindeed make him appear f to love whatever he speaksof.' Then he seems so thoroughly pleased to hearany anecdote in praise of any person who is talkedabout, and so ready to make allowance in others forthe faults that he has not a taint of himself. Oh heo 3298 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1828.is a dear, good, admirable old man ! I have beenpraying that I may be enabled to imitate whatever isi mi table in this excellent being ; his talents and attractionsare not to be acquired, but is it not a cheeringreflection that such principles as his may begained by all ? "This desire of finding some favourable points inevery character was noticed by his neighbour LadyRaffles in a striking instance. " I spent a few days,"she says, " at his house, just after Moore's Life ofLord Byron was published. I brought it with me fromMurray's, and read parts of it to him at night, whilehe was pacing up and down the room with all thequickness and gaiety of a child. What struck meparticularly, was his anxiety to find out any thing inLord Byron's favour. f There now,' he would stopand exclaim, ' surely there is good feeling there ! ' 3One other frequent occupation of his time at High-woodis too characteristic to be omitted. Assistanceto young men of promise had always been with hima favourite charity, and the inclination had beenstrengthened by the evident harvest he had sometimesreaped. To have been one of the first whoassisted Kirk White would have been reward enough;but he had seen two others, who owed all to him, fillwith credit different judicial stations ; and at thisvery time the highest honours of one of our Universitieswere obtained by two young men, for whose educationhe had in like manner assisted to provide.But now that he had time, he gave more than merely1828. HIS CHAPEL. . 299money ; he made his house the home of one or twoyouths, the expense of whose education he defrayed ;all their holidays were spent with him j and hours ofhis own time were profusely given to training andfurnishing their minds. Nor were the poor forgotten; they were invited to join in his family worshipon the Sunday evening, and sought out often in theircottages for instruction and relief.This was his life when at High wood, and it wasstill varied by visits to his friends. Thus on the 24thof April, he set off "for a few days in London," havingbeen " busy last night writing my letter to Mr.Williams, about a new chapel ; left it as I passed byHendon." When he first came to look at High-wood,he was " most struck by its distance fromchurch three miles ;" 21 and it was only on hearingthat " a new chapel was probable," that he enteredon the purchase. Three years had now passed, andthe hope of a chapel seemed further off than ever :he resolved therefore to avail himself of the newChurch Building Acts, and erect one on HighwoodHill if he could obtain the sanction of the Commissioners.One great object of his present stay inLondon was to obtain this consent, and on his roadhe left with the vicar of the parish a statement of hiswishes.On the 25th he was Mr, Stephen's guest, andcalled on the Bishop of London, who most kindlysaw me, and gave me all the encouragement I couldpossibly expect. Afterwards called on Acland, and2' Diary, March, 1825.300 .LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1828,with him to the Athenaeum, where met Irish North,W. Whitmore, and one or two more old parliamentarymen who knew me in my working days.May 3rd. Freemasons' Hall, Anti Slavery meetingDuke, Brougham, Denman, Mackintosh, &c. Icould not get on comfortably or remember my topics.6th. Church Missionary meeting, and the Reportand motion falling in with my views, I pleased people.May it tend to augment the missionary spirit.1 3th. Naval and Military Bible Society, wherecompelled to take the chair delightful meeting.Captain Parry's declaration, that no persons more disposedthan those hardy, daring fellows, to receive thekingdom of God as a little child.14th. To Sir T. Lawrence's, to sit the first timefor Tnglis ; had a very pleasant hour with him. Williamscalled this morning, and talked fully to us.30th. Wrote letters, and made calls on Southey,who anticipates civil war ; when the Roman Catholicpriests see their religion really in danger, they willincite their flocks to insurrection. And when I concurredin the possibility of this and said the Houseof Commons would concede, as it had done in 1782,he replied ( The administration then weak, but nowthe Duke of Wellington stretching out his arm stiffly,and pulling up his sleeve. The Duke is a great man.'June 7th. To African Institution, and interviewwith the Duke of Wellington, Lord Bathurst, and SirGeorge Murray. The Duke received us very pleasingly,and distinctly declared he charged himself withthe obligations incurred by Canning and the late1828. HIS CHAPEL. 301government of which he a part." The same day heset off on his road to Sussex, to be present at the marriageof his third son. "9th. At Richmond sawGerard Noel's library a rich store of old divinity.10th. Langton all my descendants met around theboard mine, of whom above forty years ago, when abachelor in 1788, Dr. Warren declared that I had notstamina to last three weeks. Praise the Lord, O mysoul. 11th. Simeon read the marriage service admirably.The day fine, and I walked, partly the ( experimentsolitary,' and partly with Simeon and Sargent; whom I think the most truly humble and spiritualman I ever knew."After spending a few days at Dale Park with hiscousin Mr. Smith, (" he is all kindness most amiableand endearing. I had much serious talk with him")he was again fixed at Highwood on the 21st, andsoon busy in the preparations for his chapel. " 27th.To town immediately after breakfast to talk withBishop of London about my chapel. He gives mereason to hope that the Commissioners will act accordingto their present powers, instead of proposingto wait till next year, when their new Bill may bepassed. July 1st. Williams called, and was very civilwalked with me, and told me he must in consciencesupport me if he could not effect the matter himself.8th. My intended visit to Scotland having beenmentioned to Chalmers, &c. quite a fermentation produced.But I dare not leave my chapel business unfinished.Writing letter to Chalmers and hearingSumner's apostolic preaching, my chief occupations.302 LIFE OF Wilberforce. 1828.12th. To Mr. Williams's to talk to him about mychapel, believing him a man of kind feelings, andgenerous. We had much talk at length he told methat he would not oppose me. 24th. Lady Raffleswalked with me, and we settled the site of thechapel'Up to this time it was his intention to build thechapel upon Highwood Hill, amongst his own cottages,and near his house ; but at this moment he discoveredthat there had been a secret opposition raisedagainst his plan, grounded on the site he had proposed.Though Highwood Hill would better suit hisown convenience, the chief population of the hamletlay about Mill Hill, half a mile further from hishouse ; and to this spot he reluctantly consented tomove the site of the intended chapel. This led onthe 18th of August to " a free conference with Mr.Williams " Mill Hill being the place where he hadso long talked of building, in .which " he pressed hisprior claim to build, and not unfairly. The conclusionwas that he would build the chapel himself." Thisit appeared to the Commissioners that he could noteffect ; and when they met upon the 26th, after hehad been with them for about an hour, they called inMr. Wilberforce. They " kept me but a few minutes,arid then read me their resolutions accepting myoffer." 22The Commissioners at a following meeting (Sept.16th) " assented to the site, and the Bishop of Londonasked me about making it a district church."22 Diary, Aug. 26.1829. MR. WILLIAMS'S OPPOSITION. 303The building was soon afterwards commenced. " Itwill doubtless," be told Hannah More, 23 " be an expensivematter, but when I consider that I am livinghere in the enjoyment of all the comforts of civilizedsociety, and with the humble hope of a still betterportion in a better world, I could not lay my headon my pillow with a quiet conscience, if I were not tohave done my best to secure for all my poor neighboursthe blessings of Christian instruction, and Ihope of pastoral care."But this good work begun in such a spirit was notto be completed without opposition and contention,in the midst of which he eminently manifested inprivate, as he had long done in public life, the meeknessof true Christian wisdom under calumny andfalsehood. It will perhaps be best to give at oncethe sequel of this matter, although it will somewhatinterrupt the order of narration, as it lasted on untilthe conclusion of his life.The secret opposition which had failed in preventinghis design, now broke out into open violence - 9 andwhen, in compliance with the advice of the Bishop ofLondon as well as from his own wish, he applied tothe Commissioners to give a district to his chapel, hereceived " a very rough and malignant letter fromWilliams, substantially charging me with falsehoodand mercenary motives. The Bishop of London behavingvery kindly. 2424th. Sunday. Williams had written to me thathe meant to summon publicly a vestry to consider83 Jan. 16. Diary, May 20.304 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1829.my proposal to the Commissioners for a district. Iam told he preached against me. Poor fellow ! Ithink I can truly say that I regret it chiefly on hisown account. Yet I would not deceive myself. Myinsensibility may arise chiefly from habit duringforty-five years used to false charges, &c. it wouldbe strange if I now regarded them. Blessed be God,I am sure I have meant well ; and the only fear I havehad is lest I should have spent too much, though inso good a cause. Expounded this evening on secondlesson, 1 Cor. vii. ( The time is short.' ' It remaineth,'&c. ' The fashion of this world passeth away.'27th. The Commissioners doubt their power toadd a district without the incumbent's permission.Vestry at Hendon Williams very rude.June 2nd. At work on an Address to the parishof Hendon on Williams's attack about applying for adistrict. 5th. Published my Address."His spirit at this trying moment may be gatheredfrom a letter written the same day to his third son.Highwood Hill, June 5, 1829.My very dear ,Whence it has happened I can scarcely say,but it is really true, that I appear to myself to havehad no leisure for some time past, indeed almost eversince you left us. The enclosed printed paper willexplain how I have been occupied for the last fewdays. I need not assure you that I have been veryunwillingly forced forward, but Mr. Williams's industryin diffusing his statements, compelled me1829. REASONS FOR BUILDING HIS CHAPEL. 305either to suffer his representations to receive thatconsent which my silence would be supposed to givethem, (according to the old adage,) or to lay beforethe public a more correct narrative. Happily theBishop of London is completely with us, and he is inconsequenceduly impressed with a sense of the unworthyconduct (his own phrase) of Mr. Williams.I have been afraid of not duly bearing in mind theapostle's injunction, not to render evil for evil or railingfor railing, but I trust I have attacked Mr. Williams'scharacter no more than was necessary for defendingmy own. The chief subject of my regret, andindeed deep concern, is, that I fear there will be asort of permanent family feud with Williams : yet letbut the affair be brought to any settlement eitherway, I will use my utmost endeavours to make up thequarrel ; and it is a consideration on which my mindreposes with great and settled comfort, that long afterI am dead and gone, some good man or other will beendeavouring to bring perishing souls to the greatPhysician. Again, the effects of the attention whichI hope any occupant of the intended chapel will payto the education of the children of the neighbourhoodweighs powerfully with me. I believe I must havetold you that the grand consideration which decidedme to build was, that probably no one would arise,were I to suffer the opportunity to pass unimproved,who would have influence enough to carry themeasure, though he might overflow with money.Also I conceive more people will be inclined to aidme in a pecuniary way, than would assist any other306 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1829.builder ; and therefore in fact it would cost me muchless than it would cost any one else, and therefore theduty appeared naturally to devolve upon me. I hadreally rather it should not he mentioned, but I wasonce a little staggered, chiefly I think by the fear ofthe irritation, and the constant hostility that wouldfollow.My spirits have I think been less buoyant thanis common with me ; at this very moment I feel languidand could be asleep in three minutes. Yet fewpersons of a bodily frame like mine, I mean not of therobust sort, enjoy such comfortable health as I do.We had a very pleasant party yesterday. Aclandand his sweet wife in the afternoon from the Harrowspeeches, and Mr. Dunn. I believe you know him,and if not, I could not give a just notion of him withoutgoing into more detail than I have now time for.There is an elegance and a refinement both of moralsand manners that is rarely met with, and I mighthave added of taste and feeling too. In short he is acharming creature. Then Mrs. Barouche, the widowof the old gentleman of that name, who lived atBellevue near Dublin, and her niece Miss Boyle,commonly termed Kate, and Sir Harry Varney, andLady Raffles : all but Dunn slept here, and indeedare only just now separated.But I must stop. How goes on your old reclaimedBaptist? Do you know Acland's son atChrist church? Ask him over to see you. It is anexcellent family with which to cultivate an acquaintance.Young men scarcely ever estimate at a sumsMR. WILLIAMS'S PAMPHLET. 307gently high rate the advantage of bringing togetherlike-minded persons. May God bless you, my dearestmost sincerely and seriously do I say it. I amwriting with a vile pen, that has the great fault ofopening its mouth, and yet saying nothing. I amEver most affectionately yours,W. Wilberforce."June 13th. The Commissioners are taking opinionsas to their powers in relation to my chapel.There is something very fine in this supremacy of law ;that these powerful men have no idea beyond ascertainingand obeying it." 25This uncertainty delayed the progress of thechapel, and in the following spring, the cause of contentionstill subsisting" (Feb. 18th) to-day Mr,Williams issued a pamphlet against me. I resolvednot to see it till tomorrow. Heard a little of itbefore dinner. But it would only fill my mind,when I had better not think of it. Evening, hearddebates, &c.19th. M. read me Williams's pamphlet, a veryartful manufacture, produced by availing himself ofchanging circumstances, and plans proportionablyvarying. God, Thou knowest my integrity. Morning,hearing debates evening, Larder's Address toLondon University lectures containing wonders ofastronomy.20th. Hearing Williams's pamphlet. I was justabout setting to work to draw up a brief and generalsDiary.308 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1830.defence, when Batten, Dr. Langley, &c. called.Evening, hearing M'Crie's Life of Knox. Had twodays ago a very pleasing letter from the Bishop ofLondon.21st. Sunday, very cold and strong wind, so athome read some of the Church service evening, I expoundedon Gal. iv, 6 , second lesson ; an exquisitelypregnant text. Blessed be God, not harassed byWilliams's business all day, but enabled to keep mymind filled with better things than those of thisworld, and felt good-will towards poor Williams himself.I well remember what Fenelon says, that weshould remember that the grace of God may changethe heart of him whom you may conceive most opposedto Him.22nd. I cannot but record it as one of those graciousinterventions of Providence, for which I havesuch cause of thankfulness, that the very man whomI most wished to consult, , came while we were atbreakfast ; led no doubt by that kindness which hasalways prompted him to be useful to me ; and withpleasure I connect this kindness with the affectionaterespect with which he always speaks and feels of mydear sister. God bless her. Oh He has blessed herbytaking her to Himself. We talked on the propercourse for me to pursue. He thinks I had better sendin a paper to the Commissioners, who are in some sortpartners to my business, and there record as it weremy innocence. Lord, thou knowest I am innocentof all the charges he brings against me."Two days later he wrote to Lady Olivia Sparrow.1830. HIS TEMPER UNDER ATTACKS. 309Highwood Hill, Middlesex, Feb. 24, 1830.My dear Lady O.Many thanks for your friendly letter. It hadappeared to me, I assure you, very long since we hadseen or heard from each other ; indeed I was not atall clear in what part of the world you had fixed yourquarters. I rejoice that you have been able to standthe rigours of our Nova Semble winter. But I haveheard of many who after enduring the bitter coldwithout apparent injury, became more or less disorderedwhen the weather became milder. Let metherefore claim the right of age to warn you againstconceiving you may now dismiss all caution, and exposeyourself to the weather with unrestrained freedom.I have great reason to be thankful for the measure ofcomfortable health that I enjoy. Indeed I oftenthink no one scarcely has so much cause as myselfto adopt the language of the psalmist, and to say,that goodness and mercy have followed me all thedays of my life. I have none of those constitutionaldiseases which often imbitter the last stage of life.{ " But I should never have done were I to attemptenumerating all the mercies and blessings whichcrowd on my view ; and the spiritual are above all invalue. Just now I have a cross. You know that I ambuilding a chapel under the Commissioners, who havebeen intrusted with a power, in such cases as they approve,to grant to individuals the perpetual patronageof chapels which they will build and endow. My LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1830.boyhood is, and still more was, in the most wretchedstate as to spirituals; and the vicar, who cannotattend to the poor himself, ought to thank me forinsuring their receiving religious instruction. Yet,though he will be a pecuniary gainer rather thanloser, he is opposing me to the utmost, and is chargingme, in a pamphlet circulated with great activity,with prosecuting by the grossest falsehoods a schemefor my own and my family's pecuniary gain, underthe pretended motive of promoting the spiritual interestsof my poor neighbours. I call God to witnessI am perfectly innocent. But our vicar* has wove a web of fallacies whichit might have been difficult to unravel, in the judgmentof those who had no previous disposition tothink well of me. But it has been said men who areloose as to facts (the idea is commonly expressedmore briefly) should have good memories ; and froma little failure in recollection in one or two particularshe has greatly aided his own detection. But Iwill say no more, only I thought you as a friend ofmine should be prepared for any rumours you mighthear of my being discovered at seventy and upwardsto be a liar, a covetous rogue, and a hypocrite.I am waiting with no little anxiety for the ascertainmentof the fact as to the widow-burning enormitybeing abolished by Lord William, Oh may he havethe honour of wiping off that foul blot. My dearfriend, may all good attend you and yours ; for thelatter I do not forget. Have you seen Raises's .COMMISSIONERS' JUDGMENT OF WILLIAMS. 311mons ? There are but few of them, but I think themvery good. The Psalms, and St. Paul's Epistles, aremore and more dear to me. Farewell.Ever sincerely and affectionatelyYour Ladyship's,W. Wilberforce.The 43rd Psalm is just now my delight, andthe 71st."27th. Found some useful letters about Williams'spamphlet. Well, blessed be God, all is sound ; andat the day of judgment, if not before, my perfectguiltlessness of all the crimes imputed to me by thatman, will be discovered; Psal. xliii. 1March 2nd. Bishops of Winchester and Chesteradvise my dismissing Williams's charges from mymind, and my friends generally dissuade me from replying.Found a Journal which likely to be useful.Obliging note from the Bishop of London contradictingtwo of Williams's statements.March 10th. A most kind letter yesterday fromthe Bishop of Chester, informed me that at a greatmeeting of the Commissioners, Williams's attack uponme became the subject of discussion, and that nofriend of mine could have wished more than was saidabout the character of both of us ; and all in onestory. A solitary walk with the psalmist eveningquiet,13th. I have been looking over old Journals, andpreparing an answer to Williams's pamphlet ; though312 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1830.not meaning to publish. It is very shocking tothink how artfully that man has been weaving aweb ; but, N. B. I must look carefully and impartiallyto see how far self-deception and loose recollectionmay have carried him to believe [what] he haspublished. It will be a curious and, as a study ofhuman nature, useful investigation ; but the insinuationsand sarcasms most opposite to love, are, alas !clearly of an anti-divine origin."The doubts which hung over the 'exact powers ofthe Commissioners still delayed the day of consecration,and it was not until a few days after the deathof Mr. Wilberforce that St. Paul's chapel at MillHill was opened for the worship of Almighty God. 26Whilst this annoying business was in progress, hisfaith in God was proved by another trial. Thoughhis style of living had always been below his income,he had never accumulated money. He had retrenchedhis expenses, to give and not to save ; and he hadgiven largely and constantly. " You probably know,"was an incidental testimony to his unseen charity,from a distant relation soon after his decease, " that26 The deeds were at length prepared when his health was so feeblethat he could not inspect them ; and an error in the office of his professionaladviser has since involved his representatives in tedious litigation.The Church Building Act required that a sum of 5 per cent, onthe original cost should be invested as a repairing fund. . . Mr. Wilberforcepaid into his banker's hands 200 for the purpose ; but his solicitorstriking out of his calculation some ornamental additions to the chapel,invested without his knowledge only 180; from this apparent flaw,corrected by a new deed of endowment, Mr. Williams raised a claimto the right of patronage in Mr. Wilberforce's chapel. The incumbentnamed by him continues to officiate, but the question is still pending inthe courts of law.1830. HIS LIBERALITY. 313it was very much owing to him that I was enabledduring a very long period of years to live in anindependent manner ; and his tenderness and feelingin conferring obligations was such that theyraised, not mortified, the objects of them. WheneverI alluded to the subject his usual reply was to thiseffect, e Had our circumstances been changed, youwould have acted towards me as I have done towardsyou.' To two others of my family his liberality laidthe foundation of present usefulness, and I trust offuture blessedness."He had always therefore lived up to his income."He feared not once himself to be in need,Nor cared to hoard for those whom he did breed :The grace of God he laid up still in store,Which like a stock he left unto his seed."ff I never intended to do more," he told his eldest son,than not exceed my income, Providence havingplaced me in a situation, in which my charities ofvarious kinds were necessarily large. But believeme there is a special blessing on being liberal to thepoor, and on the family of those who have been so ;and I doubt not my children will fare better even inthis world, for real happiness, than if I had beensaving 20,000 or 30,000 of what has been givenaway."He had felt therefore some inconvenience fromreducing his rents, which were never high, full 37per cent," at a time when his family were most expensiveto him. His property had been furtherlessened by his raising a considerable capital in orderVOL. v. p314 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1830.to embark his eldest son, whose health appeared unequalto the practice of the law, in a large farmingspeculation, ee to be actually managed " as hethought " by ," 27 a man in whose principles andpractical acquaintance with the business, he at thattime entertained the highest confidence. The eventdid not confirm his expectations ; and in the verymonth when Mr. Williams's pamphlet appeared, hefound that to secure the remainder of his fortune hemust submit to the immediate and very heavy loss ofnearly all the capital which had been invested in thebusiness, and retrench greatly on his usual style ofliving. Yet he was still as free from care as ever,and his " solitary walk with the psalmist," was twodays after the full discovery of his loss. Amongstmany gratifying instances of his unbroken cheerfulness,an interesting sample may be found in his renewedintercourse with Sir James Mackintosh, whomhe now met frequently at Battersea Rise. " Mackintoshcame in," he says, " and sat most kindly chattingwith me during my dinner what a paragon of acompanion he is; quite unequalled!" 28 "We arespending a little time at this to me deeply interestingplace. I always visit the funeral urn H. T. Jan.16th, 1815M. T. Oct. 12th, 1815. Sir JamesMackintosh and his family now live in one of .thehouses which are built upon the ground which Henry(Thornton) sold on the side opposite to that of C.Grant's house. He has been sitting chattering tothe girls and myself for above an hour ; and this Diary, May 20, 1825. Ib. Nov. 25, 1829.1830. SIR JAMES MACKINTOSH, 315extraordinary man spends, they tell me, much of histime in the circulating library room, at the end ofthe Common, and chats with the utmost freedom toall the passengers in the Clapham stage as he goesand comes from London. It is really to he regrettedthat he should thus throw away time so valuable.But he is at every body's service, and his conversationis always rich and sparkling I am much pleasedwith a review of Tom Macaulay's in the Edinburgh ;it is not merely the very superior talent which it indicates,but its being on the right side. The WestminsterReview, of which Mill is a principal support,is a very mischievous publication; and this Reviewwill be a death-blow to Mill as a Reasoner." 29Mackintosh's own account of this intercourse is peculiarlyhappy. " Do you remember Madame de Maintenon'sexclamation, ( Oh the misery of having toamuse an old King, qui n'est pas amiable ! ' Now ifI were called upon to describe Wilberforce in oneword, I should say he was the most ' amiable ' manI ever met with in my life. Instead of having to thinkwhat subjects will interest him, it is perfectly impossibleto hit on one that does not. I never saw anyonewho touched life at so many points and thisis the more remarkable in a man who is supposed tolive absorbed in the contemplation of a future state.When he was in the House of Commons, he seemedto have the freshest mind of any man there. Therewas all the charm of youth about him. And he is*9 Letter to Mr. Babington.p 2316 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1830.quite as remarkable in this bright evening of his daysas when I saw him in his glory many years ago."The chief alteration wrought in him by age, was ashrinking from actual business. " I get little done,"he complains, " compared with what I used to be ableto do when a young man." 30 In spite of appearanceswhich might mislead a careless eye, he had been aremarkably efficient man. " His mind," says a deeperobserver, 31 " was of a highly discursive character ; andit was often extremely amusing to observe how, whilepursuing any particular subject, he was caught bysome bright idea which flashed across his path, andcarried him off (for 'a time at least) in a wholly differentdirection. This peculiarity belonged to hisgenius, and was a means of multiplying the instructionwhich his conversation afforded. But the volubilityof his intellect was balanced by the stability andfaithfulness of his moral qualities. When the happinessof man and the glory of God were in his view,he was for ever recurring to his point, and in spite ofall his episodes of thought, was an assiduous, persuasive,and undaunted labourer." 32And such he still continued, when any great causewoke up his former fires. " Retired as he was frompublic life," says Mr. Gurney, " and greatly enfeebledin his health, he no longer found his place in the vanof the army, or in the heat of the battle ; but both byspeaking and writing he repeatedly bore his public30 Diary, Oct. 28, 1829. 3> Joseph John Gurney.32 Mr. Gurney's Mem.1830. HIS LAST PUBLIC MEETING IN LONDON. 317testimony in favour of the great principles of the Abolitionists; and his warm encouragements and wisecounsels were always ready to stimulate and directthe efforts of his friends." 33The spring of 1830 supplies an instance. In themidst of all the trials and perplexities which then hadgathered round him, the darkened prospects of thenegro cause called him again from his retirement.We must," he was convinced, " endeavour to producethroughout the whole country a just sense of ourcrime in maintaining such a cruel system." He consentedtherefore on the 15th of May, with a weakenedvoice and an enfeebled frame, to take the chair at agreat meeting of the Anti-Slavery Society. " All theold friends of the cause gathered round " 3t him ; andFreemasons' Hall overflowed with an unusual audience.This was the last time he took any public part inLondon for this cause. In the following year he thusdeclined attending the anniversary of the Anti SlaverySociety."April 21, 1831.My dear Friend,It cannot be necessary for me to assure youthat my not obeying the summons issued to the friendsof our great cause, to assemble in Exeter Hall, mustbe produced by some unavoidable hinderance. Theprohibition of my medical adviser is clear and strong.I must beg you to do me the favour to assure ourfriends of my best wishes and fervent prayers for the33 Mr. Gurney's Mem. 3 * Diary.318 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1830.success of our endeavours. Our motto must continueto be, ' perseverance : ' and ultimately I trust the Almightywill crown our efforts with success. I remain,my dear friend, with the highest respect andregard,Ever yours sincerely and affectionately,W. WILBERFORCE.T. Foweli Buxton Esq. &c. &c. &c."The fruit of this effort was reaped in the electionswhich succeeded, when Yorkshire, which had ever ledthe way in this great cause, chose four representativespledged to Emancipation, and amongst themHenry Brougham though unconnected with thecounty because he was its advocate. " The election,"Mr. Wilberforce heard from him, 33 " turnedvery much on Slavery ; your name was in everymouth, and your health the most enthusiastically received."" Depend upon it," was the encouragingaugury with which he cheered some despondingfriends, " we are getting forward. The standard ofpublic opinion is rising under the influence of an improvingbody of clergy, and the secrets of the prison-housewill be divulged more freely."In France too the prospect was more cheering ; andhe at once re-opened an active correspondence withLa Fayette, the Due de Broglie, and others, whomthe new revolution had raised to political importance.But the sketch of this vigorous and cheerful mind3* H. Brougham Esq. to W. Wilberforce Esq.1830. CAUSES OF HIS CHEERFULNESS. 319would be exceedingly imperfect, if no hint were givenof the hidden springs by which its freshness wasmaintained. A merely cheerful age is a melancholysight to thoughtful men. " It quite lowers my spirits'was his own declaration at the conclusion ofa visit, 36 " to see people past seventy, so little apparentlyestranging themselves from worldly objects ; itis most painful to me not to be able to converse withthem on religion." His own cheerfulness rested ona surer basis. He was often thoughtfully retracingall " the way by which the Lord his God had ledhim." " How striking is the change of fifty yearstheir Samuel Smith and I travelled as bachelors, andnow he has a house full of descendants ; and I alsohave five children and a grandchild living, besides adaughter and sweet little grandson gone, I humblytrust, to a better world. Praise the Lord, O mysoul. My dear, and I trust imparadised, child's birthday."37 'This same tone of thought may be traced in hisletters to those with whom he was most intimate.It is one of my frequent subjects of gratitude andpraise, though not as frequently as it ought to be, thatin the kind providence of God I was born an Englishman.Go through the whole earth and enumerateevery part of it, and you will find nothing like ourown country. An Englishman too in this period ofour country's existence, and in the middle station oflife, &c. &c. &c. We do not, I am sure / do not,3<3 Letter to the Rev. R. I. Wilberforce.37 Diary, July 29, 1829, at Wood Hall.320 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1830.live sufficiently under the constant influence of thisspirit of thankfulness ; and I believe there is not anyone,who has at all observed the dealings of Providencein his own instance with any thing like a duemeasure of attention, who will not have seen many,many particulars in which he has been deeply indebtedto the preventing or directing grace of God. Itwas the reproach, and among the chief causes of thethe condemnation of the pagan world, scanty as wasthe light they enjoyed compared with the brightnessof our meridian day, that they ' were not thankful.'And still more the people of God were threatenedwith being cast off if they should not serve the Lordtheir God with joyfulness and with gladness of heartfor the abundance of all things. How much morethen should our hearts overflow with continual gratitude! I doubt not the want of this blessed dispositionwill constitute one of the leading articles in thecondemnation of the unholy ; and I have found rustics,as unassailable as a tortoise in every other quarter,feeling their weak and indefensible state in this point,when I have put it to themselves whether they havebeen in any due degree grateful to the God who gavethem all their present blessings, and who gave His onlySon to die for them, and to the Saviour, who for theirsakes endured the unknown agonies of His bitterpassion and cruel death."In his letters to his children these feelings especiallyappear.1830. HIS GRATITUDE. 321TO MISS WILBERFORCE.(Private.) Highwood Hill, July 15, 1830.My dear ,I was compelled to make up in extreme haste,and to finish full as rapidly, the letter to you whichis just despatched to the post office, and I recollected,when it was too late to supply the defect, that therewas not in my epistle a single word of a serious, orrather of a religious character. Now, though I do notcarry my principle in this respect so far as some goodpeople have done, thinking it wrong that any letterunder any circumstances should be sent off withoutcontaining some religious sentiments, yet at my timeof life, almost a year beyond that stated by thepsalmist to be the ordinary limit of the life of man,and more especially when a daughter is addressed,I do think there should be some recognition of thoseinfluential principles which ought ever to be uppermostin a Christian's bosom. And if from any onethe constant exhibition of religious principles andfeelings might be expected, assuredly from me, inwhose heart there may well be expected a continualbreathing forth of adoring gratitude to my God andSaviour, for all the long course of goodness and mercyby which my life has been distinguished. I haveoften thought that if I had been imbued with thenotions described in Mrs. Grant's letters from theHighlands, (notions which represent the Deity asbeing jealous of the happiness of his creatures,) Ip 3322 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1830.should certainly have supposed that I must preparefor some signal misfortune, to counterbalance all theaccumulated blessings which had been poured out onme in such rich and increasing profusion. But oh howmuch more generous, as well as just, are the views ofthe character of the Supreme Being, our heavenlyFather, which we derive from the word of God !God is love ! ' Even under a dispensation which,when compared with that of the gospel, may bedeemed to wear somewhat of a harsh and repulsivecountenance, the Jews were told that the lawsprescribed to them were devised for their good ;but under our more generous and gracious system,judgment and punishment are termed the strangework of God; and mercy, and long-suffering, andbounty, and loving-kindness, are his habitual dispositionstowards us. Even when speaking to sinners(there is scarcely any passage in the whole Biblewhich has afforded me so much comfort) the languageis, f The Lord takes pleasure in them that fearHim, in them that hope in His mercy* Only considerthe force of that assurance, and the comfort it mustgive to any who may be apprehensive of being presumptuousin indulging hopes of pardon. They areassured not that they may presume to hope that theirsins may be forgiven, but that by so hoping they willdisplay the very disposition of mind in which Godtakes pleasure. Believe me to be,Ever your very affectionate Father,W. WILBERFORCE."1831. HIGH VALUE OF TIME. 323With this grateful retrospect of life he combined ahigh value of the time which still remained to him.What importance does it give to life when it isregarded in its true character, as the probation inwhich are to become constitutional the dispositionswhich must form our meetness for the heavenly state !When the real purpose and grand end of life is comparedwith that low view of it which is taken by thevotaries of ambition, or even of literature and science,the contrast between the joys of children, and theresearches and pursuits of manhood, is a most feebleand inadequate illustration." 38 " The main fault of thepresent day," he now repeatedly declared, "is themaking knowledge and intellectual advancement thegreat object of pursuit, instead of that moral improvementby which we may be fitted for a higherand better state. Much mystery overhangs the one,and time with an oblivious touch effaces the little wedo attain of science ; but blessed is he who attainssome lineaments of the moral image of God, for theyshall see Him as He is, and then shall know even asthey now are known." 39 This conviction made himstill watchful to redeem the time. " This evening,"he says, Feb. 15th, "I expounded on the Epistle,So run that ye may obtain, &c. lest I should be acast-away.' The second lesson this very evening is1 Cor. ii., in which St. Paul relates his labour andsufferings. And could pains be required by HIM? Othen, my soul, strive to him that overcome only, the3S - Letter to Lord Teignmouth.39 Letter to Mr. Washington.324 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1831.promise is assured." 40 " My future state should nowbe my grand, indeed comparatively speaking, my soleconcern. God's kind providence has granted to mearesidue of life after its business is over. I know Imust be near death, perhaps very near it. I believethat on the state in which death finds me, will dependmy eternal condition ; and even though my state maynow be such as to produce a humble hope that Iam safe, yet by a wise improvement of my time, Imay augment my eternal happiness, besides enjoyingdelightful communion with God in the interval. Letme then make the improvement of my soul the firstgrand business of my life, attending also to the goodof others, if possible both by my pen, and conversation,and social intercourse."In this spirit he continued still his rules of abstinenceand self-denial, saying on Ash Wednesday,"We attend too little to these days;" and oftensecretly observing his fasting regulations " disusedpleasant food Daniel. Entire fasting does not suitmy constitution, but I attend to the principle." 4lOften also did he now give up his days to more continuousdevotion, employing thus especially his ownand his children's birth-days, and noting in his Diary.I had an interview of two hours and a quarter beforedinner of unspeakable value. Why not secure manysimilar seasons ? At my time of life what so proper or solikely to make me useful to others as thus walkingwith God ? " 42 It was not in vain that he thus watchedand laboured. Through his later years he walked, inDiary, 1829. *' Aug. 22, 1830. Aug. 24, 1830.1831. HIS LEAVING Highroad. 325an eminent degree, with God, and was literally keptin perfect peace through every trial. Those wholived with him and marked his unmixed cheerfulnesscould scarcely believe that he felt as much on relinquishingin 1831 his house at Highwood, as a letterwritten at the time implies.Highwood, March 16.My dear ,I wished that you should receive from myselfrather than from the tongue of rumour, tidings whichsooner or later were sure to be conveyed to you, andwhich I know would give you pain. The loss incurredhas been so heavy as to compel me to descendfrom my present level, and greatly to diminish myestablishment. But I am bound to recognise in thisdispensation the gracious mitigation of the severityof the stroke. It was not suffered to take place tillall my children were educated, and nearly all of themplaced out in one way or another ; and by the delay,Mrs. Wilberforce and I are supplied with a delightfulasylum under the roofs of two of our own children.And what better could we desire ? A kind Providencehas enabled me with truth to adopt the declarationof David, that goodness and mercy havefollowed me all my days. And now, when thecup presented to me has some bitter ingredients, yetsurely no draught can be deemed distasteful whichcomes from such a hand, and contains such gratefulinfusions as those of social intercourse and the sweetendearments of filial gratitude and affection. What326 LIFE OF Wilberforce. 1831.I shall most miss will be my books and my garden,though I own I do feel a little the not (for I know nothow long if ever) being able to ask my friends totake a dinner or a bed with me, under my own roof.And as even the great apostle did not think thehaving no certain dwelling-places associated with hisother far greater sufferings, unworthy of mention, soI may feel this also to be some, though I grant not agreat evil, to one who has so many kind friends whowill be happy to receive him."His sure confidence was it'll in God. " He willnot suffer me to be disgraced in my old age. Whatgives me repose in all things, is the thought of theirbeing His appointment. I doubt not that the sameGod who has in mercy ordered so many events for solong a course of time, will never fail to overrule allthings both for my family and myself." And onrecovering from a temporary illness, " I can scarceunderstand," he said, " why my life is spared so long,except it be to show that a man can be as happywithout a fortune as with one'*It should be mentioned to the credit of our times,that by no less than six persons, one of them a WestIndian, such private offers were now made to Mr.Wilberforce as would have at once restored hisfortune. 43 It was from no false pride that he declinedentirely these friendly propositions, thinking it One of these offers, made, highly to his honour, by the late LordFitewilliam, never reached Mr. Wilberforce's ears; a near connexion,through whom it was made, and who knew his former decision, decliningit without consulting him.1832. DEATH OF HIS SECOND DAUGHTER.came his Christian character rather to adapt hishabits to his present income. Towards his chapel atMill Hill alone he consented to receive the assistanceof his friends ; and no less happy in receiving than inshowing kindness, he carried always in his pocket anddelighted to produce a well-worn list of their severalcontributions.His leaving Highwood was soon followed by a trialof a different nature, the death of his survivingdaughter. " Blessed be God," he says, during herillness, " we have every reason to be thankful for thestate of mind we witness in her : a holy, calm, humblereliance on her Saviour, enables her to enter thedark valley with Christian hope, leaning as it wereon her Redeemer's arm, and supported and cheeredby the blessed promises of His gospel. We are in thehands of our heavenly Father, and I am sure no onehas hitherto had such reason as myself to say thatgoodness and mercy have followed me all my days.I was much impressed yesterday with the similarityin some respects of my own situation, to thatdf her dear little innocent, who was undergoing theoperation of vaccination. The infant gave up itslittle arm to the operator without suspicion or fear.But when it felt the puncture, which must have beensharp, no words can express the astonishment andgrief that followed. I could not have thought themouth could have been distended so widely as itcontinued, till the nurse's soothing restored her usualcalmness (for it is really true, that I never knew aninfant that cried near so seldom as this little one).328 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1832.What an illustration is this, thought I, of the impatientfeelings we are often apt to experience, andsometimes even to express, when suffering from thedispensations of a Being, whose wisdom we profess tobelieve to be unerring, whose kindness we know tobe unfailing, whose truth also is sure, and who hasdeclared to us, that all things shall work together forgood to them that love Him, and that the object of Hisinflictions is to make us partakers of His holiness !Let us have your prayers, that the painful visitationwe are now experiencing, may have a blessed effectupon us."Now was seen the fruit of the high degree in whichhe had learned to " walk by faith rather than bysight." " I have often heard," he says, " that sailorson a voyage will drink ' friends astern' till they are halfwayover, then ' friends a-head.' With me it has beenfriends a-head' this long time." It was not by theslow process of reasoning, that he learned to regardthis as a short separation, he at once felt that theyshould not long be parted. And he soon describeshimself, " as enjoying as much peace and social comfort,as any ought to expect in this stormy world." 44I forget whether I sent you any particulars of theclosing scene," he writes to Mr. Babington. " Theywere such as to call forth from our dear friend Sargentdeclarations of satisfaction and thankfulness, whichwill be sources of comfort and joy to Mrs. Wilberforceand myself as long as we live. The Mondayafter she was taken away we removed to St. Boniface,To J. Stephen Esq. March 30.1832.ST. BONIFACE.which we had taken in the hope of its conducing toher recovery. It is certainly one of the most delightfulof all possible retirements. The most romanticscenery, sheltered from every cold wind, and aboundingin the most delightful walks, both sea and inland.There the Sargent ; my S. and his wife, and littletoddler and prattler ; my H. and ourselves, passed adelightful fortnight. Really it was an oasis in thewilderness."CHAPTER XXXIX.APRIL 1832 TO AUGUST 1833.Retirement into Kent and the Isle of Wight His great happinessthere Habits of life Specimen of conversationRetrospect of life Thankfulness Humility TendernessTrust in God Mr. Richmond's portrait Anti-Slavery exertionsLast illness Death Funeral.WHEN Mr. Wilberforce left Highwood Hill, he intendedto divide the year between the houses of hissecond and third sons. The latter already had ahome fit for his reception in the Isle of Wight ; andthe former soon possessed one in the neighbourhoodof Maidstone. " You will join me I am sure' hetells more than one amongst his friends, 1 " in beingthankful as well as rejoiced in my being able to informyou that Lord Brougham has given to mysecond son, (or rather I may say to me,) quite spontaneouslyand very handsomely, the living of EastFarleigh. The parsonage is very little above a miledistant from Barham Court, and there must be manypleasant circumstances in being so near the residence,library, park, &c. of an old friend, of such dimensions.i April, 1832.1832. RESIDENCE IN KENT AND ISLE OF WIGHT. 331This event comes in such a way as strongly to confirmthe persuasion that it is an indication of thefavour of God ; and I cannot but recognise a providentialhand in Lord Brougham's being prompted tomake the appointment just when we were in wantof such a settlement and residence; though LordBrougham knew nothing of the matter, and was quiteunconsciously the instrument of granting us our wish."Here and in the Isle of Wight, to the great joyof those he visited, his remaining years were spent.Personal reasons forbid the veil being lifted from hislife as heretofore, and all the feelings shown withwhich his warm heart overflowed, now that he hadbecome the parishioner and guest of his sons. Butafew extracts from his Diary and letters will givethe outline of his holy and peaceful age.We have now been here," he writes from one ofhis parsonage houses, 2 " for about six weeks. Howcan I but rejoice rather than lament at a pecuniaryloss, which has produced such a result as that ofbringing us to dwell under the roofs of our dear children,and witness their enjoyment of a large shareof domestic comforts, and their conscientious dischargeof the duties of the most important of all professions."" I thank God," he tells another friendmy health is in about its ordinary state ; though Iam becoming yearly more and more stiff and crazy,But what causes have I for gratitude ! surely no oneought more habitually to feel and adopt the psalmist'slanguage, Goodness and mercy have followed me allTo James Stephen Esq. 3 Lady Olivia Sparrow.332 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1832.my days. And now have not we great cause forthankfulness in being moored in our latter days in thepeaceful haven which we enjoy, (after all my tossingduring my long and stormy voyage in the sea of politics,)under the roofs of our sons in Kent and in theIsle of Wight, relieved from all the worry of familycares, and witnessing the respectability, usefulness,and domestic happiness of those most dear to us.Had not the state of my finances rendered it absolutelynecessary however, I fear I should hardly havethought myself warranted in giving up my only residence,but it is really true, speaking unaffectedly, thatour heavy loss has led to the solid and great increaseof our enjoyments."Some of his letters fill in other features of the picture.' ' It gives me no little pleasure, 4 and calls for alarge return of gratitude to the Giver of all good, towitness the delightful scene that is here exhibited ofpastoral service and domestic happiness. 18th. Whenat a late hour last night I was compelled to lay downmy pen, I was entering on a topic so deeply interesting tome,that it might have carried me on writing till morning.But you are able from experience to judge howa parent must feel in witnessing the pastoral laboursof his own child. This living is not of the pecuniaryvalue which was supposed and even stated, when it wasgiven, and is not eating the bread of idleness. Hislady was not well endowed with pecuniary charms :but they will have enough, I trust, for comfort ; andeven if it were not a sin, as it certainly is, to marry forTo Mr. Babington, Aug. 17. "1832. HIS SONS' PARSONAGE HOUSES. 333money, I should deem it one of the basest actions agentleman could commit. My wife must have toldyours that this house is enlivened by a delightful infantwhich twaddle about most captivating, andbegins to lisp out papa and mamma, with more thanCicero's eloquence. My health certainly exhibitssymptoms of decay, but not I think in any great degree.I live however hoping, late in the day as it is,to make a progress in the divine life. O pray forme,my friend, that I may grow in grace."' We are passing our time here very agreeably ; indeedwe might well use a much stronger term ; forwe should be void of all feeling if the warmest emotionsof gratitude were not called forth in us, towardsthe gracious Ordainer of all things, for granting us,in the evening of life, after the tossing of the oceanof this world, such a quiet and comfortable haven.Here too we have the delightful spectacle of thosewhom we love most, enjoying a large measure of humanlife's sweetest enjoyments, combined with thediligent discharge of its most important duties. Andthen that lovely baby ! What a manifest benevolencethere is in the Almighty's having rendered young childrenso eminently attractive, considering the degreein which their very existence must depend on thedisposition of those around them, to bear with theirlittle infirmities, sustain their weakness, and supplytheir wants. How little could I expect to complete myseventy-second year ! Yet it is on this day completed,and I am suffering no pain, and my complaints thosewhich are salutary without producing great bodily334 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1832.suffering, like the kind suggestions of a friend tenderlywatching over me, and endeavouring to obtain formethe benefits, without my feeling the evils commonlyattendant on providential visitations. Reallythe loss of fortune has been delayed till it brings withit some positive comforts, without producing inconvenienceor vexation ; my children's education havingbeen completed, and my parliamentary life quitefinished. The necessity too of quitting my ownhouse has not taken place till I am supplied with achoice of residences ; quite an embarras des richessesin the habitation line. O pray for me, my dear ,that my return of gratitude and service may be morecommensurate with the rich stock of blessings whichthe Almighty has poured out upon me."His overflowing gratitude to God was the chieffeature of his later years. Every thing became withhim a cause for thanksgiving. When some of theinfirmities of years began to press upon him, " whatthanks do I .owe to God," was his reflection, " thatmy declining strength appears likely not to be attendedwith painful diseases, but rather to lessengradually and by moderate degrees ! How good afriend God is to me 1 When I have any complaint itis always so mitigated and softened as to give mescarcely any pain. Praise the Lord, O my soul. Ihave had a feverish night, or rather a dreamy anddisturbed one, but no head-ache or pain, D. G. Whatthanks do I owe to my gracious and kind heavenlyFather !" 5 And so when one of bis friends had passeda Diary.1832. ASTRONOMICAL DISCOVERIES. 335through a painful operation, " seldom' he says, "haveI felt any thing so deeply. My hard heart quiteconfounded and overpowered. But I go to prayer.How thankful should I be to be spared such trials,my strength not being equal to them ! I humblycommit myself unto Him, who surely has given mereason to say, ' goodness and mercy have followed meall my days'" And when he was himself threatenedwith a similar attack, " O let me commit myself,"was his consolation, " to Him who has ever pouredforth on me His mercies with so lavish a hand, ( f Godis love') that how can I doubt He will strengthen mefor any cross He may see fit to lay on me. But, OLord, ' if it be possible, let this cup pass from meOh may I be able to add, from the heart, ' nevertheless,not as I will, but as Thou wilt >:The details of his life at his parsonage residenceswere much what they had been of late at Highwood,except that greater quietness gave him more time forreading, and for those habits of devotional retirementwhich manifestly grew with his increasing years; inwhich he found the Psalms and St. Paul's Epistlesbecoming more and more dear to hin. He wasstill read to whilst he dressed ; and after thus hearingSharon Turner's Sacred History, he notes in hispocket-book the importance of " meditating moreon God as the Creator and Governor of the universe.Eighty millions of fixed stars, each as large atleast as our sun. Combine the considerations heuarising with the madness and guilt of sin as settingup our will against that of God. Combine with it336 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1832.Christ's unspeakable mercy and love, and that of GodinChrist."This subject he had been accustomed to notice inhis family exhortations. " The discoveries of astronomy,"he said, " instead of having an oppositeeffect, warm my heart. I think of eighty millions ofstars in our nebula, and of two thousand nebulae,and I feel elevated and thankful to bear part in thismagnificent creation, to be the child of Him whois the Governor of these boundless dominions."These thoughts often passed into meditations upon themoral attributes of God. " Retire into thy closet,"is one of the last entries in his pocket-book, " andthere let contemplation indulge her flights and expatiate."' " I find unspeakable pleasure," he tells afriend, " in the declarations so often reiterated in theWord of God of the unvarying truth of the SupremeBeing. To me there is something inexpressibly sublimein the assurance, that throughout the wholeimmeasurable extent of the all but infinite empire ofGod truth always extends, and like a master-keyunlocks and opens all the mysterious wisdom, andgoodness, and mercy of the Divine dispensations."His early walk and his mid-day employments remainedunaltered ; and in the afternoon he still took,as heretofore, considerable exercise ; pacing at EastFarleigh, during the winter, up and down a " sheltered,sunny, gravel walk;" and in the summer, climbingwith delight at Brighton to the top of the chalkdowns, or of an intermediate terrace, or walking longupon the unfrequented shore. " April 4th. Like the1832. HIS PARSONAGE EVENINGS. 337finest summer day. The air singularly mild andbalmy, and not a leaf stirring. S. engaged in at a cottagereading. R. drove me out in the pony-chaise ;which very pleasant. Much affected this evening bymy own reflections. Alas, I am an unprofitable servant,but God's mercy and Christ's love are inconceivablygreat ; His ways (thank God) not as ourways. 5th. Day, if possible, even sweeter than yesterday; as balmy and more air. Walked with mysons up the hill. This evening began ArchdeaconRobinson's Last Days of Bishop Heberr had begunSir Walter Scott's last work, but I felt desirous ofsomething more spiritual."His evenings were as bright as ever, and thoughhis power of retaining new impressions was greatlyimpaired, the colours of his earlier recollectionsseemed scarcely to fade. " How full he is of anecdote! " said a friend, when he had for a momentleft the room, to one of the party who was writingat another table. " It would be quite worth whilesome evening to put down notes of his conversation."This suggestion was at once acted on when he returned,and some extracts from the notes taken down,as far as the pen could follow him, will give a faintidea of the richness of his usual conversation, thoughthe life and play of mind which dressed up everysentence can never be transferred into the copy.One day while Hastings' trial was proceeding, animportant point came on when only Burke and twoor three more were present little Michael AngeloVOL. v. Q338 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1832.among them, very pompous. Ned Law, who was toargue the case as Hastings' counsel, began, { It is apity, sir, to raise a discussion on this matter. Thisis no doubtful question of political expedience, it is amere point of law, and my honourable friend there,'pointing to little Michael, ' from his accurate knowledgeof the law, which he has practised with somuch success, can confirm fully what I say.' Michaelpuffed and swelled, and almost assented. Burke wasquite furious, and ran to him and shook him, saying,You little rogue, what do you mean by assenting tothis ? ' Michael is talked of for a peer. It is notunlikely ; he has no son. He was left a good fortuneby his father, who was a builder, and he got on bykeeping a good cook and giving excellent dinners.I remember Sheridan playing off on him one of hisamusing tricks. He did not know where to go foradinner, so sitting down by Michael Angelo he said,There is a law question likely to rise presently onwhich from your legal knowledge you will be wantedto reply to Pitt, so I hope you will not think of leavingthe House.' Michael sat still with no little pleasure,while Sheridan slipped out, walked over toMichael's house, and ordered up dinner, saying tothe servants, f Your master is not coming home thisevening.' He made an excellent dinner, came backto the House, and seeing Michael looking expectant,went to release him, saying, f I am sorry to havekept you, for after all I believe this matter will notnow come on to-night.' Michael immediately walked1832. SIR SYDNEY SMITH. 339home, and heard to his no little consternation, whenhe rang for dinner, ' Mr. Sheridan had it, sir, abouttwo hours ago.'Poor Boswell ! I once had some serious conversationwith him ; he was evidently low and depressed,and appeared to have many serious feelings. Hetold me that Dr. Johnson had assured him he wasnever intimately acquainted with one religious clergyman.I was determined not to let him off; so I replied,f that can only be because he never sought their acquaintance.They knew that he had about him suchpersons as they would not choose for companions.'General Smith, Sir Sydney's uncle, put his papersinto my hands : amongst them a most extraordinarycorrespondence between Lord Elgin and Sir Sydney.Sir Sydney was most scandalously used. Others hadribands and peerage, but he never had any thing.At the time of the siege of Acre, he got from the oldPacha a ring, or some other emblem of authority,which gave him absolute command over all the gates ;and one of his first employments of it was, to go tothe Pacha's dungeons and set all the captives free.The Pacha grumbled in vain, exclaiming pathetically,' But, Sir Sydney, they owe me moneys 'Whitbread was a rough speaker ; he spoke as if hehad a pot of porter at his lips and all his words camethrough it. I remember his drawing tears from meupon the Lottery question. After Canning's speechon Lord Bexley's Resolution about a pound note anda shilling being of equal value with a guinea, he saidto me, ' Well, I do envy him the power of makingQ 2340 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1832.that speech.' This was very curious to me, becauseI never could have guessed that it was at all themodel to which he aspired. Poor Canning ! I knewhim well, and he knew that I knew him. He feltthat I knew him before he became well acquaintedwith Pitt. He had a mind susceptible of the formsof great ideas ; as for these men, they have not mindsup to any thing of the sort ; their minds would burstwith the attempt. I have often talked openly withCanning, and I cannot but hope that some good mayhave come from it. When I was with him once, hewas in bed, on a sort of sofa-bed, at GloucesterLodge, and Southey was mentioned. ' I did notknow that he was in town.' ( Yes, he is, and dines withme tomorrow ; but I am afraid you will not comebecause it is Sunday.' Canning was not a first-ratespeaker ! Oh he was as different as possible from Pitt,and from'old Fox too, though he was so rough; he hadnot that art, ' clare autem.' If effect is the criterionof good speaking, Canning was nothing to them, forhe never drew you to him in spite of yourself. Younever lost sight of Canning ; even in that admirablespeech of his about Sir John C. Hippisley, whenyour muscles were so exercised by laughing, it wasthe same thing; yet he was a more finished oratorthan Pitt. Oh how little justice was done to Pitt onWarren Hastings' business ! People were asking,what could make Pitt support him on this point andon that, as if he was acting from political motives ;whereas he was always weighing in every particularwhether Hastings had exceeded the discretionary1832. SIR SAMUEL Reilly. 341power lodged in him. I well remember, I couldswear to it now, Pitt listening most attentively tosome facts which were coming out either in the firstor second case. He beckoned me over, and wentwith me behind the chair, and said, ( Does not thislook very ill to you 1* ' Very bad indeed.' He thenreturned to his place and made his speech, giving upHastings' case. He paid as much impartial attentionto it as if he were a jury-man.One of the most remarkable things about Ro-sillywas, that though he had such an immense quantityof business, he always seemed an idle man. Ifyou had not known who and what he was, you wouldhave said f he is a remarkably gentleman-like, pleasantman ; I suppose, poor fellow, he has no business 'for he would stand at the bar of the House, and chatwith you, and talk over the last novel, with which hewas as well acquainted as if he had nothing else tothink about. Once indeed I remember coming tospeak to him in court, and seeing him look faggedand with an immense pile of papers by him. Thiswas at a time when Lord Eldon had been reproachedfor having left business undischarged, and had declaredthat he would get through all arrears by sittingon until the business was done. As I went up toRomilly, old Eldon saw me, and beckoned to me withas much cheerfulness and gaiety as possible. When Iwas alone with Romilly, and asked him how he was,he answered, ' I am worn to death ; here have we beensitting on in the vacation, from nine in the morninguntil four ; and when we leave this place, I have to342 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1832.read through all my papers, to be ready for tomorrowmorning ; but the most extraordinary part of all is,that Eldon, who has not only mine, but all the otherbusiness to go through, is just as cheerful and untiredas ever." 1The conversation turned on other topics, and a sickperson in the neighbourhood being named " Poorsoul," he said, " how little we know of the afflictionsof those in other ranks of life ! I am quite abashedto think of them. I have to find sorrows for myself ;God has so crowded His mercies upon me. I canfancy how delightful it would be to pour in oil and wineinto her wounds. How wonderful is the power withwhich all the general statements of Scripture comehome to the different circumstances of life ! In howmany instances, for example, does that parable of thegood Samaritan direct us how to be truly pitiful !"And soon after, speaking of Herschel's saying, " Theseare things which must be for ever hid from man," hebroke out, " No, that they shall not ; I shall know allthese things. Oh how low at the best are your wisemen and philosophers ! Truly, he that is least in thekingdom of heaven is greater than he." He then beganto speak of the astonishing truths of the gospel.Only think of that one declaration, God is perfecttruth and perfect love. Why that one thoughtworked out, is enough to fit a man for heaven. Ohthe goodness of God to me, to bear all my provocationsof Him for so many years, and then not onlyhear my prayers, but give me grace to offer them."Here he stopped quite overpowered by his feelings.1832. HIS RETROSPECT OF LIFE. 343Few things were more striking than the calm, historicaltone in which he spoke and thought of thegreat national events, in the stormy reality of whichhe had borne so prominent a part.I sometimes look back," he tells his old friendMr. Bankes, 6 " on the long consultations you and Iand Henry Thornton had, when we were wishing forpeace early in this century. After we had once to dowith Buonaparte in his full force, I do believe therewas scarcely any alternative between destroying himor being destroyed ourselves. But there was an intervalbefore the completion of the former war, whenperhaps the ruinous amount of debt might have beenprevented. But I have done with politics."Low as was his estimate of all that he had actuallydone, it was easy to see, by the judgments which heformed of others, how much he now rejoiced in hisearlier choice of objects and pursuits. " Much struckto-day," says his Diary, " with T. as the successfullawyer at his best. How little has he been (I fear)preparing for another world ! His father was anartisan ; what will it signify in a little time whetherhe had remained on that level or risen as he has ? "Thank God," was his common exclamation afterparting with those who had drawn prizes in thelottery of worldly schemes ; " Thank God that I wasled into a different path." " How much rather," hesaid to one of his sons as he drove by the splendidhouse of one whom he had always thought rapacioushow much rather would I be living as I am on the6 Oct. 19, 1832.344 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1832.wreck of my fortune, than have fattened as he hasdone upon the public ! "Never did any one see in him the least touch of regretfor that which he had given up. " When a manchooses the rewards of virtue' he said with somelittle indignation, after hearing such complaints, " heshould remember, that to resign the pleasures of viceis part of his bargain."But that which was of all things most worthy ofremark in his review of his past life, was his unfeignedhumility. He observed in many differentdirections, the improvement that had taken placesince he first came upon the stage, but he neverseemed aware of the degree in which he was himselfits cause. " How well I remember," he says withdelight after hearing a report of the flourishing religiousstate of British India, " Mr. Grant, Mr. Unhandtwo others, writing to me in 1788," (the letterreached him as he went apparently a dying manto Bath,) <e begging my good offices in a religiousview ; there being then scarcely any show of religionamong our residents in India." 7 Notwithstanding themany clouds which he thought gathering over thepolitical horizon, he noticed " with delight the improvementin the middle and rather higher ranks ofsociety ; " 8 and in " the despondency which variouscircumstances " caused, he was " always revived andcomforted by contemplating the vast improvement inthe character and conduct of our clergy ; " 9 but that7 Vid. Memorial Sketches of the Rev. D. Brown.8 To Hannah More. 9 To T. F. Buxton Esq.1832. HIS HUMILITY. 345he had been a great instrument in this happy changenever seemed to occur to him. To himself he appeared" a sadly unprofitable servant' 10 and neededconstantly " the soothing consideration that we servea gracious Master, who will take the will for the deed.Thou didst well (even the phraseology is indicative)that it was in thy heart." Any direct allusion to hisservices was met by some natural disclaimer, " thatwe each knew our own faults," and that he was deeplyconscious of" neglected opportunities of service;" justas a friendly preface to his work on Christianity drewfrom him the remark, " Such things ought never tobe published till a man is dead." 11He had always detested flattery. Mr. Gisborne neversaw in him so much display of temper as when, beingaddressed with servility by a person who wished for hisfavourable influence with Mr. Pitt, he threw the letteron the ground, with the exclamation, " How muchrather would I have the man spit in my face ! " Thisbeautiful simplicity survived all the unfavourable influencesof his life ; and the old man whose name was afamiliar word in every mouth, whose country parsonagewas visited almost like a shrine, and who was told byRammohun Roy, that when " he left the East, one ofhis chief wishes was to see Mr. Wilberforce," was stillaltogether lowly in his own sight, and could say withnatural simplicity when treated in a place of public concoursewith some marks of courtesy, te How very civil10 Diary, passim. The eloquent description of this feature of his characterin the Nat. Hist, of Enthusiasm, 7th Ed. p. 172, is really not overdrawn.To T. Babington Esq. Feb. 13, 1827.Q 3346 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1832.they were to me ; they made way for me, and treatedme as if I were some great man ! "The same causes had kept unimpaired his naturaltenderness of heart. " I am not worthy," he writesat this time with all the freshness of his youth, 12 " ofyour tenderness; and yet, my dear friend, I 4 must loveyou while the power of loving at all is left me." Tothe same friend he writes again in language whichthrows an affecting light on his unclouded gaiety ofoutward demeanour. "I have observed that olderpeople join in the gaieties of the young externally,while all the time there is a secret chamber of theheart in which some domestic griefs are exerting theirinfluence. For instance, this is the very week in whichsome years ago we were watching our dear 'sgradual sinking into the grave, which took place almostat the last hour of it. My dear wife's woundsbleed afresh at this anniversary. It really is not sowith me. I can look back on the event with a melancholythat is not unpleasing ; the consciousness ofour dear child's happiness infuses a tender kind of triumph.You can sympathize with me in all thesefeelings, and our two wives also will feel alike."Almost the only growing mark of age was a stillincreasing love of that rest to which he was drawingnearer. " The grasshopper had become a burden tohim," and he declined to settle a dispute which had*been referred to him, with the excuse, " My spiritsare now quite unequal to these unpleasant contentions."13 With the same feeling he replied, whenTo T. Babington Esq. " Diary.1832. DISRELISH FOR POLITICS. 347pressed to take a part in an election contest, " I haveretired, and must be silent and neutral." When helooked out into the world from his retirement, it wasin the faithful spirit of one who though not unacquaintedwith its storms, was more deeply learned inthe secret of a quiet confidence in God. " I havefelt my mind and spirits less affected than perhapsthey ought to have been by the various clouds thatare now gathering around us with such appallingblackness. Yet I trust that I may calmly, thoughhumbly, resign myself to the gracious disposal of thatgreat Being, who, I am sure, has mercifully pouredout on me such unnumbered blessings, and so allayedwith mitigating kindness the few trials to which Ihave been subjected, as to give me cause to look up toHim and address Him as my heavenly Father. Formy own part, I quite rejoice in being out of all thebustle and turmoil of political life." 14Even in his full strength indeed it had been his lotand not his choice. " Though the contrary might beinferred," he tells a friend, " from the nature of thepursuits to which my time and talents were chieflydevoted, I never relished politics; on the contrary,they were quite distasteful to me. Just as the scene ofmy labours (the great city) was so little my residenceby preference, that I well remember, (before my homewas cheered and endeared to me by a wife and children,)I used to obey the call to exchange the variousdelights of a country life, for the contentious occupationsof a parliamentary man, most unwillingly. Iu Letter to , 1832.348 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1832.really could scarcely refrain from tears, as I approachedthe bustle and smoke of London. And nowhow refreshing is it, when our home prospects are soawfully gloomy, to contemplate the blessed effectswith which a kind Providence is rewarding the laboursof those who, instead of suffering themselves tobe seduced by vanity or by self-interest into devotingto politics all their faculties and endeavours, areusing their best efforts to promote the cause of God,and the true happiness of their fellow-creatures."To these objects he was still alive ; and to hisprayer " that I may be a less unprofitable servant,"he joined all the exertion still within his power. Henow never met a friend of earlier days, whose principleswere different from his own, (and such he tookgreat pains to see,) without following up their intercoursewith a long and friendly letter on their mostimportant interests, pressing mainly on them, that itwas not yet too late for them to make the betterchoice. " This is what they need," he repeated often ;they get to think that they are in for it, and thatthough they have chosen ill it is too late to alter. Iwell remember going to my old friend Lord inhis last illness. I had spoken to him fully on religiousmatters many years before, and he had seemedto pay no attention to me. I heard that he was takenill, and called upon him. When I had sat some timechatting with him, but without alluding to religiousmatters, another friend came in and asked, ' How areyou to-day ? ' ' Why,' was his reply, ' as well as I canbe with Wilberforce sitting there, and telling me that1832. RICHMOND'S PICTURE. 349I am going to hell.' ' : The conversation which hadthus sunk into his mind had been affectionate andopen. " I never can believe," he had said, " someparts of the Scripture." " How can you expect," wasthe reply, " to be able to believe, when you only turnyour mind to the difficulties of the subject?" Butwhat had made his friend read this language in hislooks, was very much that sense of hopelessness whichhe was most desirous to correct. " At all events,"said another at the close of such a conversation, " ifyou are right it is now too late for me to alter. I aminfor it." " No," he answered earnestly, " my dearP., it is not too late, only attend to these things andyou will find it true, ' him that cometh unto Me Iwill in no wise cast out'"To such calls as these he was still alive, but fromall common business he withdrew as much as possible ;and could not " leave the quiet of his country retirementeven for the most friendly asylum, without hisspirits failing him," and praying, " that in proportionas " he " grew unfit for the bustle of life," he " mightbecome more and more harmonized with the sentimentsand dispositions of a better world." 15 Hisneed of its waters still carried him to Bath, and hepaid a few short visits to his oldest and most valuedfriends. One of these carried him in the autumn of1832 to his old haunts at Battersea Rise; and duringhis stay there Mr. Richmond took his admirable picture.This was begun whilst he was joining in generalconversation, but it was found impossible to fix him inLetter to the Rev, R. I. Wilberforce.350 LIFE OF wilberforce. 1832.the necessary position until an ingenious device succeeded.Mr. Forster, 16 who was staying in the house,undertook to draw him into argument. <( Pray, Mr.Wilberforce," he began as he sat by him, " is it truethat the last accounts from the West Indies prove thatthe slaves are on the whole so much better off thanthey were thought to be, that you have much alteredyour views as to slavery ? " " Mr. Forster," he replied,with sudden animation, " I am astonished atyou. What! a sensible man like you believe suchreports ? Why, sir, they flog them with a whip asthick as my arm," grasping it as he spoke. A mostanimated conversation followed, and Mr. Forster wasnot convinced until Richmond's happy likeness wassecured. On this subject he was full of vigour to thevery last. Soon after his return from Clapham hewrote to Mr. Buxton.East Farleigh, near Maidstone, Nov. 23, 1832.My dear Buxton,It is well for you that just now my eyes areless equal to work than they sometimes are ; nay,rather (for I would not spare my eyes when it reallybecame my duty to strain them) it is well for you thatI have but a few minutes at command ; for my mindhappening lately to have been led into some lucubrationson the Slave Trade, I was gradually excited intosuch an internal heat, that were I not to attempt tolessen the intensity of the flame by imparting a measureof it to you, I should almost become the victim16 The Rev. C. Forster, Chaplain to the late Bishop of Limerick.1832. FEELINGS ON THE SLAVE TRADE. 351of my own excessive inflammation. Happily, I ampersuaded I need use no laborious endeavours to exciteyour warmth. It will be enough for me to namethe governments of Spain, of Portugal, of Brazil, andabove all, of France, in reference to the Abolition ofthe Slave Trade. Do examine all the treaties theyhave made with us, and the sums of money by whichwe endeavoured to quicken their tardiness. Then, observe,the Due de Broglie, who is in office in France,would assuredly be favourably disposed towards anypropositions we should make to his government torender practical what is now only nominal a circumstancethe more abominable because I understand bothSpain and Portugal use the French flag to cover theiracts of piracy.My dear friend, let me beg you, unless youhappen to have recently looked into this subject,do not suppose yourself to know it ; but do reviewyour inquiry and consideration, and you will be asready to burst into a flame as I am. I feel, and shallfeel, this affair the more, because I myself am notguiltless. I myself ought to have stirred in it morethan I did before I left the House of Commons, andnow that I am there no longer, I consider you as myheir at law. I gave no small offence in a certainquarter for not adopting another line of succession,and I really believe if you cannot get government toconcede to your wishes, you might carry the measurein the House of Commons. But my letter is calledfor and I must lay down my pen. There is no posttomorrow farewell.352 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1832.May the blessing of God be with you and yours,and believe meEver sincerely and affectionately yours,W. WILBERFORCE.P. S. Pray give me a frank or two ; that to Knibbto contradict a statement that I sold my slaves 17 beforeI took up the cause, and the other to honestPagan the grand African Liberator." T. F. Buxton Esq."I congratulate you, my dear old friend," he wroteto Mr. Macaulay on the 1st of January, "on havingentered on the year which I trust will be distinguishedby your seeing at last the mortal stroke given to theaccursed Slave Trade, and the emancipation of theWest Indian slaves at length accomplished."He could not be a mere well-wisher in this business.Though he had two years before " resolvednever more to speak in public," he was induced, uponthe 12th of April, 1833, to propose at a meeting inthe town of Maidstone, a petition against slavery.His own signature was put to this petition, and withallhis earlier spirit, he would not allow the appointmentof delegates, a measure commonly adopted, butinconsistent he maintained with the spirit of theconstitution. It was an affecting sight to see the oldman who had been so long the champion of this cause*7 One of the prevalent calumnies against Mr. Wilberforce had beenthat he had inherited a West Indian estate, which he had sold preparatoryto his Abolition labours.1833. COMPENSATION. 353come forth once more from his retirement, and withan unquenched spirit, though with a weakened voiceand failing body, maintain for the last time thecause of truth and justice.There was now no question about immediate emancipation; hut the principle of compensation wasdisputed, and on this his judgment and his voicewere clear. Ten years before he had proposed toMr. Canning that a fund should be formed for indemnifyingthose who should be proved in fact tosuffer by a change in the West Indian system ; butto admit the principle of previous compensation forexpected injury was only to postpone for ever allimprovements of the system. Against this thereforehe all along contended, even whilst he maintainedthat Great Britain "owed smart money" 18 for herformer encouragement of the Slave Trade. He hailedtherefore with joy the proposal to atone for theseoffences by the grant of twenty millions ; and in thishis last speech at once declared, " I say, and sayhonestly and fearlessly, that the same Being who commandsus to love mercy, says also, Do justice, andtherefore I have no objection to grant the coloniststhe relief that may be due to them for any real injuries,which they may ultimately prove themselvesto have sustained. But it must be after an impartialinvestigation of the merits of each case by a fair andcompetent tribunal. I have no objection either, tomake every possible sacrifice which may be necessaryto secure the complete accomplishment of the object'8 Feb. 9, 1818.354 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1833.which we have in view ; but let not the inquiry intothis matter be made a plea for perpetuating wrongsfor which no pecuniary offers can compensate. " Itrust," he concluded, "that we now approach thevery end of our career ; " and as a gleam of sunshinebroke into the hall, " the object," he exclaimed withallhis early fire, " is bright before us, the light ofheaven beams on it, and is an earnest of success."To the very end, this his earliest object roused himinto animation, " with the interest," as Mr. Smithhumorously puts it, " which a main-spring, althoughsomewhat less elastic than when first encased, mightbe supposed to take in the going of a watch." Whenit was casually mentioned at dinner, that " at thismoment probably the debate on Slavery is just commencing,"he sprung up from his chair, and with hisclear voice startled his surrounding friends, by suddenlyexclaiming in a most striking manner, " Hear,hear, hear."And now the time was come, when his dust was toreturn to the earth, and his spirit to God who gaveit. On the 20th of April he left East Farleigh, andafter a short visit to the Isle of Wight, arrived atBath on the 17th of May. The waters, to whichin great measure he owed the prolongation of hislife till his 74th year, would help, it was hoped, tothrow off the effects of the influenza, from whichhe had suffered greatly upon leaving Kent. Buthere his strength visibly declined, and it was soonseen, that if his life was spared, it would be but foraseason of weakness and suffering. During two1833. HIS ILLNESS. 355months which he spent there, he suffered much frompain and languor ; and though he displayed the mostunvarying patience, yet the excellent bust executedat this time by Joseph, shows, beautiful asit is, that his outward tenement was fast hasteningto decay. But while all around him were full ofthought about himself, his own anxiety was altogetherfor two of his daughters-inlaw : for a month onlybefore his removal, two grandsons were born toinherit the name of William Wilberforce,Et quasi curses vital lampada trading."This event is the last recorded in a pocket-bookwhich he always carried with him. Other of histhoughts may be traced in its pages, by a set ofreferences to the " closing scene of several memorablemen."All his thoughts and conversation now savouredof the better world to which he was drawing near. Atthis time he was consulted by a young friend who wasdoubtful what profession to choose, but inclined towardsthe army or navy. " Think particularly," hesaid, " whether you are choosing for time only, or foreternity. For of course a sensible man will wish tochoose that which will be best on the long run. Andthen it is just as much part of the consideration whatwill be best for me between my thousandth and twothousandth year as between my twentieth andthirtieth. It is curious how our estimate of time isaltered by its being removed to a distance. Ask howlong did Moses live before Christ. If a man says356 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1833.1300 years, and you correct him, 1500 : pol ! why heso accurate ? Within 200 years will do. But howimmense 200 years now seem ! "Meanwhile the calmness with which he was preparingto close his own career is apparent from thefollowing letter.TO THE RIGHT HON. LORD Carthorse.(Private.) Bath, June 27, 1833.My dear Calthorpe,You have been very kindly liberal aboutfranks, and I really feel your kindness, and did notmean you should be called on so largely. To confessthe truth to you, as really, and not merely in name,a friend, I will state that three or four days ago Ithought I was breaking up rapidly as well as seriously.There has been I think an amendment subsequently,which leads me to believe that my declineis proceeding less rapidly than I had supposed, thoughnot less seriously. There has been a general dispositionin the system to the deposition of water, andthis sluggishness of the absorbents is a very commonmode in which they whose constitutions are ratherfeeble, and who are favoured with a gradual exit,actually decay. I thought you would like to knowthis, and therefore would not keep it from you.I hear with real pleasure that your dear sister iswell, and that dear Lady Charlotte is about to affordanother security against the extinction of the Cal-thorpename. My dear friend, may God bless and1833. HIS CALMNESS OF MIND. 357prosper you, especially in the most important particulars.Oh what cause for thankfulness have youfor having been called to the knowledge and feelingof salvation through the Redeemer ! May you growin grace more and more. Give my affectionate remembrancesto Lady Charlotte, and Frederick, alsoto Miss Calthorpe when you next write, and be assuredI amEver sincerely and affectionately yours,W. Wilberforce.The cover I enclose is to spare the finances of awidow with six or seven children, and a very slenderpecuniary provision. It is to introduce her to someacquaintances at the place where she has fixed for atime."It had always been his feeling that the most fittingstate for the last hours of life, was one free alike fromexcitement and from terror ; in which while the mindwas conscious of the awful nature of the approachingchange, it could yet resign itself to its reconciled, all-mercifulFather, with the humility as well as the confidenceof a child. He often mentioned it as a proofof great wisdom, that while the younger believer isdescribed by Bunyan in his Pilgrim's Progress aspassing easily through the stream of death, a lessbuoyant hope and a deeper flood is represented as theportion of the aged Christian. " It is the peculiarity,"he said, " of the Christian religion, that humility andholiness increase in equal proportions."358 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1833.But his own mind was as remarkable for its thankfulnessand peace as for its humility. His youngestson, who was with him at this period, recorded at themoment various memoranda of his state of feeling.Saturday, July 6th, he was taken ill, quite suddenly,while sitting at dinner. I ran for a medical man, andbefore I returned he was got to bed. He was sufferingmuch from giddiness and sickness, but his words tomewere, e I have been thinking of the great mercy ofGod in trying me with illness of this kind, which,though very distressing, is scarcely to be called pain,rather than with severe suffering, which my bodilyconstitution could hardly bear.' When his medicalattendant came, f Thank God,' he said, ' I am notlosing my faculties.' ' Yes, but you could not easilygo through a 'problem in arithmetic or geometry.'I think I could go through the Asses' Bridge,' hereplied. ( Let me see ;' and began, correcting himselfif he omitted any thing. Of course his attendantstopped him.About eight o'clock, on being asked how he felt,he said, ' What cause have I for thankfulness ! I havebeen all day almost as comfortable as if I had beenpretty well. I have slept a good deal, and I have somany people who are kind to me. I am sure I feeldeeply my servants' attention.'Alluding to a remedy which was provided forsome present discomfort, he burst out repeatedly intoexclamations on the goodness of God in these littlethings, providing means to remedy the various inconveniencesof sickness. To this subject he several1833. NOTES DURING HIS ILLNESS. 359times recurred, with the remark, ' How ungratefulmen are in not seeing the hand of God in all theircomforts ! I am sure it greatly adds to our enjoymentto trace His hand in them.'Soon after he said, ( What is that text, < He hathhid pride from man ? ' I was thinking how God hadtaught him the folly of pride, because the mostbeautiful and delicate woman, and the proudest man,of the highest birth and station, who was never approachedbut with deference and formality, is exposedto exactly the same infirmities of this body of ourhumiliation that I am.' He was repeating mentallythe 51st Psalm, and asked me to look what camenext after the eleventh verse, ' Take not Thy HolySpirit from me.' I read, ' Oh give me the comfort ofThy help again.' ' It is very odd, I thought it hadbeen ' Restore unto me the joy of Thy salvation.' Dolook what it is in the Bible Version.' I found it ashesaid. e What a very remarkable passage ! Itseems like an anticipation of the privileges of thenew dispensation.'He spoke much of the delight which he had in theaffection and care of his wife and children. ' Thinkwhat I should have done had I been left ; as one hearsof people quarrelling and separating. ' In sicknessand in health' was the burden, and well has it beenkept.' (Here she came in.) ( I was just praisingyou.'lf Generally, I should say, that except in his remarkabout pride, there was hardly a word he uttered thatwas not a bursting forth of praise. ( What cause it360 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1833.is for thankfulness he exclaimed, ' that I neversuffer from head-ache ! 'Half-past eight, Sunday morning. 19 ( Remember,my dear H./ he said, ( that it is Sunday morning,and all our times here are very short. I am sure themanner of my dismissal, as far as it has yet gone, hasbeen most gracious. I have not had so much timehere for reading Scripture as I wish, but I rejoiceat having laid in a knowledge of it when I wasstronger. I hope you always take care of that. Fromour familiarity with it, we do not feel about the Scriptureat all as we should do, if we were to hear for thefirst time that there was a communication from Godto man.Think of our Saviour coming down from heaven,and, when one feels what a little pain is, submittingto all that he endured; having the nails roughlydriven through his hands. To be sure the thoughtof our Saviour's sufferings is so amazing, so astonishing,I am quite overwhelmed. Next to the horribledriving of the nails, I have thought most of His beinggiven over to the insults of the Roman soldiery, whenone thinks what brutal fellows they were. His sufferingswere not alleviated as mine are by the kindnessof those about Him.I have been thinking of that delightful text, whichhas often comforted me, e Be careful for nothing,'&c.' (He went on as far as f The peace of God shallkeep your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus')To be sure (he spoke with his voice falteringJuly?.1833. NOTES DURING HIS ILLNESS. 3G1with emotion,) f it is the same Almighty power whichenables Him to watch over all the world, every creature,beast, bird, or insect, and to attend to all theconcerns of every individual.'Four o'clock. Dinner time. 'I am a poor creatureto-day,' he said. ' I cannot help thinking if some ofthe people who saw me swaggering away on thehustings at York could see me now, how much theywould think me changed. What a mercy to thinkthat these things do not come by chance, but are thearrangements of infinite wisdom !When I think how many poor people are suffering,without the luxuries that I possess, and thekind friends I have about me, I am quite ashamedof my comforts.'Five o'clock. ' I cannot help thinking there wassome mistake about my medicine ; but it does notmatter. There is nothing sinful in it.'Toussaint Overture was mentioned in the evening.( I sent word,' he said, ( to Sir Walter Scott thathe had not at all done justice to that part of his History,(of Buonaparte,) and he replied, that if I wouldpoint any thing out to him, he would willingly alter it.I wanted dear Stephen to do it, but he did not. I amvery sorry for it, but it must be known sooner or later.To be sure to make a treaty of amity and friendshipwith a man, and then have him and his family seizedand sent on shipboard, and finally to the chateau ofJour. . . . And then a veil is drawn over it. Noneknows what happened. What a story there will bethere, when this world shall give up its dead ! It wasVOL. v. R362 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1833.something like the case of the Due D'Enghien, butworse.'Eleven, p. m. ' I feel more comfortable than Ihave done for I know not how long. Never had aman such cause for thankfulness as I have, and aboveall, that I have so many, many kind friends to doevery thing for me. My own son, and my own wife.I am quite ashamed of my comforts when I think ofHim who had not where to lay His head.'Tuesday, 20 four o'clock. Reading some ofCecil's remarks. ' Nothing can be more oppositethan that spirit of the present day, which shows itselffor instance in the pride of literature, to the spirit ofChristianity. Compare this bold, independent, daringspirit, with the beatitudes. ' Blessed are the poorin spirit. Blessed are they that mourn. Blessed arethe meek.' Nothing surely can be so contrary towhat ought to be the spirit of a creature who feels inhimself the seeds of corruption.Mrs. Hannah More told me that towards the endof Johnson's life, if he was asked how he was, hewould answer, ' rather better, I thank my God throughJesus Christ.' And so to whatever he was asked'"A friend 21 who happened to be passing through Bath,two days afterwards, (July 11th,) paid him a visitwhich he thus describes. " When I arrived at thehouse on the South Parade which he then occupied,I found that he had been suffering severely from abilious attack ; and his lady, whose attentions tohim were most tender and unremitting, appeared to20 July 9. 21 J 06e ph John Gurney.1833. JOSEPH JOHN GURNEY. 363be in low spirits on his account. Still there thenappeared no reason to apprehend the near approachof death.I was introduced to an apartment up-stairs, whereI found the veteran Christian reclining on a sofa,with his feet wrapped in flannel ; and his countenancebespeaking increased age since I had last seen him,as well as much delicacy. He received me with thewarmest marks of affection, and seemed to be delightedby the unexpected arrival of an old friend.I had scarcely taken my seat beside him before . . .it seemed given me to remind him of the words ofthe psalmist; ( Although ye have lien among thepots, yet shall ye be as the wings of a dove coveredwith silver, and her feathers with yellow gold ;' andI freely spoke to him of the good and glorious things,which, as I believed, assuredly awaited him in thekingdom of rest and peace. In the mean time theilluminated expression of his furrowed countenance,with his clasped and uplifted hands, were indicativeof profound devotion and holy joy.Soon afterwards he unfolded his own experience tomein a highly interesting manner. He told me thatthe text on which he was then most prone to dwell,and from which he was deriving peculiar comfort, wasa passage in the Epistle to the Philippians ; ' Becareful for nothing, but in every thing by prayer andsupplication, with thanksgiving, let your requests bemade known unto God; and the peace of God whichpasseth all understanding shall keep your hearts andminds through Jesus Christ.' While his frail natureR 2364 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1833.was shaking, and his mortal tabernacle seemed readyto be dissolved, this ' peace of God ' was his blessedand abundant portion.The mention of this text immediately called forthone of his bright ideas, and led to a display, as in daysof old, of his peculiar versatility of mind. ' Howadmirable said he, ' are the harmony and variety ofSt. Paul's smaller Epistles !-you might well havegiven an argument upon it in your little work on evidence.The Epistle to the Galatians contains anoble exhibition of doctrine. That to the Colossiansis a union of doctrine and precept, showing theirmutual connexion and dependence ; that to the Ephesians,is seraphic ; that to the Philippians, is alllove.' 22With regard to myself,' he added, ' I have nothingwhatsoever to urge, but the poor Publican's plea,c God be merciful to me a sinner.' These wordswere expressed with peculiar feeling and emphasis,and have since called to my remembrance his owndefinition of the word mercy 'kindness to thosethat deserve punishment.' What a lesson may wederive from such an example ! It may awfully remindus of the apostle's question ' If the righteousscarcely be saved, where shall the sinner and ungodlyappear?" *; ;.The predominance of these feelings may be seen inaremark which he made to his son a few days after" Familiar Sketch," by Joseph John Gurney. His son has recordedthe last remark as " The Epistle to the Philippians is social anddomestic."1833. MR. JOSEPH'S BUST. 365wards, speaking of his dangerous attack the weekbefore 3 " You must all join with me," he said, " inpraying that the short remainder of my life may bespent in gaining that spirituality of mind which willfit me for heaven. And there I hope to meet allof you."One or two other notices of his conversationbefore he left Bath show how thoroughly his mindretained its powers. With Mr. Joseph (who wasthen taking his bust) the conversation turned uponPitt. " Michael Angelo Taylor," he said, " was oneday going up St. James's Street with M. whenthey saw Pitt walking down it with immense strides.I do not know whether you ever happened to observethat the fall in St. James's Street makes thosewho are coming down it seem to overlook those whoare going the other way. c I am very sorry,' saidMichael Angelo, ' but Pitt's conduct has been such,that I feel it my duty to cut him, as you will see.'Pitt walked by, giving rather a haughty nod to M.,and never observing Michael Angelo at all. ' Yousaw I cut him.' ( I am truly glad you told me. Ishould have thought he cut you.'Never was there a man whose character was somuch misunderstood. He was thought very proud.Now he was a very little proud and very shy.While he still condescended to practise the law,he was pleading in Chancery against the opening thebidding for an estate which had been sold by thecourt, and he said, ' If this is done, no sensible man23 July ]3.366 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1833.will ever bid again for an estate sold by Chancery.I am sure I never will a declaration which of coursefilled the court with merriment."After he had spent two months at Bath, it wasthought advisable that he should consult Dr. Chambers,from whose skill he had derived great benefitin 1824. He set out therefore towards London,though with no expectation on his own part of recovering." There is no one now," he said, "that I canbe useful to, but we should always be trying to follow,in every respect, God's indicated will." His purposewas to spend a few days at a house which waslent him by his cousin, Mrs. Lucy Smith, of whosekindness he readily availed himself, observing, thatit was his " test of having a regard for a person whenhe liked to receive favours from them. One likes toconfer them upon every one, but only to receive themfrom real friends. I am sure I used always to think,as soon as I went out of my house, which of my friendsthere was to whom I could lend it. It was such apleasure to think, when I could not enjoy it myself,that they did." He commenced his journey on the17th of July, and on the 19th arrived in CadoganPlace, Sloane Street.Thus was he again carried along the road, whichforty-five years before he had traversed in apparentlya dying state, and his mind seemed to travelback through the long space which had intervened.How differently time appears," he said to his sonwhile they halted at an inn, " when you look at it inthe life of an individual, and in the general mass t1833. REACHES LONDON. 367Now I seem to have gone through such a numberof various scenes, and such a lapse of time, and yetwhen' you come to compare it with any great periodof time fifty years think how little fifty yearsseems : why it is 3000 years since the Psalms, whichI delight in, were written. By the way, (turning tohis servant,) I have not my Psalter this morning. Doyou know where it is ? "The day after he reached town, lie expressed himselfas " very anxious to dedicate the short remainderof time God might yet allot him, to the cultivation ofunion with Christ, and to the acquiring more of Hisspirit. My private prayers," he said, "are muchthe same as those in the family, pardon and grace.To-night [Saturday] particularly with regard to theweek past.Perhaps I have been wrong in not praying morewith others. But I never felt that I could open myheart with perfect freedom and sincerity, and the idea ofdoing otherwise in praying to Almighty God. . . NowI own many good men use expressions which I cannotuse; for instance, about their own corruption. IHOPE no man on earth has a stronger sense of sinfulnessand unworthiness before God than I. But theyspeak as if they did not feel the wish to do the will ofGod, and I am sure I cannot say that. Now S. inhis prayers often uses expressions of that kind, whichquite amaze me in a man so sincere as he is."When he reached London parliament was stillsitting, and many of his friends flocked around him.What cause it is for thankfulness," he said, " thatLIFE OF WILBERFORCE.1833.God has always disposed people to treat me sokindly, and with such attention ! Popularity is certainlya dangerous thing ;" [then after a pause ;]the antidote is chiefly in the feeling one has ;how very differently they would regard me, if theyknew me really ! " A friend who at this time camein asked, " Well ! how are you ? " " I am like aclock which is almost run down." On the Mondayafter his arrival, he received a visit from a party ofchildren. After they were gone, he said, " What adelightful thing it is to think how many inhabitantsare being trained up there for heaven ! For when themeans of grace are used, one does see, I think, thatGod so very greatly, one may say universally, blessesthem."His public conduct had not prevented him fromkeeping up a friendly connexion with many West Indians;who gave full credit to his sincerity. Oneof his last visitors was a member of a great West Indianfamily; and to his son's remark that this circumstanceproduced no effect upon his feelings" Ohwhen we really believe a man to be serving God,"he answered, " I delight in trampling on all theselittle points. Some one said, ' I trample on impossibilities.'I do not quite say that ; but all theselittle distinctions are overwhelmed, annihilated, inthe case of a person with whom I trust, (speakingwith deep seriousness,) for my own sake, I may meethereafter."How thankful should I be," was his remark to afriend who now came in, " that I am not lying in1833. HIS LAST DAYS. 369severe pain, as so many are ! Certainly, not to beable to move about is a great privation to me ; butthen I have so many comforts, and above all, suchkind friends and to that you contribute."At this time," says another member of his family,I arrived in London to see him, and was muchstruck by the signs of his approaching end. Hisusual activity was totally suspended by a painful localdisorder, which prevented him from walking. Themorning of Friday (July 26th) was pleasant, and Iassisted before his breakfast to carry him in a chairto the steps in front of the house, that he might enjoythe air for a few moments. Here he presented amost striking appearance, looking forth with calmdelight upon trees and grass, the freshness and vigourof which contrasted with his own decay. It wasnearly his last view of God's works in this their lowermanifestation. ( The doors' were soon to f be shutin the streets, and those that look out of the windowsto be darkened.'His manner at this time was more than usuallyaffectionate, and he received with great cheerfulnessthe visits of many old associates, from whom hehad long been separated. The last words which Iheard from him related to one of these, whose religiousopinions he had for many years lamented.e How truly amiable he is, yet I can never see himwithout the deepest pain ! ' On Friday afternoon Ileft him with the intention of preparing to receivehim, on the following Tuesday, not knowing thatR 3LIFE OF WILBERFORCE.1833.before that time he was to be a e partaker of the inheritanceof the saints in light.' "It was altogether a striking combination of circumstancesthat he should have come to London at thattime to die. The Bill for the Abolition of Slaverywas read for the second time in the House of Commonson the Friday night, and the last public informationhe received was, that his country was willingto redeem itself from the national disgrace at anysacrifice. " Thank God," said he, " that I shouldhave lived to witness a day in which England is willingto give twenty millions sterling for the Abolitionof Slavery." His state of health had latterly inducedmany of his friends to express their hope thathe might be allowed to witness the consummation ofthe fifty years' struggle, and might then retire inpeace ; and so strong was this presentiment, that oneof them speaks of writing to take leave of him sosoon as the Bill for the Abolition of Slavery wasknown to be in progress. That this anticipationshould be so exactly realized, added signal interest toan event, which in the course of nature might beshortly expected.Not less remarkable was it that London, which oflate he had seldom visited, and where he purposed toremain but a day or two, should be the place of his departure.Yet had it been otherwise, his funeral couldhardly have presented the circumstances, which madeit the fit termination of such a life. The concurrenceof two such incidents seemed providentially designed1833. TEMPORARY IMPROVEMENT. 371to fix public attention on his closing scene, that sothe aged Christian might be marked out by the publicvoice, as the man whom his country " delighted tohonour."On the evening of Friday, however, he seemed somuch better, that there was every reason to supposehe would be able to leave town on the Tuesday. Hisyoungest son has again recorded some of his remarks.A review in the Quarterly was read to him, (Rush'sResidence,) which spoke of the Duke of Wellington'sability in council. e Most true,' he said. ( I supposeyou have never seen them, but when the Dukeof Wellington commanded in Spain, and his brotherthe Marquis Wellesley was sent to conduct the negociation,the papers containing the despatches of thetwo brothers were printed by parliament, and I rememberthinking, that I had never seen any thing atall equal to them in talent. I remember hearing too,that of all the persons who gave evidence about Finance,the Duke of Wellington and Lord Harrowbyknew most of the subject.'Some of his concluding remarks this evening wereon the number of friends by whom he was surrounded.I do declare,' he said, ' that the delight I have in feelingthat there are a few people whose hearts are reallyattached to me, is the very highest I have in thisworld. And as far as the present state is concerned,what more could any man wish at the close of life,than to be attended by his own children, and his ownwife, and all treating him with such uniform kindnessand affection'"372 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1833.His son concludes his notes this evening. " Onthe whole what appears to me characteristic in hisstate of mind is chiefly this : there seems to be littleanticipation, though he is strongly impressed with afeeling that he is near his end ; much nearer than fromwhat his physician says I trust is the case. Hespeaks very little as if looking forward to future happiness; but he seems more like a person in the actualenjoyment of heaven within : he hardly speaks of anyonesubject except to express his sense of thankfulness,and what cause he feels for gratitude. This isthe case even in speaking of the things which try himmost. Thus talking of his being kept from exercise,What cause for thankfulness have I that I am notlying in pain, and in a suffering posture, as so manypeople are ! Certainly it is a great privation to me frommy habits not to be able to walk about, and to lie stillso much as I do, but then how many there are whoare lying in severe pain ! ' And then he will break outinto some passionate expression of thankfulness.""The next morning 24 his amendment seemed tocontinue. To an old servant who drew him out in awheel-chair, he talked with more than usual animation,and the fervency with which he offered up thefamily prayer was particularly noticed. But in theevening his weakness returned in a most distressingmanner, and the next day he experienced a successionof fainting fits, to which he had been for two yearssubject, which were followed by much suffering, andwhich for a time suspended his powers of recollection.53 July 27.1833. HIS DEATH. 373His physician pronounced that if he survived thisattack it would be to suffer much pain, and probablyalso with an impaired understanding. During aninterval in the evening of Sunday, ' I am in a verydistressed state he said, alluding apparently to hisbodily condition. ( Yes it was answered, ' but youhave your feet on the Rock.' ' I do not venture hereplied, ' to speak so positively; but I hope I have.'And after this expression of his humble trust, withbut one groan, he entered into that world where painand doubt are for ever at an end. He died at threeo'clock in the morning of Monday, July 29th, aged73 years and 11 months."No sooner was his death made known, than thefollowing letter, originating with the Lord Chancellor,(Brougham,) was addressed to his youngest son,the only one of his four children who was with himat the time of his departure.v^TO THE REV. H. W. WILBERFORCE. 25We the undersigned members of bothHouses of parliament, being anxious upon publicgrounds to show our respect for the memory of thelate William Wilberforce, and being also satisfiedthat public honours can never be more fitly bestowedthan upon such benefactors of mankind, earnestlyrequest that he may be buried in Westminster Abbey ;and that we, and others who may agree with us in** His youngest son, though thus addressed in the requisition, wasnot at that time in Holy Orders.LIFE OF WILBERFORCE.1833.these sentiments, may have permission to attend hisfuneral.WILLIAM FREDERICK -BROUGHAM, C.ELDONLANSDOWN, P. C.Vassals HOLLANDWESTMINSTERCLARENDONESSEXCliftonWELLESLEYGREYBEXLEYSlDMOUTHGRAFTONW. Canter.WELLINGTONRIPON, P. S.HADDINGTONPlanetJ. LINCOLNE. CHICHESTERBRISTOLOxfordHarrowsALBEMARLEC. J. LONDONGodolphinGrosslyCarthorseBUTEDENBIGHDucisCleonCLANRICARDEMORLEYEDWARD HEREFORDDare.In conveying this requisition, 26 the Lord Chancellordeclared himself " authorized to add that nearlyall the members of both Houses of parliament wouldhave joined, had the time allowed;" and an applicationcouched in the same terms was signed by almostone hundred members of all parties in the House ofCommons.26 July 31.1833. HIS FUNERAL. 375Mr. Wilberforce had chosen for the place of hisinterment, in accordance with a promise made to hisbrother-in-law, Mr. Stephen, a vault at StokeLexington, where his sister and his daughter hadbeen buried. A direction to this effect was given in hiswill, a circumstance however not actually ascertainedtill after the funeral. But his family had no hesitationin acceding to a request so gratifying to their feelings.Still they thought it fitting to avoid all suchparade as was inconsistent with the situation of a privategentleman. It was his characteristic distinctionthat, without quitting the rank in which Providencehad placed him, he had cast on it a lustre peculiarly hisown. Nothing therefore could be more appropriate,than that the Bishops of the Church, the Princes ofthe Blood, the great warrior of the age, the King'schief servants, and the highest legal functionarieswhatever England had most renowned for talent andgreatness should assemble as they did around hisunpretending bier. His simple name was its noblestdecoration.When his funeral reached Westminster Abbey onSaturday, Aug. 5th, the procession was joined by themembers then attending the two Houses of parliament.Public business was suspended ; the Speakerof the House of Commons, the Lord Chancellor, onePrince of the Blood, with others of the highestrank, took their place as pall-bearers beside the bier.It was followed by his sons, his relations, and immediatefriends. The Prebendary then in residence, oneof his few surviving college friends, met it at the376 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1833.Minster gate with the Church's funeral office ; andwhilst the vaulted roof gave back the anthem hisbody was laid in the north transept, close to thetombs of Pitt, Fox, and Canning.It was remarked by one of the prelates who tookpart in this striking scene, that considering how longhe had retired from active life, and that his intellectualsuperiority could be known only by tradition tothe generation which thus celebrated his obsequies,there was a sort of testimony to the moral sublimityof his Christian character in this unequalled mark ofpublic approbation. For while a public funeral hadbeen matter of customary compliment to those whodied in official situations, this voluntary tribute ofindividual respect from the mass of the great legislativebodies of the land, was an unprecedentedhonour. It was one moreover to which the generalvoice responded. The crowd of equipages which followedhis funeral procession was unusually great.The Abbey was thronged with the most respectablepersons. " You will like to know," writes a friend,that as I came towards it down the Strand, everythird person I met going about their ordinary businesswas in mourning." A subscription was immediatelyopened among his friends in London ; it wasagreed to place his statue in Westminster Abbey, andas a yet more appropriate memorial, that some charitableendowment should perpetuate his name. Publicmeetings were held at York and Hull on the occasion,and in the former place, a County Asylum for theblind has since been founded in honour of him,1833. THE SPRING OF HIS HAPPINESS. 377while his townsmen of Hull have raised a column tohis memory,It would be vain to mention all the marks of respectwhich were paid to him by the public societiesin which he had borne part. Nor were there wantingother more private, but not less affecting, tokensof regard. A number of those who had been indebtedto his kindness met after his funeral, "with feelings'as one of them expressed it in touching, and itis hoped not unseemly, words, "almost as disconsolateas those of the bereaved apostles, to lament his loss."Great part of our coloured population, who formhere an important body," writes a dignified clergymanfrom the West Indies, (( went into mourning atthe news of his death." The same honour was paidhim by this class of persons at New York, where alsoan eulogium (since printed) was pronounced uponhim by a person publicly selected for the task, andtheir brethren throughout the United States werecalled upon to pay the marks of external respect tothe memory of their benefactor. For departed kingsthere are appointed honours, and the wealthy havetheir gorgeous obsequies : it was his nobler portionto clothe a people with spontaneous mourning, andgo down to the grave amid the benedictions of thepoor.It is impossible to conclude this history without observingthe striking testimony which it bears to thatinspired dictate ; " Godliness has the promise of thelife that now is as well as of that which is to come." Ifever any man drew a prosperous lot in this life, he didLIFE OF WILBERFORCE.1833.so, who has been here described. Yet his Christianfaith was from first to last his talisman of happiness.Without it the buoyancy of his youthful spirits led toa frivolous waste of life, not more culpable than unsatisfying.With it came lofty conceptions, an energywhich triumphed over sickness and languor, the coldnessof friends and the violence of enemies, acalmness not to be provoked, a perseverance whichrepulse could not baffle. To these virtues was owingthe happiness of his active days. Through the powerof the same sustaining principle, his affection towardshis fellow creatures was not dulled by the intercourseof life, nor his sweetness of temper impaired by theirritability of age. A firm trust in God, an undeviatingsubmission to His will, an overflowing thankfulness,these maintained in him to the last thatcheerfulness which this world could neither give nortake away. They poured even upon his earthlypilgrimage the anticipated radiance of that brighterregion, to which he has now doubtless been admitted.For " THE PATH OF THE JUST IS LIKE THE SHININGLIGHT, WHICH SHINETH MORE AND MORE UNTO THEPERFECT DAY."THE END.INDEX.INDEX.ABBOT,Right Hon. Charles, Speakerof the House of Commons,(afterwards Lord Colchester,)iii. 287. 551. his reprimand ofthe Sheriff of Middlesex, 442.letter from, iv. 24.Abercorn, Marquis of, ii. 94.Abercrombie, Right Hon. James,(now Speaker of the House ofCommons,) v. 129. 214.Abingdon, Earl of, ii. 20. 50.Abolition Bill Anniversary, iii.361.Abolitionists, subjects of actionand deliberation for, iii. 483.Abuse, iv. 283.Abusive assailant, answer to, iv.283.Acland, Sir Thomas Dyke, iv.321 ; v. 59. 172. 306.Acquaintances, on the selectionof, v. 184.Adair, Sergeant, ii. 141. 146.Addington, Right Hon. Henry,(afterwards Lord Sidmouth,) i.224; iii. 2. 85. 88. 147, 148.178. 210. letters to and from,28.Addington and Pitt reconciled,iii. 211.Addington, John Riley, Esq. iii.376.Adult schools, iv. 219.Adultery, iii. 402.Affection of children, great importanceof insuring, iii. 563.African Institution, iii. 360.VOL. V.African travellers, propositions tobe proved by, iii. 203.Ale-house politician, ii. 449.Alers,William, Esq. (now WilliamAlters Hanker,) iii. 381. letterto, 381 .Alexander, Emperor of Russia, iv.180 ; v. 2. letter to, on conventionfor general Abolition, iv.180. interviews with, 190. 198.second letter to, 333. its reception,334. third letter to, v. 120.130.Allen, William, iii. 478. 565,566; v. 273. his character, iii.566. letter to, v. 120.Alvanley, Lord, iii. 151.Ambition, temptations of, i. 390 ;iii. 531.America, state of religion in, ii.57.American war, i. 19; iv. 5, 6.Amiens, peace of, iii. 101 .Ancient History, ii. 377.Anglo-Indians, iv. 110. 112. 118.Animal magnetism, i. 73.Annual Register, New, iii. 15.Antelope, iv. 72. 89.Anti-saccharine, i. 338 ; ii. 29.Anti Jacobin, or Weekly Examiner,ii. 334.Anti-Jacobin Review, iii. 68.Anti-room, Mr. Wilber force's, described,i. 256.Apley Park described, v. 142.Apology for Negro Slavery'quoted, i. 292.INDEX.Appointments, recommendationto, iii. 409.Arabians, Hannah More's eightv. 191.Archeveques, French, i. 36.Arden, Right Hon. Pepper, (afterwardsLord Alvanley,) i. 54118.Arden, Lord, iv. 24.Aristocratic,' i. 336.Articles of the Church, i. 259, 260Assessed Tax Bill, ii. 244. 247.Astell, Thornton, Esq. i. 105.Atkinson, Miles, Esq. iii. 499.Attacks, personal, iv. 305; v. 203Attila, ii. 92.Attornies, iii. 81.Augereau, General, v. 195.Austerlitz, battle of, iii. 244.Autographs, iv. 149.Autumn of life, iii. 400.Avignon, i. 68.Saber, Mrs. i. 305.Babington, Thomas, Esq. i. 277;ii. 325. letters to, 325 ; iii.87. 136. 379. 430. 479. 542.552 ;iv. 176. 349; v. 116. 218.276. 323.Bacon, Lord, i. 139; ii. 100; v.220.Baillie, Miss Joanna, v. 273.Bank Restriction Bill, ii. 193.Bankes, Henry, Esq.i. 18. 25, 26.34. 42 ; ii. 66. letters to, i. 42 ;ii. 66. 316 ; iii. 114. 206. 414.428. 437; iv. 30. 32. 60. 61.276 ; v. 9. 75. 343.Barham, (Sir Charles Middleton,)Lord, iii. 239. 460. his death,iv. 122.Barham Court described, iii. 460.v. 29.Barham, John Forster, Esq.|" ii.49; iii. 272. his pamphlet, v.200.Barlow, Sir John, iv. 15.Barnes, Thomas, Esq. his ' PoliticalPortraits ' quoted, iv. 125.Barren, iii. 102.Barrington, Sir Jonah, his Autobiography,v. 291.Barrow, Dr. his Sermon on loveof God, i. 236.Basket, Rev. K. i. 9.Battas, criminal law of the, v.250.Bath characterized, i. 174 ; v. 225.253.Bathurst, Lord Chancellor, i. 138.Bathurst, Earl, iv. 223. letter from,223. 292.Baxter, Richard, his Life, iv. 148.Battle, Dr. his * Minstrel' anespecial favourite with Wilberforcewhen a child, i. 10.Bedford, (Francis Russell,) Dukeof, ii. 113.Bedford, Captain, iii. 285. letterto, 138.Belirrave, Lord, (now Marquis ofWestminster,) his SundayNewspaper Bill, ii. 338.Bell, Dr. his schools, iv. 197.Bell, Johnny, i. 14.Bellingham, John, iv. 24.Benfield, Paul, Esq. iii. 115.Bentham, Jeremy, Esq. ii. 137.170; iii. 499. 504. failure ofhis Adoption, ii. 171. lettersto and from, iii. 179.Beresford, John Claudius, ii. 326.Berkeley, Bishop, his advice, iii.131.Bernard, Thomas, Esq. (afterwardsSir Thomas,) iii. 44. 186.237. 497. letters to, 44. 72.his plan of an Alfred theatre,497.Best man in the world, 7 ii. 100.Bible Meetings, v. 18.Bible Society Anniversary, iii.407.Billy-men, 7 ii. 125.Bird, Miss Harriet, account ofthe death of, i. 329 ; iii. 67.Blaize Castle described, v. 30.259.Blasphemous and indecent publications,i. 132.Blasphemy, trials for, v. 39. 173.Blenheim, iv. 267.Blucher, Prince, iv. 198. 261,262.Boar's Head, Eastcheap, an eveningat, in memory of Shakespeare,i. 18.INDEX.Bonnet, James, his private devotions,iii. 63.Books to be read, i. 90.95. 116.Banquet, Charles, Esq. hisValue of Commerce,' iii. 349.Boswell, James, Esq. i. 360 ; v.339. his ' Life of Johnson iii.63. 70. his description of Wilberforceat York, i. 54.Botany Bay chaplaincy, i. 268.285.Bouverie, Mrs. i. 371.Powder, John, Esq. iii. 348. 350.420, 421. his sketch of Wilberforcein domestic life, 423.his character, 467. his partingaddress on leaving England,468. letter from, 553. his death,and character, iv. 233.Boyd, General, iv. 375.Bridges, Mr. his attack on Mr.Wilberforce, v. 203.Brighton, Piccadilly by the seaside,7 iv. 268.Brighton Auxiliary Bible Society,speech at, iv. 272.Bristol, Bishop of, (Dr. WilliamLord Manse,) iii. 560. 562.letter from, 562.Bristol, Earl (now Marquis) of,iii. 560.British constitution!. 38 ; iii. 332.its distinguishing features, v.214.British Review, iv. 52.Bradley, Robert, Esq. ii. 101,102.Broglie, Duchesse de, iv. 217.Brotherly Love and Conduct,'iii. 474.Brougham, Henry, Esq. (nowLord Brougham and Vaux,) iii.187. 194. 243. 287. 299; iv.35; v. 54. 59. 65. 186. 214.330. 373. his < Colonial Policyiii. 194. correspondencewith, 194. his motion on Ordersin Council, iv. 17. 35. presentsspontaneously Mr. Wilberforce'ssecond son with the living ofEast Farleigh, v. 330.Brown, Isaac Hawkins, Esq. ii.60 ; iv. 77.Brown, Mrs. iv. 155.Buchanan, Dr. iv. 22. 99. 106.sBull-baiting Bill, ii. 365; iii. 48.Buller, Edward Lytton, Esq. hisPelham 'characterized, v. 291.Bunyan's ' Pilgrim's Progress v.358.Buonaparte, Napoleon, ii. 353,354, 355 ; iii. 66. 70. 75. 89.369 ; iv. 87. 170, 171. 173.his letter to the King, i. 353.355.Burdett, Sir Francis, iii. 442, 443.500, 501 ; iv. 18, 19.Burgess, Colonel, iv. 163.Burgh, Dr. i. 66. 222. 227. 379,380 ; ii. 145. 359. letters to andfrom, i. 223; ii. 77. 142; iii.285. 289. his death, 398.Burke, Right Hon. Edmund, i.152. 159. 171. 219. 266. 286;ii, 13. 24. 72. 190; v. 338. differencewith Wilberforce, i. 159.his character, 159. his 'Reflectionson the French Revolution284. his quarrel with Fox, 300.his death-bed approbation of'Practical Christianity ii. 208.last interview with, 211. hisplan for bettering slaves' condition,v. 157.Burleigh, Lord, his reply to Walsingham,iii. 241.Bute, Lord, i. 233.Butler's ' Analogy of Religioni. 90. 95.Butler, Charles, Esq. iv. 203.Butterworth, Joseph, Esq. iii. 110;iv. 5. 65. letters to, iii. 110 ; iv.10. letter from,v. 239.Buxton, inconveniences of, ii.164.Buxton, Thomas Powell, Esq. iv.368; v.20. 96. 122, 123. 129.139. 216, 217. his J Inquiry intoPrison Discipline iv. 376. his'Speech on Criminal Laws, v.100. letters to and from, v. 1 39.153. 158. 196. 239. 344. 350.the advocacy of Slavery Emancipationcommitted to his chargeby Mr. Wilberforce, 177. depositaryof Mr. Wilberforce'sprinciples on West Indian matters,129. 238.Byron, Lord, v. 298.INDEX.Cader Idris, v. 205.Cain/v. 132.Calabar Tragedy, i. 262.Calcraft, John, Esq. v. 272.Calthorpe, Lord, iii. 535 ; v. 166.offers Mr. Wilberforce a seatin parliament, iii. 535. letter tov.356.Calumny, iii. 337. progress of, ii.298.Calvinism, v. 162.Cambridge, life at, i. 107.Cambridge Bible Society, iii. 559.562.Camden, Charles Pratt, first Earl,cures Wilberforce of the art ofmimicry, i. 30.Camden, Earl, (now Marquis,) i.179.233; ii. 111. his generousgift to the public, v. 20 ; letterfrom, ii. 111.Canistered,' v. 15.Canning, Right Hon. Geo. i. 180ii. 277. 324. 358, 359. 366iii. 38. 342. 426. 429. 431.491iv. 31. 33. 37, 38. 41. 51. 325.329. 369; v. 15. 20. 81. 126.137. 139. 171. 175. 214. 216,217. 339 ; character of hisspeeches, iii. 491 ; letters to andfrom, i. 180 ; iii. 349 ; iv. 36,37, 38; v.122. 135. his death,275.Canterbury, Archbishop of, (Dr.John Moore,) i. 133. (Dr.Charles Manners Sutton,) iv. 13.259.Cape of Good Hope, ii. 242.slavery at, v. 131.Capital punishments, i. 131; iii.440; v. 14.Carcase, Mr. iv. 153.Card-playing, i. 133 ; ii. 56; v. 17.Carey, Dr. his character, iv. 123.Champion, Lord, ii. 25.Carib tribes, ii. 258.Carlisle, Richard, his trials forblasphemy, v. 39.Carlyle, Rev. I. D. ii. 333. 344.Caroline, Queen, v. 54. 56, 57.59. 61. 65. 71. 77. 79. 85. 87.her death, 105.JWarrington, Lord, ii. 154; iii. 56;iv. 220. letter from, iii. 56.Cartwright, Major, i. 190. 245.letter to and from, 190.Castlereagh, Lord, (afterwardsMarquis of Londonderry,) iii.178. 406; iv. 35. 124. 13,5.187. 190. 221; v. 2. 9. letterfrom, iv. 224.Catalans, Madame, iii. 516.Catholic Emancipation, iii. 231.Cecil, Rev. John, ii. 16. 57.Censorship of the press, v. 212.Ceylon, ii. 242. schools for Christianityin, iii. 378.Chalmers, Rev. Dr. iv. 323, 324.371, 372. letters to and from,v. 28. 48. 1 1 6. 294. his sketch ofMr. Wilberforce's politics, 243.Changes, great, i. 139.Chapels of Ease, ii. 319. 342.Character, ii. 154.Charitable Donation Bill,iv. 2.Charities, Wilberforce's, ii. 302 ;iii. 4; v. 313.Charlotte, Queen, iv. 278.Chateaubriand, Viscount, iv. 213.Chatham, first Earl of, v. 107.his Letters to his Nephew,'reviewed by Wilberforce, iii.194.Chatham, John, second Earl of, ii.39; iii. 49.Chatham, Lady, (mother of WilliamPitt,) i.' 304.Chatterton,' v. 90.Chatterton, iii. 251.Cheddar, establishment of schoolsat, i. 240.246; ii.31.221; iii.375.Cheerful temper, iv. 305.Cheerfulness, i. 123 ; iv. 305. "Chester, Bishop of, (Dr. JohnBird Sumner,) v. 311.Chesterfield's ' Letters to his Son,'iii. 545.Chief Justice of England, mischiefof making him a politician, iii.258.Children, iii. 191. 563; iv. 205;v. 104.Children of religious parents, iv.151.Children's tempers, iv. 205.Chinese, v. 250.INDEX.Christian-duty paper, i. 116.Christian, life of a, i. 127.Christian, peculiar character of a,ii. 115.Christian Knowledge Society, iv.15. 22.Christian Observer,' iii. 67.Christian's Sunday motto, v. 93.Christianity, ii. 97. 404 ; iii. 179.temporal blessings which itbrings with it, ii. 462.Christianity in India, iii. 351 ;iv. 12. 16. 101. 103. 118.Christophe, iv. 336. 352. 354. 360.v. 108. 125. correspondencewith, iv. 352 ; v. 4. his deathand character, 82. 108.Church, danger of running fromchurch to, i. 104.Church Establishment, i. 249.258; ii. 26.Church Establishments, benefitsof,ii. 401.Church Methodism, v. 273.Church Missionary Society, ii.251.Church, national, needed for India,ii. 25.Church, parish, reasons for attending,v. 252.Church patronage, ii. 287.Church property, i. 261.Civil government, intent of, v. 100Clare, Earl of, ii. 327.Clarence, H. R. H. the Duke of(afterwards William IV.) i233; ii. 50; iii. 291.Clarendon, Earl of, v. 232. his descriptionof Wilberforce at college,i. 12.Clarke, Mrs. Anne, iii. 402, 403.Clarke, Rev. Dr. (Wilberforce;brother-in-law,) i. 277. hideath and character, ii. 226.Clarkson, John, i. 269.Clarkson, Thomas, i. 141. 146151. 184. 229, 230. 343; ii38. 51, 52; v. 3, 4. his 'Historyof Abolition' characterizei. 141 . his ' Essay on the Slaverof the Human Species,' 148subscription for, h. 51. letterto and from, i. 230 ; ii. 39, 40Clergy, mode of supporting, i319. sitting in parliament, ii10. non-residence of the, i. 129.Non-residence Bill, iii. 44.spread of Hadley's latitudinarianviews amongst!. 129. improvementamong them, v. 281.344.Climate, English, v. 166.Clinton, Sir Henry, i. 323.;owes, Mr. ii. 99. 106.Coalitions, iii. 154. 428. 433.!obbetr, William, ii. 384 ; iii. 46.93. 441. 531; iv. 277. 308;v. 67. 107. 203.Cales in search of a Wife,' iii.399.Cogitation, ii. 357.:oke, Rev. Dr. iii. 389. 1ld Bath Fields prison, ii. 320.326 ; iii. 500.College life, i. 107. 176. reviewof, v. 147.^ollingwood, Lord, iii. 242.Collins on the management ofnegroes, recommended, iii. 481.Colonial acquisitions, ii. 147."comforts of the poor, v. 214.;common-place book, i. 116.Company, ii. 274; iii. 64.Composition recommended, iii.463.congress at Aix la Chapelle, v. 1 .Connexions, new, i. 97. 104.Conscience, iii. 108; 'the manwithin the breast,' iii. 533.consequence, danger of a man'snot knowing his own, ii. 77.constable, Duke, Esq. iii. 311.Constituency, corruption of, v.151.Continental connexions, iii. 75,76. 206.Continental expeditions, iii. 414.Conventicle Act, iv. 12.Conversation, i. 100. 128 ; v.51.Cooksonon, Rev. Dr. i. 274 ; iii.278, 279. letters to and from, i.274; iii. 278, 279. his death,iii. 498.Cooksonon, William, Esq. ii. 139.Cooper's Practical Sermons, iv.390.Copenhagen, attack on, iii. 344.347.Corbett, Archdeacon, ii. 228. lettersto, 228; iv. 145.INDEX.Corn Law Bill and riots, iv. 245Cornwall, i. 199.Cornwallis, Marquis, iii. 49. 248250. 252.Coronation, v. 103. 105.Cossacks in London, visit to, iv.198.Outburst, Dr. ii. 129; iii. 182.Country life, advantages of, i. 32 ;iii. 84. 421; iv. 141.Country, love of, i. 69.County patronage, iii. 313.Courteney, John, Esq. ii. 320.Courtesy, iv. 269; v. 161.Cotton Factories' ApprenticesBill, iii. 44.Cowper, iii. 419. 441. favouritelines of, 331. his letters, 358.Comprising summer,' iii. 417.Come's ' Memoirs of Sir RobertWalpole,'ii. 317.Crebillon, iv. 275.Crewe, Mrs. i. 47, 48. 88. (afterwardsLady,) iii. 412.Creyke, Colonel, ii. 101. 153.letter to, iii. 311.Crimes, most effectual way of preventing,i. 131.Criminal Code, severity of, iv. 256.379; v. 12.Criminal law of the Battas, v. 250.Croker, Right Hon. John Wilson,i. 395; v. 186.Crowds, ii. 57.Brother, Rev. Mr. i. 267.Brother, Rev. Samuel, iii. 83.Cruelty to animals, v. 214.Coffee, Paul, iii. 501.Cumberland, H. R. H. the Dukeof, iii. 301.Cunningham, Rev. J. W. v. 17.Curates' Stipends Bill, ii. 146;iii. 364. 367.Currie, Dr. i. 345. 355; ii. 21.Custom, force of, i. 33.Czartoriski, Prince, iv. 199, 200.Danish Expedition, iii. 344. 347.Danton, iii. 102.Dead, features of the, iv. 300.Death, iii. 467; iv. 300. f friends,iv. 273. of the righteous, i. 331.De Blaquiere, Lord, iii. 273.De Laggard, Abbe, (afterwardsM. de Cheval,) i. 36. 82 ; ii.92. his recollections of Wilberforceand Pitt at Rheims, i. 36.his escape to England, ii. 63.Demerara, insurrection in, v. 201.Democrat Slave-masters, iv. 293.Denman, Thomas, Esq. (now LordChief Justice,) v. 60.Devonshire, Duchess of, iv. 277.Devotional day, iii. 123.Devotional poetry, v. 261.Diary, i. 101.Dickson, Dr. i. 344.Diligence, v. 153.Dining-out,' iv. 161.Dinners, conversation of great, i.205.Disinterestedness, iv. 127.Dissent, evils of, i. 248. 259.Dissenters, increase of, i. 248.Dissimulation, ii. 230.Distinction, love of, ii. 275.Division of time, v. 154.Doctor, The,' ii. 73. 103.Doddridge, Dr. his ' Rise andProgress of Religion,' i. 76 ; ii.166; iii. 63. his directions forspending time, i. 103. his life,i. 319. his pupils, iii. 24. hisprivate devotions, 63. his ' Expositor,'551.Dolben, Sir William, i. 137. 172.Domingo, St. ii. 92.Domestic comfort, iii. 189.Duel between Castlereagh andCanning, iii. 426. 428, 429.Duelling, i. 356 ; ii. 93. 281.Duigenan, Dr. Patrick, ii. 24 ; iii.231. 361.Durnourier, General, letter from,iv. 172.Duncan, Lord, ii. 249.Buncombe, Henry, Esq. i. 309;ii. 9. 151 ; iii. 55. letters toand from, i. 309.Buncombe, Charles, Esq. (nowLord Petersham,) ii. 151. 153;iii. 319. letter to, on retiringfrom Yorkshire, iv. 54.Dundas, Right Hon. Henry,(afterwards Viscount Melville,)i. 179. 233. 349, 350, 351 ;ii. 27. 142 ; iii. 8. a fine leader,INDEX.i. 20. his character as a speakeri. 21. 326; his character, i351 . letters to and from, i. 364ii. 49. his proposed motto, iii219.Dundas, Hon Robert, (now LordMelville,) iii. 361.Durham, Bishop of, iv. 12, 13Dutch expedition, ii. 349. 358Dutch settlements, iii. 180.Earldom family, iv. 298.Early friends, v. 149.Early rising, ii. 23.East India Bill, Fox's, described,i. 54.East India Clauses proposed byWilberforce, ii. 392.East India College, iii. 352.East India Company's Charter,ii. 24; iv. 9. 14. 101. 104. 107.124.East India instruction, iv. 13, 14.East India missions, iii. 359. 364.East India sugar, i. 338.Eden, Mr. (afterwards LordAuckland,) i. 156. letter to, 157.Edgeworth, Miss, her Tales, iii.472.Edinburgh Review, iii. 194. 271.362. 364 ; iv. 202. v. 10.47;its character of Mr. Wilberforce,iii. 270.Education, iii. 348; iv. 138. necessityof making religious instructiona part of, ii. 407.Education without religion, v. 47.255.Edwards on Religious Affections,recommended, iii. 66.Edwards, Bryan, Esq. ii. 196.218. 340.Eldon, Lord, iii. 9. 155; v. 215.341. his advice as to the bestmode of study and discipline forthe bar, iii. 9.Eliot, Hon. Edward James, i. 34.125, 126. 137. 373. his death,and character, ii. 234. 236, 237.417. letters to and from,i. 137;ii.235.Ellenborough, (Sir Edward Law,)Lord Chief Justice, iii. 258,259. his seat in the Cabinet, iii.258.Eland Society, i. 252. 255.El I ice, Edward, Esq. (now RightHon.) v. 27.Ellice, Charles, Esq. (now LordSeaport,) v. 266.Ellis, George, Esq. ii. 196; iii.168.Eloquence, i. 140.Elwes, John, (the miser,) v. 260.Employment of time, v. 155.Encyclopaedia Britannica, iii. 14.Enemies, ii. 100.England, attachment to, i. 83. itscomforts and luxuries, iv. 269.English, i. 85.Erskine, Hon. Thomas, (afterwardsLord Erskine,) i. 221.293 ; ii. 164.Established Church, i. 249. 258 ;ii. 26, 27. benefits of, 401, 402.Eucharist, i. 102.European civilization, origin of, i.35.Everard, Rev. Dr. iv. 323.Excellence, various modes of, i.256.Exeter, Bishop of, iv. 259.Expediency, general, ii. 351.Expediency, political, ii. 22. 26.Expeditions, continental, iii. 414.Family prayers, i. 91. 93; iii. 112.Family connexions, v. 141.Family affection, v. 193.Family affection in sickness, v.218.Fast days, ii. 143; iii. 120.Faure, Rev. Mr. iv. 363.Fawkes, Walter, Esq. iii. 275.296.Fear, iii. 24.Features of the dead, iv. 300.Finale's Art of Memory, iii.471 ; iv. 98; v. 9. 45.Female character, v. 264. importanceof improving, iv. 336.Female Anti-Slavery Associations,objections to, v. 264.Fenelon, v. 308.INDEX.Finley, visit to, in Newgate, iii.82.Fitzpatrick, General Richard, reasonsfor supporting his motionfor the release of La Fayette,ii. 394.Fitzwilliam, Earl, i. 335 ; v. 37.279, 280. 326.Flogging in the array, iv. 18.Flood, Sir Frederick, iv. 98.Flowers, v. 287.Folkestone, Lord, (now Earl ofRadnor,) iii. 500, 501.Foreign Enlistment Bill, v. 27.Foreign Slave Trade Bill, ii. 23.48. 50; iii. 261.Forster, Mr. i. 101. 366.Forster, Rev. C. v. 350.4 Fortunate,' iv. 242.Fortunes of Nigel/ v. 133.Douche, iii. 69.Fox, Right Hon. Charles, i. 23.26. 171. 191. 219; ii. 3. 72.133. 245. 249, 278, 279; iii.159. 259 ; v. 260. 340. his EastIndia Bill described, i. 54. hisspeech at Whig Club, ii. 279.422. his illness and death, iii.268, 269. 273. character of his4 History of James II.' 383.385, 386.Fox, Joseph, Esq. iii. 478.France, origin of the war with, ii.392. observations on the propositionfor treating with, ii.429. reasons for and against anegociation with, in 1800, 431.peace with, iii. 16. public mindin, iv.213.Francis, Philip, Esq. (afterwardsSir Philip,) ii. 144.Franklin, Dr. Benjamin, i. 41 ; ii.177. 179.Frankness, iii. 521 ; iv. 220.Frazer, Dr. i. 332.Freeholders Registration Bill, i.114.French emigrant clergy, ii. 143.French levity, v. 261.French morals, iii. 40.French Revolution, iii. 14. its effectson the Abolition question,i. 295. 343.French revolutionary principles,speed of, ii. 2. 5* 8. 62, 63.French Royalists, iv. 213.Friends, ii. 100.Friends, loss of, iv. 235, 236. 273.300. 335.Friends' paper, to be looked atevery Sunday, ii. 405.Frewen, Rev. Dr. i. 209. 211.letters to and from, v. 144.Fry, Mrs. iv. 369, 370. 376.Fuller, Andrew, iii. 389 ; iv. 118.Fuller, John, Esq. i. 263 ; iii.441. 464.Funchal, M. his * Projet,' iv.133.Funds, project of taxing, iii. 103,104.Future state, iii. 411.Gaiety, i. 100.Galloway, Lord, ii. 189.Gambier, Admiral, (afterwardsLord,) ii. 57. 223. letter from,iii. 344.Gaming, i. 19.Gardiner, Colonel, his private devotions,iii. 63.Gaskin, Dr. iv. 318.Geneva, i. 81, 82.George the Third, i. 189. 206.233. 344; ii. 72. 89; iii. 7.9.109. 155. 159. 306. 415; v.49. political intrigues duringhis illness in 1788, i. 385. hisletter to Mr. Dundas on continuingthe office of Warden ofthe Cinque Ports on Mr. Pitt,396.German sufferers, iv. 159. 198.Gibbon, Edward, Esq. ii. 166;iii. 401.Gil Bias, iii. 545.Gisborne, Rev. Thomas, v. 345.his picture of Wilber force's collegelife, i. 10. 220. 279 ; iii.461. his * Moral Philosophy,' ii.351. letters to and from, i. 217.336. 347; ii. 17. 27. 50; iii.461.Gloucester, Prince William Henry,Duke of, i. 80.Gloucester, Prince William Frederickof, i. 74. (afterwards DukeINDEX.of,) iii. 294. 502. 516. 561 ; v.34.Gloucester, Duchess of, ii. 89.Gloucester, Bishop of, iv. 375.Godwin, William, his confessionto Mrs. Knowles, ii. 64.Goldberry's Travels in Africa, iv.203.Goldsmith's Vicar of Wakefield,'iv. 52.Good Friday employment, ii.210.Good nature, ii. 100.Goostree's club, list of the membersof, i. 17.Gordon, Duchess of, i. 178, 179 ;ii. 87.Gordon, James, Esq. ii. 140; iv.306; v. 117.Government, solicitations for favoursto, ii. 38.40. 291.Government patronage, use andabuse of, iii. 409.Government question, what is,and is not, i. 165.Graham, Lady Catharine, ii. 359.Grant, Charles, Esq. i. 363. 374;ii. 313; iv. 129. his death, andcharacter, v. 206.Grant, Charles, Esq. jun. (nowLord Glenelg,)iv. 132. 155.Grant, Robert, Esq. (now RightHon. Sir Robert,) iii. 199; iv.258.Gratitude, motives to, iv. 345.Grattan, Right Hon. Henry, iii.231. 363; iv. 260.Gravity, i. 100.Great seal, i. 55.Great, the, iv. 279.Gregory, Abbe, iii. 65 ; iv. 213.Gregory, Dr. Olynthus, i. 321.Grenville, Hon. William Wynd-ham,(afterwards Lord,) i. 155.199.Grenville, Lord, i. 284; ii. 50.337; iii. 179. 183. 260. 265.291.293.431; v. 43. 251,252.reasons of his elevation to thepeerage, i. 234. 387. his characterof Mr. Wilberforce, iv.1 95. letters to and from, i. 155 ;iii. 179.Grenville, James, Esq. i. 255.letters to and from, 255.Grey, Hon. Charles, (afterwardsEarl,) i. 226.Grey, Earl, iii. 432 ; iv. 34.Crimson, Thomas, Esq. iii. 117.Guiana Slave Trade, iii. 217.234.Gurney, Joseph John, Esq. iv.298 ; v. 230. 363. letters to, 230.his character of Mr. Wilberforce,286. 362.IIHabeas Corpus Suspension Bill,ii. 358. 427.Habit, force of, i. 33.Hale, Sir Matthew, i. 319.'Halidon Hill,' v. 133.Hall, Robert, iii. 186; v. 140.Hall, Captain, i. 355.Hallam's ' Constitutional History,'Southey's review of, v. 291.Hamilton, Lord Archibald, iii. 406.Hanging, barbarous custom of,i. 131.Hanover, iii. 109. 415.Hard castle, Mr. iii. 69.Firewood House described, iii.55.Harford, J. S. Esq. iv. 235 ; v. 206.259. letters to, iv. 236; v. 174.206.Harrington, Earl of, ii. 219.Harrowby, (Right Hon. DudleyRyder') Earl of, iii. 208. 412.Hartley, David, Esq. ii. 315.Hastings, Right Hon. Warren, iv.108; v. 340.Hatched's prosecution, iv. 319.Hatsell, John, Esq. iii. 213.Hearth, John, i. 319.Hawke, Lord, ii. 109.Hawker, Dr. iii. 102.Hawkesbury, (Charles Jenkins,)Lord, i. 293.Hawkesbury, (Robert BanksJenkins,) second Lord, afterwardsEarl of Liver pool, iii. 183.Hay ley, William, Esq. lettersfrom, iii. 289. 339.Hayti, iv. 206. 237. 251. 336 352.354; v. 1. 31. 82.Hadrian correspondence, iv. 352;v. 5.INDEX.Hadrian Professors, v. 5.1 Heart of Mid Lothian v. 254.Heaven, iii. 80.Heberr, Reginald, ( afterwardsBishop of Calcutta,) iii. 299 ;v. 258. his first introduction toWilberforce, iii. 298.Herbert, George, Esq. iv. 282.Hermitage wine, iv. 322.Herstmonceux, iii. 464.Hey, William, Esq. i. 114. 123.252. 275, 276 ; ii. 9. 539. hischaracter of ' Practical Christianity,'ii. 201. letters to andfrom, i. 114. 132. 135. 241,242. 244. 331. 346; ii, 9. 56.62. 118. 123. 213. 311 ; iii, 4.137. 268. 297. 345. 358. 400.402. 454. 509. 539 ; iv. 28. 95.172. 196.Highwood Hill, v. 248.Hilyard, Sir Robert, ii. 101.Hill, Bryant, Esq. i. 243.Hill, Sir Richard, i. 201. 243,244.Hill, Rev. Rowland, v. 226.Hindoo conversion, iv. 125.Hindooism, iv. 106.Hippisley, Sir John Cox, iii. 309 ;v. 340.History, ancient, ii. 377.Hadley, Bishop, spread of hislatitudinarian views, i. 129.Hoare, Prince, Esq. his * Life ofGranville Sharpe i. 308.Hoare, Samuel, Esq. i. 231.Hoax,' v. 204.Holland, expedition to, iu 349.358.Holland, Lord, iii. 287; v. 26.letter from, iv. 213.Holland, Lady, v. 26.Holy Alliance, v. 95.Holy Scriptures, i. 102, 103. 105.119.Home, iii. 563.Honour, modern, ii. 286.Honours, iii. 54.Home, Bishop, his ' Commentaryon the Psalms,' iii. 134.Homer, Francis, Esq. iii. 102.Horsey, Bishop, ii. 171.Hours, evils of late, i. 201.House of Commons, advice to afriend on entering the, i. 20.House of Commons recollections,v. 259.Howe, Rev. John, his treatise * OnDelighting in God,' i. 360.Hawick, (Charles Grey,) Lord,(now Earl Grey,) iii. 295,296.300.Huddlestone, John, Esq. iii. 212.Human reason, ii. 21.Humboldt, Baron, iv. 212. 214.letter to and from, 212, 213,214.Hume, Joseph, v. 120. 127. 188.Humiliation, ii. 173; iii. 79.Humiliation, means of, and topicsfor, iv. 343.Humility, i. 32. 252.Hunt, Henry, iv. 308; v. 38.Huskisson, Right Hon. William,iv. 349.Hutchinson, Mrs. her * Memoirsof her Husband iii. 350.Immorality in the lower and middlingclasses, consequences of,ii. 448.Incivilities, iv. 200.Independents, club of, described,i. 31.India, plan for national religiousinstruction in, ii. 24, 25. clausesproposed by Wilberforce, ii. 392 .Indian bishoprics, iv. 22.Informers, iv. 369. 371, 372.Inglis, Sir Robert, iv. 321 ; v.205. 249.Ingram on Causes of Increase ofMethodism, iii. 357.Integrity, iii. 150; v. 132.Intercession, iii. 131.Interlaced, i. 85.Intermediate state, iv. 232.Invasion, iii. 108, 109. 142.Ireland. Moral and religiouseducation, the want of, iii. 309,310.Ireland, popery the bane of, iii.300. 309. 363 ; iv. 101.Ireland, state of, ii. 163; iii. 3.63.Irish agitators, v. 183.Irish barbarism, popery the causeof, ii. 292.INDEX.Irish gentry, ii. 163.Irish Union, ii. 318. 325. 353.Irishman of genius, v. 197.Irving, Rev. Edward, v. 180. 188.210. his ' Orations ' and ' Argument'characterized, 210. hischaracter, 210.Isaiah, iii. 369.Jay, John, Esq. (American envoy,)iL 57. 65.Jay, William, ii. 240. 351.Jeannie Deans, v. 254.Webb, Rev. I. (afterwards Bishopof Limerick,) iii. 417.Jefferson, Thomas, (AmericanPresident,) letter to, iii. 374.Jeffrey, Francis, Esq. (now Lord,)iii. 194.Jenkins, Hon. R. B. (afterwardsLord Hawk esbury, and Earl ofLiverpool,) ii. 139.Birmingham, Edward, Esq. ' iv.203.Jersey Methodists, case of the, ii.315.'John Bulls. 201. 211.Johnson, Dr. ii. 179 ; v. 215. 260.339.Jones, Sir William, iii. 49.Jones, Lord Teignmouth's Life of,iii. 188.Joseph Andrews, ii. 322.Joseph, Mr. v. 365.Jungfrau, the, i. 82.KKent, H. R. H. the Duke of, iv.296. notes before meeting forerecting a monument to, ii. 460.Kent, H. R. H. the Duchess of, v.71.Kenyon, Lord, i. 237. 243.Keswick, visit to, iv. 395.Timber, Captain, i. 303. 356;ii. 51.Knowles, Mrs. Mary, ii. 64.Knox, Alexander, Esq. iii. 417.555.Lady of the Lake,' character of,iii. 461.467.La Fayette, Marquis de,i.41. 229.315. reasons for supporting themotion for his release, ii. 394.letter from, v. 1 1 .La Harpe, iii. 102.Lamb, ;Hon. William, (now ViscountMelbourne,) v. 76. letterfrom, 76.Lancaster, Joseph, iii. 66.Lancastrian schools, iii. 478; iv197; v. 57.Language, Philip, Esq. ii.102.Langton, Bennet, Esq. i. 150,151.Lansdown, (John, second) Marquisof, ii. 113.Lansdown, (Henry Petty, third)Marquis of, v. 43.Lascars in England, iv. 154.Late hours, i. 201.Latitudinarian schools, ii. 239.Latrobe, Rev. C. Ignatius, i. 140.150. his letter on the originof the Abolition of the SlaveTrade, 142.Lauderdale, Earl of, iii. 292.'Launches ii. 101. 104. 163.210; iii. 194.Laura's tomb, i. 71.Latter, John Caspar, i. 82. 85his description of the English,85. his mystical notions, 85.Lawrence, Sir Thomas, v. 300.Lawson, Sir John, ii. 222.Leach, Vice-chancellor, v. 54.Lead in the House of Commons,what, iv. 38.Lee, Edward, Esq. iii. 176. letterto, 176.Leeds, manners of the inhabitants,ii. 163.Legislative measures, on the importanceof, for promoting publicmorals, ii. 448.Leopold of Saxe Coburg, Prince,iv. 363.'Letter to the Freeholders ofYorkshire,' on the Slave Trade,iii. 289.Letter writing, i. 100.INDEX.Letters, duty of answering, iii.373.Levity, i. 186; ii. 101.Lewis, Matthew, Esq. (' Monk')ii. 184; iv. 292.Liberty of the press, v. 39.Leven Count, v. 130.Life, i. 126.Lindsey, Rev. Theophilus, i. 76.129.Liturgy, i. 259.Liverpool, Earl of, iv. 209. 291.letter from, 209. 249. 291 ; v.274.Llandaff, (Dr. Richard Watson,)Bishop of, ii. 108.Loft, Capet, Esq. ii. 18. letterfrom, 18.London, Bishop of, (Dr. WilliamRowley, now Archbishop ofCanterbury,) iv. 297.London life, dangers of a, i. 33.London and country thieves, iii.504.London University purposely excludesreligion, v. 256.Londonderry, Marquis of, v. 133.259. his death, 133. 142.Lonsdale, Lord, i. 184 ; ii. 240.Lord's day, unspeakable benefitsof,v. 134. 143.Loss of friends, iv. 235, 236. 300.335.Lotteries, iii. 298 ; iv. 317 ; v. 20.Loughborough, Lord, (afterwardsEarl of Grossly,) i. 114 ; ii. 10.his character of * PracticalChristianity 202.Louis XVI. described, i. 40. 44.Louis XVIII. iv. 223.Love of country, i. 69.Love of ease, v. 263.Low spirits, cure for, iv. 53.Lowe on State of West Indies, iii.359.Lushington, Dr. v. 273.Lyttleton, Hon. W. H. iv. 317.MMacartney, Lord, ii. 28.Macao lay, General, iv. 212. 217.303; v. 152. letters from, 212.215,Macaulay, Thomas, Esq. v. 94.249. 258. 315.Macaulay, Zachary, Esq. ii. 136 ;iv. 152. 184. 211. letters to, ii.157. 173. 233; iii. 382. 386.555; iv. 21. 74. 79. 143. 184.211. 226. 284. 302. 334. 394;v. 6. 105. 123. 126. 182. 206.224. 352. his mission to Paris,iv. 183.Mackintosh, Sir James, i. 159. 31 2.359; ii. 328; iii. 102 ; iv. 158.254; v. 14. 27. 101. 186. 213.222. 290. 314. his lectures, ii.328. his character of Mr. Wilberforce,iii. 302.Magdalen, the, i. 203.Magee, Rev. Dr. William, (Archbishopof Dublin, v. 169.Mason, Lord, (afterwards EarlStanhope,) i. 48. 104. SeeStanhope.Maintenon, Madame de, v. 315.Salisbury, Lord, ii. 223.Mahomet, M. iv. 186.Malt tax, v. 97.Malta, iii. 99.Man of Feeling,' iii. 71.1 Man of the World iii. 71 .Manby, Captain, his invention forsaving shipwrecked mariners,iii. 499.514. l\M99Manchester, state of religion andmorals in, ii. 163.Manners, Society for the Reformationof, establishment of, i.133.Manning, William, Esq. i. 330.letters to and from, 330.Marden Park, v. 102.Marie Antoinette, Queen ofFrance, i. 40. 44. 82 ; v. 261 .Warrington estate, i. 310.Marion,' iii. 461.Marriage, iii. 557; iv. 147; v.117.Marriage-bond, cruelty of denyingto the slaves, v. 117.Marriages of the Royal Family,v. 67.Married Life, iii. 557.Marryatt, Joseph, Esq. iv. 282.Marston, Rev. Mr. iii. 401.Marseilles described, i. 71.Martello towers, iv. 48.INDEX.Martyn,Rev. Henry, his characterof Mr. Wilberforce, iii. 146.Marvel, Andrew, i. 19.Mason, Rev. William, i. 52. 220 ;ii. 109. letters to and from, i.220. 327. 335. 339.Matthias, Thomas James, Esq. hischaracter of Wilberforce, i. 375.Matthias, Rev. Mr. v. 17. 19.Maundy-money, iii. 25.Maynooth College, iii. 300. 310.361.Measures, not men, i. 79.Mechanics' Institutes, v. 256.Meditation, rural, iii. 132.Melville, (Right Hon. HenryDundas,) iii. 217.229. proceedingsagainst, 219. 221. 227. hischaracter, 229.Member of parliament, hard anddifficult case of a private one,in times of war and violent opposition,ii. 434.Memoranda dictated by Mr. Wilberforce,relating to his connexionwith Isaac Milner, i.379. and on his own conduct,390.Memory, iii. 472.Men of Honour,' iv. 124.Mental constitutions, ii. 97.Methodists, iii. 365. 510, 511.Middle Passage Bill, i. 173.Middleton, Sir Charles, (afterwardsLord Barbara,) i. 143370; ii. 211; iii. 71. 118. 149223. 226.Middleton, Lady, i. 140. heideath, 370.Middleton, Bishop, iv. 200.Mill, James, Esq. v. 315.Milner, Rev. Joseph, i. 2.4; ii156. 228. his death, 251.Milner, Dr. Isaac, i. 4. 32. 6677. 81. 86. accompanies Wilberforceto Nice, i. 66. 72. hireligious principles, 75. his character,379. his death, v. 50letters to and from, i. 221. 343346. 372 ; ii. 74. 87.Milnes, James, Esq. ii. 107.Milton, i. 110 ; iii. 543 ; iv. 123Milton, Lord, (now Earl Fitswilliam,) iii. 296; v. 294. 326Mimicry, a vulgar accomplishment,i. 29. Wilberforce curedof the practice of, by LordCamden, i. 30.lind, iv. 267.ministers, duty in the selection of,ii. 290.mirabeau, Comte de, i. 230, 231.Miranda, General, iii. 434. 459.Missionaries, ii. 159.missionary Society, thoughts previousto a speech at, ii. 462.Milford, Sir John, (afterwardsLord Pedestal,) ii. 178.Moira, Earl of, (afterwards Marquisof Hastings,) iii. 294.Molyneux, Mr. i. 235.Montagu, Duke of, i. 133 138.Montagu, Matthew, Esq. i. 236.Montagu, Mrs. senior, i. 23t>.Montgomery, James, his poems,iv. 52. letter from, v. 279.Montmorin, M. de, i. 158.Moore, Thomas, Esq. v. 253. hisLife of Sheridan 258.Moral sublime, instance of, iv123.Morals, public, on the importanceof legislative measures for promoting,ii. 448.More, Hannah, i. 138. 190. 237.305; ii. 31. her active usefulnessin the retirement of thecountry, i. 237. her character otWilberforce, i. 138. her characterby Wilberforce, i. 237. lettersto and from, i. 246 ; ii.30. 33. 182. 238. 299. 345.375. 378. 387; iii. 67. 151.239. 370. 375. 399. 411. 440 ;iv. 81. 103. 146. 171. 228.234. 261. 302; v. 70. 109.188. 190. 210. 219. 303.More, Martha, (sister of Hannah,)i. 237. 239. her death, v. 32.Morning Chronicle, v. 48.Warrington, Lord, (now MarquisWellesley,) ii. 116.Morrison, Dr. (Chinese scholar)v. 250.Morritt, John B. Saurey, Esq. ofRokeby, iii. 318; iv. 392; v.35. 241. his character of Mr.Wilberforce, 241.Mountainous countries, love of,v. 199.INDEX.< Mrs. T.s/ iv. 204.Mulgrave, Lord, i. 61.Lancaster, Lord, i. 66; ii. 108;iii. 299. his character of ' PracticalChristianity,' ii. 199. lettersto and from, i. 66. 82. 124.145. 357,358.362; ii. 50. 52.60. 62. 167. 191. 193. 199.223. 236. 242. 248. 298. 327.349. 353.371. 374; iii. 2. 25.39. 92. 105. 112. 146, 147.156. 159. 171. 188. 199. 214.224. 241, 242. 245. 289. 292.368. 377. 396. 399. 405. 418.459. 505. 556. 566 ; iv. 8. 49.76. 86. his Historical Sketcheson the Slave Trade iii. 172.his death, iv. 145.Murray, Rev. Dr. (titular Archbishopof Dublin,) iv. 323.Music, v. 165. 285.Mutiny at the More, ii. 211. itseffect, iii. 24.NNational crimes, iii. 290.National happiness, iv. 143.National punishments, iii. 291.National schools, iv. 379.Naval abuses, iii. 88. 90. 93.Naval inquiry, iii. 149. 217. Reportof the Commissioners,217.Navy Board, iii. 88. 90.Taylor, F. Hare, Esq. ii. 369.letter to, 369.Neckar, M.his daughter proposedas a match to Mr. Pitt, i. 40.the advocate of Abolition, 230.Neil, Joseph, Esq. iii. 82.Nelson, Lord, ii. 312. 319; iii.241 . his letter on the victory ofthe Nile, ii. 312. 319. hisdeath, hi. 241.Neville, Mr. v. 226.New connexions, i. 97. 104.New morality, v. 41.New South Wales, iii. 401. chaplaincyfor, i. 268. state of moralsin, iii. 240.New Testament, best Commentaryon, iii. 551.Newgate, visit to, iii. 82. 504.Newmarket races, i. 315.Newspaper abuse, ii. 197.Newspapers, effect of, v. 47.Newton, Rev. John, i. 93. 96, 97.99.101.104.183; ii. 93. 136;iii. 169. letters to and from, i.96. 183. 338 ; ii. 206. 341 ; iii.169. his character of ' PracticalChristianity ii. 201. 206.Nice described, i. 72.Noel, Rev. Gerard, v. 15. 301.Norfolk, Duke of, iii. 317. 467.Normanby, Lord, (now Earl ofMulgrave,) v. 45.North, Lord, i. 21, 22, 23. 26.his denial of secret influence,iv. 19.North, Dudley, Esq. ii. 93.North, Hon. Frederick, i. 73.North American Indians, iii. 503.Norton, Sir Fletcher, i. 19.Norton, Mr., Mohawk chief, iii.188.Norway question, iv. 184.Norwich, Bishop of, (Dr. Bathurst,)v. 272.'Not at Home iii. 16.527.Notables in Wilberforce's life, ii.165.Nova Scotia negroes, i. 323.Nutmeg, v. 290.OOaths, diminution of, V. 231.O'Connor, Arthur, ii. 280.Old Mortality v. 268.Olney, iii. 422.Onesimus,v. 205.Opium, Wilberforce restored tohealth by the use of, i. 173.Opposition, remarks on the conductof, in 1796-8, ii. 427. difficultcase of a private memberof parliament in times of violent,434.Orders in Council, iii. 234. 358 ;iv. 17. 35.Orford, Lord, his * Memoirs ofGeorge Ii v. 291.Osborne, Robert, Esq. iv. 47. letterto, 47. 141.Ossory, Bishop of, (Dr. Kearney,)iv. 323.INDEX.Otway, iii. 251.Owen, Robert, Esq. of Lanarkiv. 90, 9 1 . 382. his plan of education,91 ; v. 46.Oxford university, v. 91.Paine, Thomas, his ' Rights ofMan,' ii. 2. 4. his < Age of reasons61.Paley, Archdeacon, ii. 3 ; iv. 165 ;v. 263. his politics, ii. 3. his4 Moral Philosophy 102. 351.Papists in parliament, ii. 318.Parental feelings, iv. 73.Paris in 1802, iii. 65. 69. 90. in1815, iv. 255.Park, Mungo, his Travels inAfrica ii. 340 ; iv. 52.Parliament, powers of, iii. 75. usesof the two Houses of, ii. 453.Parliamentary life, advice as topreparatory studies, iii. 462.Parliamentary corruption, v. 151 .Parliamentary Reform, i. 77. 79 ;ii. 9. 24. 446; iii. 402. 408.449. 451 ; iv. 19. 315 ; v. 151.notes of Wilberforce's speechon, ii.442.Parliamentary usefulness, iv. 359.Parr, Rev. Dr. i. 159. 294; v. 85.139.Parry, Edward, Esq. iii. 173.188.Parsonages, iii. 419; v. 332.Party, i. 79; ii. 452; v. 37. evilsof, ii. 452; iii. 150; v. 37.principles, on, ii. 452. spirit,iii. 150, 151. virulence, iv.373.Passions, appeal to the, iii. 100.Patronage, government, use andabuse of, iii. 409. church, ii.287.Patrons, duty of private, ii. 289.Pavilion, Brighton, described, iv.277.e Pavilion-going,' iv. 280.Paul, Emperor of Russia, ii. 385;iii. 9.Pearson, John, Esq. i. 359.Pecchio, Count, iv. 373.Pecked, Rev. Dr. i. 222. 296.Peel's, Sir Robert, Cotton FactoryApprentices Bill, iii. 44.Peel, Right Hon. Robert, (nowSir Robert,) iv. 323.Peerage, i. 391 ; v. 229.Pelham the novel of, characterized,v. 291.Penal Code, petitions for a revisionof, v. 13.Pepys's Memoirs, v. 253.Perceval, Right Hon. Spencer,iii. 46. 397. 403. 432. 458.489. 567. letters to and from,397; iv. 4. his assassination,23. provision for his family, 25.his character, 26. 29. 32.Perceval, Mrs. iv. 27.Perceval, Spencer, Esq. iv. 72.Perfection, ii. 403.Period, M.v.261.Perry Mead, i. 302.Personal attacks, iv. 305 ; v. 203.Personal influence, ii. 43.Petty, Lord Henry, (now Marquisof Lansdown,) iii. 256.259. 263.'Peveril of the Peak v. 269,270.Pigott, Sir Arthur, iii. 260.Pitcairn, Dr. i. 173.Pitt, Right Hon. William, i. 26.28. 55. 77,78,79. 90.94.125.151. 158. 191. 233. 364; ii.92. 110. 238. 257. 281. 283,284. 298. 327. 334. 359, 360 ;iii. 3. 71. 93. 95. 104. 113. 149.153. 159. 206. 210, 211. 219,220. 224.490; iv. 181. 306;v. 260. 275. 341. 342. 365.Wilberforce's youthful intimacywith, i. 14. early anecdotes of, 18.28 ; v. 365. the soul of merrimentand conversation!. 18. characterof his first speech in parliament,22 ; and of his speech on thetreaties for peace, 26. visitsFrance with Wilberforce, 34.anecdotes, 39. advised to becomea suitor for Neckar'sdaughter, 39. supports ParliamentaryReform, 77. 79. commends* Butler's Analogy 90.95. advises Wilberforce to undertakethe Abolition, 151. 158.his interest in the question, 161 .INDEX.his speech on Hastings' impeachment,286 ; v. 341 .compelledby the King to accept wardenshipof the Cinque Ports, i.365. 396 ; ii. 10. 13. his temporaryalienation from Wilberforce,71. their intercourse renewed,85. his duel with Tierney, 281.effect produced on him by thedeath of Mr. Eliot, 417. hispicture, v. 73. letters to andfrom, i. 25. 55. 63. 94. 162.214. 216. 266. 319. 366. 395 ;ii. 257. 281. 283, 284. 356.422; iii.11.37. 167.208. 231.his character, ii. 13. 245. 269 ;iii. 20. 71. 206. 219. 249. 251.321. 490; iv. 181. 306. hislast illness, and death, iii. 244,245. 251. his debts, 245. 248.his funeral, 254.Pitt Lady Harriet, i. 125.Pitt and Addington reconciled,iii. 211.Pitt club dinners, v. 181.Planta, John, Esq. (now RightHon.) iv.259.Play-going, i. 88.Plunket, Right Hon. WilliamConyngham, (now Lord,) v.43.Plymley, Rev. J. J. (afterwardsArchdeacon Corbett,) ii. 229.Pole's History of Adult Schools,iv. 219.Political craft, ii. 50.Political enmity, v. 47, 48.Political events, origin of "great,ii. 7.Political expectancies, iii. 269.Political expediency, ii. 22. 26.Politicians, v. 91 .Politics, ii. 141 ; iii. 308 ; v. 99.Poor, queries sent by Wilberforceto his friends, concerning thestate of, ii. 414.Poor, comforts of the, v. 214.Pope, letter to, v. 137.Popery, ii. 292 ; iv. 100.Popery, the bane of Ireland, iii.300".Popularity, v. 68. 368.Person, Richard, L.L.D. ii. 344.Porteus, Dr. Beilby, Bishop ofLondon, i. 138. 170. 219; iii.180. 239. 297. 365. lettersfrom, iii. 266. 365, 366. hischaracter of ' Practical Christianity,'ii. 201. his death, iii.411.Portsmouth Point, ii. 58.Portuguese Slave Trade, iv. 133;v. 267.Post Office, iii. 465.Pott, Archdeacon, iv. 15. 22. lettersfrom, 15. 22.Ponder, J. Esq. v. 12.Practical Christianity,' progressof, ii. 33. 36. 46. 198. published,199. its great success, 199.opinions thereon, 200. its character,by Lord Lancaster, 199.Henry Thornton, 199. BishopPorteus, 200. Rev. John Newton,201. Mr. Hey, 201. LordLoughborough, 202. its greateffect, 205. translations of it,205. reasons for delaying thepublication of, 399. hints forsome chapters supplementaryto, 401.Prayer, i. 91. 93 ; ii. 138 ; iii. 79 ;iv. 78. 92. 162. 201. 248. 312.Prayer, family, i. 91. 93; iii.112.Prayer, private, iv. 78.Prayer, reasons for a day of secret,ii. 138.Precipitancy, iv. 307.Prejudice, iii. 298.Presents, on giving and receiving,v. 196.Preston, , Esq. ii. 108.Prince Regent, (afterwards GeorgeIV.) iv. 16. 114. 197. 277. interviewswith, 277.Private devotion, iii. 63 ; iv. 78.92. 162. 201. 248. 312.Private table talk, i. 233.Procrastination, i. 326 ; iv. 208.Profession, choice of a, v. 91.Proposition book, i. 116.Protestant Dissenters LicensingBill, iii. 507. 509, 510. 512.Psalm xix. v. 45. Lxxi. 68. 221.Psalms, iii. 134.Public fast-days, ii. 143.Public meetings, i. 336.Public men, ii. 459 ; iii. 447 ; v.232. how soon forgotten, iii. 447.INDEX.Public men of 1821, v. 99.Public morals, iii. 405. on theimportance of legislative measuresfor promoting, ii. 448.Public schools, iii. 348.Public worship, its object, v. 140.Publications, blasphemous andindecent, i. 132.Punishments, capital, iii. 440.Pursuits of Literature quoted,i. 375.QQuakers, iv. 91. 153. 258 ; v. 170.Quakers' meeting, visit to, v. 269.Quakers' Relief Bill, ii. 146.Quarterly Review, on Progress ofPopular Discontents, iv. 315.Queensberry, Duke of, iii. 417.Quietism, iii. 241. 243.Races, i. 276. 314.Raises, Rev. Mr. his Sermons, v.311.Rammohun Roy, v. 345.Ramsay, Rev. James, i. 143. 148.235/ his 'Essay on the Treatmentof, and Traffic in, Slaves,'144. 148. his death, 235. lettersto and from, 235.Reading, directions for, i. 122.Reasons for retiring from Parliament,'v. 233.Reform of Parliament, i. 77. 79 ;ii. 9. 24. 446; iii. 402. 408.449. 451 ; iv. 19. 315. notesof Wilberforce's speech on, ii.442.Reformation of Manners, Prospectusof the Society for the, i.393.Regency Bill, i. 205. 385.Registration of Freeholders Bill,i. 114.Registry Bill, iv. 263. 282.Religion, true, i. 122; iii. 172.Religion, duty of rendering it congenial,iv. 152.Religionists, modern, iii. 473.Religious anniversaries, v. 19. 53.Religious instruction, on the necessityof making it a part ofeducation, ii. 407.Religious training, iii. 473.REMEMBER ! ' v. 179. 245.Kennel, Rev. Dr. Thomas, ii. 86.Representation the vital principleof the House of Commons, iii.451.Republican government, ii. 62.Resolutions of amendment, i. 182.208.Retrospect of life, v. 112.Revel, Chevalier de, i. 73.Review of life, iv. 393.Revision of the Penal Code, y. 13.Revolutionary principles, ii. 2.5. 8.Rheims, visit to, i. 35.Rheims, Archbishop of, letter from,iv. 223.Rhone, scenery of the, i. 68. 70.Rich, the, iv. 279. duties of thei.80.Richardson, Rev. William, iii.509.Richmond, Rev. Legs, ii. 341 ;iii. 236. 421. 508.Richmond, Mr. his admirableportrait of Mr. Wilberforce, v.349.Rugby, Richard, Esq. anecdoteof/i. 19.Riot, Captain, his shipwreck andextraordinary fortitude, i. 267.his death at Copenhagen, 272.Roberts, Samuel, Esq. letter to,in answer to charges of beinghurrying and unmethodical, iii.519.' letters to, iv. 7 ; v. 62.Rob Roy,' v. 268.Rockingham, Marquis of, i. 15.24.Rogers, Samuel, Esq. iv. 161.163.Rokeby, Lord, i. 358.Roman Catholic Emancipation,iii. 231. 306. 362; iv. 94, 95.321. 323, 324; v. 96.Roman Catholic leaders, v. 183.Roman Catholics, ii. 150. 163.325; iii. 309, 3>tf 362; iv.323, 324 ; v. 96.Romanists, danger of favouring,iii. 310.INDEX.Romans, striking passage in, iv.275.Romantic countries, v. 199.Romilly, Sir Samuel, iii. 296.440;" iv. 317; v. 13. 135. 177.341. his character of Mr. Wilberforce,iii. 296.Roscoe, William, Esq. iii. 289.299. letter from, 289.Rose, Right Hon. George, ii. 43.417; iii. 217. 245. letter from,on the death of Mr. Eliot, ii.417; iii. 247.Rose, Rev. Mr. v. 157*Ross, Hercules, Esq. i. 344. lettersto and from, 354.Grossly, Earl of, iii. 292.Rowley's Poems, i. 16.Royal Family, marriages of the, v.67.Rules for self-improvement, i.196. 208.Humboldt, Sir Thomas, iii. 114.Russel, J. artist, his portrait ofMr. Wilberforce, i. 5.Russell, Lord John, (now Dukeof Bedford,) i. 294.299.Russell, Lord John, (third son ofthe Duke of Bedford,) v. 74.21 7. his letter to Mr . Wilberforceon the state of public affairs, 74.his motion on ParliamentaryReform, v. 125.Russia, Empress Catharine of, ii.178.Rydale, v. 6.Ryder, Right Hon. Dudley, (now'Earl of Harrowby,) i. 82. 299.337.Ryder, Hon. and Rev. Henry,(afterwards Bishop of Gloucester,)iv. 27.Sabbath, i. 111. 203.Sacrament, i. 102.Sacramental tests, i. 258.Sailors, iv. 262.St. Bartholomew's Hospital,abuses in, ii. 180.St. Helen's, Lord, ii. 136; letterfrom, iii. 333.St. Paul's smaller Epistles, v. 364.Salvation of God, iii. 339.Sandgate, iv. 52.Sargent, John, Esq. v. 301. 328.Savile, Sir George, i. 15. 56.Scarcity, ii. 358, 359.Scheldt, Expedition to the, iii. 430.School of Industry, ii. 239.Scott, Sir Walter," iii. 461. 467.545; iv. 92. 259. 388. hisLady of the Lake,' iii. 461.467. his ' Marion,' iii. 461.his Rokeby,' iv. 92. ' Fortunesof Nigel/ v. 133. ' HalidonHill 133. ' Heart of Mid lothians254. ' Old Mortality268. ' Rob Roy 268. Peverilof the Peak 269, 270. hisnovels characterized, 291.Scott, Sir William, (afterwardsLord Swell,) iii. 73; iv. 322.Scott, Rev. Thomas, v. 132. hisLife ' recommended to theconstant study of a minister,132.Scriptures, i. 102, 103. 105. 119.Bright, Sir John, iii. 496.Seeker, Archbishop, iv. 68.Secret influence, iv. 19.Secret prayer, reasons for a day of,ii. 138.Sedition Bills, ii. 11 3. 133. Yorkshiremeeting in support of, ii.122.Seditious Meetings Bill, v. 43.Seditious publications, iv. 28.Self-deceit, iii. 135.Self-discipline, iv. 343.Self-improvement, rules for, i. 196.Self-indulgence, i. 272.Self-interest, iii. 215.Self-sufficiency, iv. 268.Selkirk, Earl of, iii. 292. 294 ; v.27. his * Scotch Emigration iii.294. letter from, v. 27.Selwyn, George, anecdote of, i.17. his person described, iii.417.Severity, i. 100.Seward, Miss Anna, ii. 164; iii.373. her letters, 373.Seymour, Mr. (Wilberforce'samanuensis,) i. 27.Shakespeare, i. 275 ; iv. 204.Sharpe, Granville, Esq. i. 146.151.153.INDEX.Sheffield, Lord, i. 358.Sheffield, apprentice system at,ii. 164.Shelburne, William Petty, secondEarl, (afterwards first Marquisof Lansdown,) i. 24. 25.Sheridan, Richard Brindled, Esq.i. 386; ii. 116; iii. 47. 118.367; iv. 34. 70. 114. v. 259.338.Sheridan, Mrs. i. 48; iv. 114.Shore, Sir John, (afterwards LordTeignmouth,) i. 368.Shore, Hon. Charles John, (nowLord Teignmouth,) v. 20.Shreckhorn, i. 82.Sickness, thoughts on recoveryfrom, v. 97.Siddons, Mrs. i, 32. 49, 50; iv.148.Sidmouth, Viscount, (Right Hon.Henry Addington,) iii. 507.509. 'his Protestant DissentersLicensing Bill, iii. 507. 509,510. 512.Sierra Leone, i. 305. 307. 323.353 ; iii. 50.Simeon, Rev. Charles, ii. 226 ;iii. 354. 502 ; v. 13. letters to,iii. 354. 502. 559; v. 14,Simple tastes, iii. 417.Simulation, ii. 230.Sincerity, ii. 154.Sinclair, Right Hon. Sir John, iv.141 ; v. 229.Sismondi, M. iv. 212. 215, 216,217. 238; v. 17. letter from,iv. 212, 215.Slave Trade, Mr. Wilberforce'scondemnation of, at the age offourteen, i. 9. causes which ledhim to the Abolition of, 140.a committee for procuring theAbolition formed, 151. negociationson the subject withFrance, 154. evidence beforethe Privy Council, 166. petitionsto parliament, 170. resolutionsagainst the Trade,passed by the Commons, 172.Middle Passage Bill, 173. correspondingcommittees established,183. Wilberforce bringsforward the question of Abolition,218. a special committeeappointed to examinewitnesses, 261. activity andincreased strength of the WestIndian party, 293. effects ofthe French Revolution onthe Abolition question, 295.again brought before theHouse of Commons and negatived,299. appeals to moralsense of the country thereon,333. county meetings to petitionparliament, 334. proposalto abstain from WestIndia produce, 338. cause ofAbolition impeded by eventsin St. Domingo, 340 ; and inFrance, 342. motion for gradualAbolition, carried in theHouse of Commons, 346. motionfor the consideration ofthe Abolition, lost in the Commons,ii. 19 ; and postponed inthe Lords, 20. Foreign SlaveTrade Bill brought in, but lost,23. Foreign Slave Trade Billpasses the Commons, 48 ; butlost in the Lords, 50. AbolitionBill rejected in the Commons,by an increased majority,84. Abolition Bill introduced,but lost on the third reading,139. Mr. Ellis 's plan for leavingthe question to the colonistsadopted, 196. Wilberforce'smotion for Abolition lost, 218.Wilberforce again brings forwardhis Abolition question,but is defeated, 277. annualmotion for Abolition again lost,329. Slave Trade AbolitionBill passes the Commons, butis lost in the Lords, 336.annual motion for Abolitioncarried in the Commons bylarge majority, iii. 1 68 ; but postponedin the Lords, 181. AbolitionBill lost in the Commons,212. Foreign Slave Trade carried,261. Abolition Bill carriedin the Commons, 263. AbolitionBill passes both Houses,292. 302.Slave Trade, inquiries concerning,in a letter to the Governor ofSierra Leone, ii. 409.INDEX.Slave Carrying Bill, ii. 147.Slave Registration Bill, iv. 3.Slavery no Oppression quoted,i. 292.Slaves, Mr. Wilberforce's earlyplans for, v. 117.Sleep, v. 104.Small Debt Society, iii. 394.Smith, Adam, ii. 383.Smith, Robert, Esq. (now LordWarrington,) letter from, i. 77.Smith, Samuel, Esq. i. 118; ii.54; iii. 114. letter to, iv. 121.393.Smith, Sir Sidney, iii. 42; iv. 226;v. 339. letter from, iv. 215.Smith, William, Esq. i. 261. 263 ;iii. 48. 536. letters to and from,i. 338 ; ii. 267 ; iii. 385.Smith, Rev. Sydney, letter from,iii. 309.Smith, missionary, v. 221.Smithfield market, iii. 364.Smith, Dr. Carmichael, iii. 43.Smith, Lady Georgians, ii. 106.Social intercourse, use of, ii. 35.Society, dangers of, iv. 165.Socinian, iii. 24.Socrates, i. 126.Society for the Reformation ofManners, establishment of, i.133; Prospectus of the Society,393.Soldiers, iv. 262.Solicitations for livings, iii. 238.Solitude, i. 32. 272. 316. 359,360; ii. 47. 61. 81. 105. 254.Southey, Robert, L. L. D., iv.320. 373. 384. 389. 391. 395,396 ; v. 29. 300. 340. his characterof Wilberforce, iv. 313.321. 397. first meeting with, iv.321. his character of Battle's'Minstrel,' i. 10. his 'Life oiWesley,' iii. 389. his * Curse ofKehama,' 564. his Thalia,"564. letters from, iv. 313; v237. his * Peninsular War,' v194.Spa, visit to, i. 87.Spa Fields' riots, iv. 308.Spain, and the Spaniards, iii. 367369. 378. 396; v. 16.Spanish Abolition, iv. 285.Spanish patriots, iii. 367. 396.Spanish interference, v. 175.Sparrow, Lady Olivia, v. 98. lettersto, 98. 163. 199. 235. 246.308.Speaker's dinners, iii. 496.Speeches, notes of Mr. Wilberforce'sbefore or during debates,ii. 438.Spence on ' Foreign Commerce,'iii. 350.Spies and informers, iv. 369. 371.Spooner, Miss Barbara Ann,(afterwards Mrs. Wilberforce,)ii. 220.Spurzheim, Professor, iv. 253.Stael, Baron de v. 130. letterfrom, 168.Stael, Madame de, iv. 158, 159.161. 164. 166, 167. 212. 215.254. translates ' Letter to YorkshireFreeholders,' at Duke ofWellington's request, iv. 215.letter from, 216. her 'TenYears' Exile v. 108.Stage-coach journey, iv. 139.Stanhope, Earl, i. 114; ii. 50;iii. 183.Stanhope, W. Spencer, Esq. i.63 ; ii. 107 ; iv. 77.Steele, Right Hon. Thomas, i.48. 189.Stephen, James, Esq. (brother-in-lawof Mr. Wilberforce,) i. 202 ;ii. 255 ; iii. 43. 46. 358 ; iv.20. his return from a long residencein the West Indies, i.202. his unwearied and disinterestedexertions in behalf ofAbolition, 202; ii. 255. 341;iv. 249. his marriage with Mr.Wilberforce's sister, 367. hisCrisis of the Sugar Coloniesiii. 43. 46. originates Order inCouncil, 358. his description ofMr. Wilberforce's character andmanners, 390. his character, iv.17. 20. his visit to Bellingham,26. his eloquent appeal to LouisXVIII. , 174. gives up his seatin parliament, 249. 253. lettersto and from, i. 235 ; ii. 229.255. 259. 264. 377; iii. 280.371. 415. 440. 486. 538. 549;iv. 4. 20. 75. 139. 154. 206.237. 285. 292. 294. 304. 314.INDEX.348, 349 ; v. 30. 32. 35. 107.116. 128. 141. 153. 159. 187275. 328.Stephen, Mrs. (sister of Mr. Wilberforce,)her death, and character,iv. 299.Stillingfleet, Rev. J. i. 75.Storehouse, Sir James, i. 243.357. letters to and from, 357.Story, two ways of telling a. ii.179.Stowe, iii. 420.Subjects of Action and Deliberationfor Abolitionists, Dec.1810,' iii. 483.Sublime, instance of the moral,iv. 123.Subscription to the Articles, i. 260.Sufferings, iii. 416.Sunday, i. 111. 185. 203. 209.316.337; ii. 61. 81. 106. 163.274; iii. 96. 424; iv. 43.179;v. 93. 121. 134. association, ii.271, 272. consultations, iii.46 ; v. 135. drilling, ii. 315 ; iii.151.Sunday motto, the Christian's, v.93.Sunday newspapers, v. 66. reasonsfor supporting the Bill for theirsuppression, ii. 424. NewspapersBill, 338.Sunday Schools, ii. 424. thoughts,iv. 43. training, ii. 181; iii.109, 110.265.Sunday travelling, iii. 397.Surgical Subjects Bill, i. 114.Sussex, H. R. H. the Duke of,iii. 291 ; iv. 158. 162.Sutton, Sir Charles Manners,(Judge Advocate General ; nowLord Canterbury,) iii. 501.Sparrow, General, ii. 348; iii.251.Swift's ' Directions to Servants,' iv.48. his letters, v. 132.Switzerland, i. 84.Sykes, Sir Christopher, letter toonChurch patronage, ii. 287.Sykes, Sir Mark, ii. 118.Sykes, Mrs. i. 119.Sykes, Miss, i. 277.Talleyrand, iii. 98, 99; iv. 184.189. 203. 214. 221. letters to,214. 222.Tallies, iii. 102.Tarleton, Colonel, i. 299.Tastes, simple, iii. 4 17.Taylor, Michael Angelo, Esq.y. 337. 365.Teignmouth, Lord, iv. 232. lettersto, 232 ; v. 323.Temper, blessings of a cheerful,iv. 44.Tenant, Thomas, Esq. iii. 449.letter to and from, 449.Test and Corporation Acts, i. 257.259.Teyoninhokarawen.Mohawk chief,iii. 188.Theatres, i. 88.Thelwall, John, iii. 499.Thieves, London and country, iii.504.Thompson, B. B. Esq. letter toi.21.Thompson, Thomas, Esq. iii.510.Thornton. Henry, Esq. i. 236. 301 .373; ii. 237.381; iii. 298; iv.227. his character of W wilberforce,i. 374. his character ofPractical Christianity ii. 200.his character, iv. 227, 228. 231.his illness and death, 229.Thornton, Mrs. Henry, iv. 270.her death, and character, 271.274. 276.Thornton, John, Esq. i. 97, 98.his death, and character, 283.letters to and from, 103.Thornton, Colonel, ii. 128.Thorpe, Robert, his pamphlet onthe Slave Trade, iv. 242. 254.Thun, i. 85.Throw, Lord Chancellor, i. 98.173. 233. 293. 385 ; ii. 87. 1 37.340. his conduct during theKing's illness, i. 385, 386. hisdeath, iii. 274.Tierney, Right Hon. George, ii.244; iii. 36. 147.372.Time, i. 128. 196. 214; v. 323.Doddridge's directions forINDEX.spending, 102. plans for theimprovement of, 116.Time-account, i. 194. 214.Times, corruption and profligacyof the, i. 84.Tissot, Simon Andrew, i. 82.Tithes, consequences of the destructionof, i. 261.Toleration Act, ii. 361.Tongue, vices of the, v. 88.Torture, use of, in Ireland, ii. 326.Toulon, i. 72.Toussaint Overture, iii. 40 ; iv.171; v. 108. 361.Town and country life compared,i. 32.Townshend, Right Hon. Thomas,i. 23. 25.Track home,' v. 277.Trafalgar, victory of, iii. 241.Treason and Sedition Bills, ii. 113.Yorkshire meeting in supportof, 122.Tremendous John Fuller,' iii.464.Trinidad, ii. 242.Trinidad Slave Registration, iv. 3.Trip, Dr. ii. 154.Trotter, Alexander, Esq. iii. 218.Tucker, Mr. Justice, iii. 191.Turner, Sharon, Esq. his ' SacredHistory,' v. 335.IUniversity honours, v. 209.Unwind, Rev. John, i. 76. 104.110.Usko, Mr. the orientalist, iii. 366.Vansittart, Right Hon. Nicholas,(now Lord Bexley,)iv. 37. 253.375; v. 20. 339.Vaughan, , Esq. ii. 49.Vellore tragedy, iii. 350.Venn, Rev. John, ii. 30, 31, 32.136; 'iii. 68. 564. letters to,564; iv. 130. his death, 132.1 Vicar of Wakefield,' iv. 52.Vice and immorality, proclamationagainst, i. 132.Vice, Society for the suppressionof, v. 172.Vices of the great, iii. 405.Victoria, H. R. H. the Princess,(now Queen of England,) v. 71 .Villiers, Hon. John, iii. 365 ; iv.133. letter from, iii. 365 ; iv.215.Virgil, ii. 143.Voluntary associations, i. 131.Voluntary contributions, ii. 247.Volunteers, iii. 117, 118.Vows, i. 305.Voyage of life, v. 278.WWalcheren expedition, iii. 427.439. 441.Landgrave, Lady, ii. 137; iii.240. 250. letter to, 250.Landgrave, Lord, his * Memoirs,'v. 106.Waldenses, v. 133.Wales, H. R. H. Prince of, (afterwardsGeorge IV.) i. 191.233. 385, 386; iii. 259- 494.559. See Prince Regent.Wales, II. R. H. the Princess of,(afterwards Queen Caroline.) iii.267 ; iv. 279. 362. her death,iv. 362.Wales, H. R. H. the PrincessCharlotte of, iv. 167.Walmer Castle, v. 251.Walmsley, Rev. Dr. his earlyanecdotes of Wilberforce, i. 9.Walpole, Sir Robert, i. 79. 259.Walpole, Horace, (afterwardsEarl of Orford,) i. 39.Walsh, Robert, his ' Letter on theGenius of the French Government,'iii. 453.War, iv. 184, 185.Ward, Hon. John William, (afterwardsEarl of Dudley,) iv.19.Ward, Rev. Edward, of Iver, iv.195.Warren, Dr. i. 387 ; v. 98.Watchfulness, iii. 79.Waterloo, battle of, iv. 261.Watts, Dr. Isaac, his Hymnsfor Children,' v. 289.INDEX.Waverley,' iv. 225.Way, Rev. Lewis, iv. 333.Wealth, iii. 341 ; v. 96. dangersof great, iii. 341.Weaving webs, iv. 220.Wellesley, Marquis, iv. 31. 33,34, 110. 291 . letter to, iv. 1 1 0.Wellington, Duke of, iv. 209. 211.215. 259. 261; v. 137, 138.152. 300. 371. letters to andfrom, 212. 223.Wentworth House, v. 279.Wesley, Rev. John, i. 130. 206.248. his last words,' 297.Wesley, Rev. Charles, i. 248; iii.511.wesleyan Methodists, ii. 315.West India produce, proposal toabstain from the use of, i. 338.West Indian opposition to RegistryBill, iv. 282.Westminster Abbey, v. 373.Westminster Review, v. 315.W'etterhorn, the, i. 82.W'hateley's ' Essays on ScriptureDifficulties,' v. 285.W T hitbread, Samuel, Esq. iv. 258.his death, 261 ; v. 99. 339.White, Mr. (New Zealand) Missionary,v. 269.White negroes,' i. 255.White, Rev. Blanc, iv. 285.White, Henry Kirk, iv. 233 ; v.298.Whitefield, Rev. George, i. 305.ii. 93.Whitmore, William, Esq. v. 129.Wentworth, Lord, iii. 89. 98.Wicked Williams,' ii. 217.Wife, iv. 165.Wilberforce, Robert, (father ofWilliam,) i. 2.Wilberforce, Mrs. (mother of William,)i. 1. 5. 80. 105. 118.178; ii. 156. letters to andfrom,'i. 80. 105; ii. 419.WILBERFORCE, WILLIAM1759. Born, August 24, at Hullparentage, education, i. 1 .1768. Transferred, on the deathof his father, to the care of hisuncle at Wimbledon, i. 4.his early acquaintance withScripture, and habits of devotion,6.1771. Removed, by his mother,from the care of his uncle, toHull, i. 7. enters into thegaieties and amusements ofthat town, 8. placed underthe care of the Rev. K. Basket,9. his talents for general society,and skill in singing, 9.1773.' His early abomination ofthe Slave Trade, i. 9. andtaste for literature, 9.1776. Entered at St. John'sCollege, Cambridge, i. 10.exposed to new temptations,10. picture of his college lifeby the Rev. T. Gisborne, 10.by himself, 10. and by LordClarendon, 12. refuses tosubscribe to the Articles ofthe Church, 12.1780. Resolves to enter uponpublic life, i. 13. canvassesthe town of Hull, 13. repairsto London to secure the nonresidentfreemen, 14. frequentsthe gallery of theHouse of Commons, 14.forms an intimacy with Mr.Pitt, 14. his coming of agecelebrated, 15. returned forHull, 15. comes to London,16. elected a member of theleading clubs, 16. immersedin politics and fashion, 16.gambling transactions, 1 7.gains at Faro, 18. cured ofgambling, 19. his close attentionto parliamentaryduties, 19.1781. Makes his first speechin the House of Commons, i.20. passion for the beauties ofscenery and retirement, 22.residence at Rayrigg, on thebanks of V\ windermere, 23.1782. Opposes Lord North'sadministration, i. 23. supportsthe Shelburne ministryon the accession of Mr. Pittthereto, 24. passes the Easterholidays with Pitt at Bath,24. takes up his residenceat Wimbledon, 25. secondsthe Address to the King, onopening the session, 26^INDEX.1783. Passes his time betweenLondon and Wimbledon, i.28. consequences of his rareaccomplishment in singing,29 ; and powers of imitation,29. cured by Lord Camdenof the art of mimicry, 30. hisdangers from the temptationof ambition, 30. excursions toYorkshire and Dorsetshire,34. field sports, 34. foreigntour with Pitt and Eliot, 34.Rheims, 35. Paris, 39. Fontainebleau,40. return to England,42. state of parties, 45.1784. Great meeting at Yorkagainst the coalition, i. 51.dissolution of parliament, 55.forms the project of standingfor Yorkshire, 57. suddenlyproposed to representthe county, 58. elected forHull, 60. "nominated for thecounty, 62. elected member,63. takes his seat for Yorkshire,65. travels to Nice, accompaniedby Isaac Milner,66.1785. Returns to England tosupport Parliamentary Reform,i. 77. lives in a round ofcompany and amusement, 79.returns to the continent withIsaac Milner, 80. religiousdiscussions with Milner, 87.favourable results, 88. returnsto England another man inhis inner being, 89. commencesa private Journal, 89.begins constant family prayer,91. opens to his friends thechange which had passed uponhim, 93. writes to, and callsupon, the Rev. John Newton,97. studies the Scripturesdaily, 102. takes lodgings inthe Delphi to be near pastoralinstructions, 103. withdrawshis name from the clubs,103.1786. Visits the Unwind atStock, i. 110. returns an alteredman to his parliamentaryduties, 113. proposes hisplan for purifying countyelections, 113. introduces hisSurgical Subjects Bill, 114.gives up his villa at Wimbledon,115. plans for the improvementof time, 116. intercoursewith his family andfriends, 118. visit to Bath,127.1787. Returns to London, i. 129.parliamentary duties, 129.speeches on the treaties withFrance and Portugal, andon Hastings' impeachment,129. efforts for the reformationof manners, and revivalof religion, 129. obtains aRoyal Proclamation againstvice and immorality, 132.establishes the Society for theReformation of Manners, 1 30.travels round the country to insurethe success of his plan,135. retirement at Bath, 139.devotes himself to the Abolitionof the Slave Trade, 140.resolves to bring the subjectbefore the House of Commons,151. returns to London, 154.purposed journey to Paris onAbolition, 155.1788. Established in PalaceYard for the season, i. 158.gives notice of a motion onAbolition, 160. dangerous illness,167. compelled to postponehis motion, 169. journeyto Bath, 169. restored tohealth by a proper use ofopium, 173. visit to Cambridge,175 ; and Westmoreland,177. return to London,190. death of his aunt, 193.1789. New year, commencesa time-accounts!. 194. seriousrules for self-improvement,196. prepares to movefor the Abolition, 214. bringsthe question before the House,218. projects a journey toParis to further the cause,228. visits Hannah More,236. visit to Cheddar assistsin the establishment of schoolsthere, 240. birth-day resolutions,240. visits "Buxton,INDEX.245. country visits, 250. returnto town, 253.1790. New-year resolutions, i.254. moves for a Slave TradeCommittee, 261. induces Pittto found a chaplaincy forNew South Wales, 268. isre-elected for Yorkshire, 271.excursion to Buxton, 272.short . tour through Wales,277. visit to the Rev. T. Gisborne,278. diligent study ofSlave Trade question, 279.return to London, 284.1791. Occupied in preparingSlave evidence, i. 287. movesthe Abolition question, 298.visit to Bath, 301. and toBurton Present, 304. returnto London, 306. engaged inthe establishment of the SierraLeone Company, 307.visits to Rothley Temple, andYoxall Lodge, 311. extensivecorrespondence, 313. plansand resolutions of improvement,316. return to London,324.1792. Review of the past year,i. 325. resolutions of greaterwatchfulness, 326. plan ofAbolition operations for thesession, 333. proposed appealto moral sense of the country,and county meetings to petitionparliament, 334. proposeshis Abolition motionin the House of Commons,345. visit to Bath, 353. inpersonal danger from timber,355. returns to Londonon Sierra Leone business,358. returns to Bath, 360.French citizenship conferredon him by the Convention,368. visit 'to Walmer Castle,369 ; and Yoxall Lodge, 371.return to town, 373. takes uphis residence with HenryThornton at Battersea Rise,373. his position and characterat this period, ^74. hisexertions in and out of parliamentto prevent war, ii. 4.attends East Riding meeting jVOL. V. Tfor counteraction of Frenchprinciples, 8.1793. His first great differencewith Pitt, ii. 10. is preventedfrom speaking against warwith France, 11. his mode oflife at this time, 16. his motionfor Abolition of the SlaveTrade lost in the Commons,19. brings in his ForeignSlave Trade Bill, 23. bringsforward his plan of nationalreligious instruction for India,24. visit to Bath, 30.begins his work on ' PracticalChristianity,' 33. returnto town, 35. fresh exertionsfor Slave Trade Abolition,37. visits to Yoxall Lodgeand Rothley Temple, 46. occupiedon ' Practical Christianity,'46.1794. Frames a plan for aJournal of interior and exteriorconduct, ii. 47. parliamentaryattendance, 48. supportsBill for Better Observanceof Sunday, 48. carrieshis Foreign Slave Trade Billthrough the Commons, 49.visit to Portsmouth, 57. engagedin preparing ' PracticalChristianity,' 59. visitto Teston, 61 ; and to Yox-all Lodge, 62. return to town,64. gives his attention to thestate of public affairs, 64.preparation for the session, 65.resolves to move for peace, 69.1795. Opposes Address onthe King's Speech, ii. 70.temporary alienation of Pitt,71 ; and' displeasure of hisfriends and constituents, 72.cut by the King at the levee,72. the country against him,73. supports Grey's motionfor peace, 80. his motion forthe Abolition of the SlaveTrade rejected by an increasedmajority, 84. his intercoursewith Pitt renewed, 85. resiststhe additional allowance tothe Princes, 88. brings forwarda motion for peace, 90.INDEX.his constituents displeased,91. established at BatterseaRise, 93. proposed course ofreading, 95. tour in Yorkshire,98. visit to Lord Lancaster,108. return to town,110. receives letter from Pittprofessing agreement aboutpeace, 110. supports theTreason and Sedition Bills,114. attends the Yorkshiremeeting in support of theBills, 122. gives notice thathe will renew his Abolitionmotion, 135.1796. Obtains leave to bring inhis Abolition Bill, ii. 139.forms a plan for relief ofFrench emigrant clergy, 143.serious illness, 145.* supportsQuakers' Relief Bill,146; and Curates' StipendsBill, 146. brings in Slave-carryingBill, 147. sets offfor Hull, 148. canvasses thecounty, 154. is re-elected,156. retires to Buxton, 157.projects an institution foreducating and maintainingmissionaries, 159. his life atBuxton, 160. called to Hullby his mother's indisposition,165. projects a general conventionfor Abolition, 176.inquires into abuses in Bartholomewhospital, 180. supportsmotion for release ofLa Fayette, 185.1797. Illness, ii. 187. visit toBath, 188. return to town,192. chosen a member ofBank Committee, 195. New-yearresolutions, 196. engagedon his book, 198.'Practical Christianity' published,199. visit to Bath,205. Good Friday employment,210. last interviewwith Burke, 211. summonedto town by Pitt, 213.new ties, 214. resolves tomarry, 215. his motion forthe Abolition of the SlaveTrade lost, 218. his marriage,220. resolutions on commencinga new era, 221. carriesa Bill through the Commonsto enable Romanists toserve in the militia, 222. suddendeath of his brother-in-law,226. visit to Hull,227. his plan of life, 229.return to town, 241. supportsgovernment in theHouse, 242. engaged inestablishing the Church MissionarySociety, 251.1 798. Review of the past year,ii. 253. visit to Bath, 254.engaged in correspondence onthe newly-acquired West Indiansettlements, 258. hisfeelings at this time towardsministry and opposition, 265.engaged in establishing anAssociation for the Better Observanceof Sunday. 271.again brings forward the Abolitionquestion, 277. givesnotice of a motion on Pitt'sduel, 281. relinquishes it onfinding that Pitt would retirefrom public life, 283. writesletter on church preferment,287. settlement at Broom-field,293. death of his mother,294. his charities, 302.engaged in establishing theChristian Observer,' 308.forms a plan for the establishmentof schools for religiousinstruction, 309. visits Bath,312. exertions on behalf ofJersey Methodists, 315. engagedin promoting the buildingof chapels of ease, 319.supports Income Tax, 320.1799. Sup ports the Irish Union,ii. 324. brings forward hismotion for immediate Abolition,329. supports HenryThornton's Slave Trade LimitationBill, 331, serious illness,332. supports Lord Bel-grave'sSunday NewspaperBill, 338. birth-day reflections,342. temporary retirementto Bath, 346.1800. Return to London, ii.355. approves of the rejecttion of Buonaparte's offer totreat, 356. supports the Ad 1dress, 357 ; and Habeas CorpusSuspension Bill, 358.occupied about scarcity, 358.defeats an attempt to alterToleration Act, 361. marriageof his sister, 367. entertainshope of general Abolition,369. visit to Bognor, 375.alarm for Mrs. Wilberforce,379. return to town, 384.engaged in attempts to remedythe distress of the lowerclasses, 384.1801. Continued exertions forthe relief of the poor, iii. 4.his charities, 4. visit to Bath,16. discusses terms of peacewith Addington and Pitt, 19.prevents guarantee of Turkey,19. supports Addington, 20.1802. Contemplates a generalconvention for Abolition, iii.26. opposes settlement ofTrinidad lands by newly-importednegroes, 35. exertionsin behalf of Dr. CarmichaelSmyth,43. and to lessenthe number of legislativeoaths, 43. renews his motionfor Abolition, 50. journey toYorkshire, 51. hasty canvass,52. visits to Firewood andCongreve, 55. chosen for thefourth time member for Yorkshire,56. forms plan for directionof his studies, 59.private devotion, 63. projectsan Abolition pamphlet,' 70.busy on education plan forchildren of lower orders, 72.opens debate on Address, andopposes continental alliances,74. retrospect of the year, 77.secret meditations, 77.1803. New-year resolutions,iii. 79. visit to Finley in Newgate,? 82. busy on Buonaparte'shiring English shipsfor St. Domingo, 85. engagedin framing Bible Society,90. visit to Wilderness Park,95. opposes the renewal ofthe war, 99. censure rff ministers,103. and of tax on theFunds, 104. proposes the volunteersystem, 105. attendsYork meeting, 111. visit toBath Eaton, 121. birth-dayreview, 123. plans of study,127. supplications and intercession,128. providentialescape, 131. return to town,140.1804. Endeavouring to keepPitt and Addington in amity,iii. 146. supports Pitt's motionfor Naval Inquiry, 149.exertion against SundayDrilling Bill, 152. carries hisAbolition motion through theCommons, 174.supports Pitt'smilitary plan, 174. exertionsto suspend Guiana SlaveTrade by proclamation, 184.visit to Lyme, 191. summeremployments, 193. writes articlesfor the ' Christian Observer,'193 ; and for EdinburghReview, 194. preparationsfor new session, 197.draws up propositions to beproved by African travellers,203.1805. New-year reflection, iii.207. return to town, 208.brings in his Abolition Bill,211. efforts to suspend GuianaSlave Trade, 216. effectuallysupports the chargesagainst Lord Melville, 221.supports Catholic EmancipationBill, 231. mode of lifein Palace Yard, 235. occupiedon state of morals inNew South Wales, 240. visitto Yoxall Lodge, 242.1806. Brought to town by Pitt'sillness, iii. 244. employed inpromoting a subscription topay Pitt's debts, 248. attendshis funeral, 254. his conducttowards new ministry, 255.opposes the admission of LordChief Justice into the Cabinet,258. engaged on Abolitionplans, 259. pressure ofcounty business, 263. defeatsIron Tax, 264. occurpied on Woollen Trade Inquiry,264. draws up theReport, 267. retires to Lyme,272. engaged in writing anaddress on Slave Trade, 272.sets off for Yorkshire, 275.writes Address to the Freeholders,275. canvass, 278.great popularity, 283. returnedfor fifth time withouta contest, 285. renews hisSlave Trade pamphlet, 286.engaged on plans for ensuingseason, 287.1 807. Publishes his ' Letter tothe Freeholders of Yorkshire 'on the Slave Trade, iii. 286.engaged in carrying AbolitionBill through both Houses,291. opposes grant for May-northCollege, 300. AbolitionBill passed, 302. Congratulations,303. his feeling on success,304. embarrassment onchange of ministry, 307. decidesto try the new ministers,308. sets off for York, 316.speech at Hull, 319. extraordinarycanvass, 324. immensesubscription, 330. is returnedfor the sixth time, 334. addressto the freeholders, 336.visit to Brighton, 342. returnto Bloomfield, 348. attack ofillness, 354.1808. Return to business, iii.357. opposes Maynooth Collegegrant, 362. supports RomanCatholic Emancipation,363. active smithfield marketCommittee, 364. supportsCurates' Salaries Bill, 365.retires to East Bourne, 368.extensive correspondence, 372 .various employments, 381.takes up his residence at KensingtonGore, 387. mode oflife at this time, 389. schemefor aiding Spanish patriots,396.1809. Engaged on inquiry intoconduct of the Duke of York,iii. 402. opposes motionagainst Lord Castlereagh forseat-selling,406. attends BibleSociety anniversary, 407. supportsmotion for ParliamentaryReform, 408. retires toEast Bourne, 410. birth-dayreflections, 416. retires to parsonagenear Newport Parnell,417. return to town, 430.1810. Appointed member ofSecret Committee on expeditionto the Scheldt, iii. 439.supports Lord Wellington'spension, 439. votes againstministry on W T acheron expedition,442. opposes motionfor sending Sir Francis Burdettto the Tower, 442. seriousaccident, 446. presentsSheffield address, 448. visitto Barham Court, 459. retiresto Herstmonceux, 464. drawsup list of ' Subjects of Actionand Deliberation for Abolitionists,'483.1811. Defends memory of Pittagainst an attack of 'Sir SamuelRomilly, iii. 490. practicalrules during the bustleof the session, 494. Report ofCommittee on Melville's detentionin Cold Bath Fieldsprison, 501. exertions in behalfof North American Indians,503. opposes LordSid mouth's Protestant DissentersLicensing Bill, 507.opposes depreciation of currency,513. carries an Addressfor rewarding CaptainManbv, 514. occupied inwatching over Abolition cause,514. attends installation ofDuke of Gloucester at Cambridge,516. retires to Herst-monceux, 518. correspondencewith Mr. Roberts,' 519.birth-day reflections, 533.draws up ' Reasons for retiringfrom Yorkshire 533.takes the opinion of friends,537. various exertions for theimprovement of the conditionof negroes, 548. decision toretire from the representationof Yorkshire, 551. visit toYoxall Lodge, 555. returnINDEX.home, 559. Christmas holidaysand amusements withhis children, 563.1812. New - year reflections,and resolutions of improvement,iv. 1. busy with CharitableDonation Bill, 2 ; andSlave Registry Bill, 3. effortsto prevent war with America,5 ; promote Christianity inIndia, 9 ; and keep back Dissenters,11. full of plans ofpublic or private charity, 17.his exertions for the welfareof religious societies, 21 ;and establishment of Indianbishoprics, 22. supports provisionfor Mr. Perceval's family,25. opposes Mr. StuartWorsley's motion for an efficientadministration, 31. promotesAssociation for RelievingDistressed Manufacturers,36. occupied with negotiationsfor new ministry, 37.visits Sandgate, 46. 'usualsummer occupations, 46. announceshis determination toretire from Yorkshire, 54.satisfaction of his friends, 61.regret of his constituents, 63.intended visit to York, 65.vote of thanks, 66. his reviewof his long and singular connexionwith the county, 69.is returned for the borough ofBramber, 70. visit to Leicestershire,72 ; and to BarhamCourt, 79. draws up rules ofconduct, 81 ; and plan oflife, 83. takes his seat forBramber, 84. supports subscriptionfor Russian sufferers,89.1813. Supports motion forRoman Catholic Emancipation,iv. 98. efforts for ChristianizingIndia, 101. stirs uppetitions, 105. illness, 115.East India measure carried,124. engaged in watchingForeign Slave Trade, 132.visit to Sandgate, 137. stagecoachjourney, 139. Christmaswith his children, 151.1814. Exertions for relief andinstruction of Lascars in England,iv. 154. and procuringaid for German sufferers, 157.preparations for General RegistrationBill, 169; and Conventionfor Abolition, 175.engaged on letter to the EmperorAlexander, 177. andon Norway question, 184.censures treaty with France,187. interview with EmperorAlexander, 190. dissatisfiedwith government, but avoidsdirect opposition, 191. carriesAddress to Prince Regentfor Abolition, 195. andAmendment to Address onPeace, 195. promotes petitions,197. introduced toBlucher, 198. writing aboutBible Society for PrinceCzartoriski, 199. retires toSandgate, 201. prepares letterto Tall ey rand, 202. 'Brieffor Lord Castlereagh, 2C9. atSandgate encouraging adultschools, 219; and adjustingdisagreement between friends,219.1815. New-year reflections, iv.225. death of Henry Thornton,227 ; and John Powder,233. preparing for AbolitionQuestion, 238. supportsCorn Law Bill, 245.his house endangered by therioters, 247. draws up remonstranceto governmenton Slave Registry Bill, 249.Sunday's self-examination,257. resolutions of improvement,257. opposes motionfor treating with Buonaparte,258. supports Duke of Wellington'sreward, 261. takeslead in meeting for relief ofGerman sufferers, 262. introduceshis Registry Bill,but consents to delay it, 263.excursion to Devonshire,266. visit to Brighton ,268. promotessubscription for FrenchProtestants, 270. death ofMrs. Henry Thornton, 271.INDEX.speech at Brighton AuxiliaryBible Society, 272. return totown, 280. retrospect of theyear, 281.1816. Postpones Registry Billonaccount of Spanish Abolition,iv. 284. opposes ministerson Property Tax, 296.exertions on behalf of distressedmanufacturers, 297.visit to Lowestoft, 297. deathof his sister, 299. visit toBath, 302. projects an Appealto Abolitionists, 302. incorrespondence on ForeignSlave Trade, 304.1817. Correspondence with hischildren, iv. 309. Sundayemployments, 311. anxiousto support government, 315.illness, 316. speaks for suppressionof lotteries, 317.defends Seditious MeetingsBill, 319. engaged on SecretCommittee, 326. supportsHabeas Corpus SuspensionBill, 327. writes letter toEmperor Alexander on Abolitioncompact, 333. visit toStarted, 349. busy on hadriancorrespondence, 352. andin procuring relief for distressedsailors, 363. yearlyretrospect, 364.1818. Engaged on Abolitionconsultations, iv. 365. avowshis abhorrence of the employmentof spies and informers,369. engaged on EducationCommittee, 378. plans ofNational Education, 379.draws up Report of Committeeon General Boyd'sclaims, 381. visit to theLakes, 384. review of life,393. return to Kensington,v. 8.1819. New-year resolutions, v.8. renewed Slave Trade exertions,9. supports Quakers'petition on severity of PenalCode, 12. supports Mackintoshon Capital Punishments,14. attends numerous annualpublic meetings, 20. correspondencewith his children,22. moves Address for Suppressionof Slave Trade, 28.visits to Barham Court, BlaizeCastle, and Malvern, 29. supportsSeditious Meetings Bill,43. opposes motion on Owenof Lanark's plan, 46.1820. Marriage of his eldestson, v. 49. sick-bed visits, 50.attends religious anniversaries,52. engaged in proceedingsrelating to the conductof Queen Caroline, 55.visit to Wey mouth, 74. returnto town, 84.1821. Supports motion for restoringQueen's name to theLiturgy, v. 85. and attemptsan adjustment of the question,87. supports Roman CatholicBill, 96. illness, 97. contemplatesretirement from publiclife, 97. his secret thoughtson recovery, 98. passes Easterrecess at Bath, 100. movesAddress on Abolition, 101.parts with his house at Kensington,101. and settles atMarden Park, 10& meditatesa religious and a politicalwork, 106. begins Letter toMembers of American. Congress,107. and to EmperorAlexander, 107. death of ibiseldest daughter, 109. takesretrospect of past life, 112.1822. Passes the winter at Mar-den,v. 115. country employments,120. finishes letter toEmperor of Russia, 121. returnsto parliamentary duties,122. engaged on negro improvement,122. supportsParliamentary Reform, 126.postpones Abolition Question,128. partial retirement,129. moves Address on ForeignSlave Trade, 129. exertionson behalf of the Wal-tenses,137. writes letter tothe Pope, 137. visits to RothleyTemple, Yoxall Lodge,Apley, and Cromer Hall, 139.takes retrospect of his collegeINDEX.life, 147. return to MardenPark, 152.1823. Engaged in preparingAbolition Manifesto, v. 158.writes Preface to Witherspoonon Regeneration, 161. takesa house in St. James's Place,165. his Manifesto published,167. presents Quakers' petitionagainst slavery, ]70. defendsSociety for Suppressionof Vice, 172. his increasinginfirmities, 173. intrusts thecause of Slavery Emancipationto Mr. Powell Buxton,177. attends annual religiousand charitable societies, 180.removes to Crompton Grove,187. excursion to Barmouth,193. visit to Yoxall Lodge,208.1824. Return to town, v. 209.supports Cruelty to AnimalsBill, 214. opposes Canning'sEmancipation plan, 216. hisdeclining health, 218. supportsmotion respecting thetreatment of Missionary Smithat Demerara, 221 ; and onSouth American Independence,222. his last speech inparliament, 223. speaks atmeeting in honour of JamesWatt, 223. visit to LordGambier, 223. and to Bath,225. passes Christmas in retirementwith his family, 227.1825. Projects Bill for lesseningthe number of oaths, v. 231.draws up reasons for retiringfrom parliament, 233. retiresfrom parliament, 237. his lastfrank, 245. retires from London,249. purchases High-woodHill, 249. visits toDropmore, Sandgate, Walmer,and Bath, 251. engagedin drawing up his objectionsto Mechanics Institutes, 256,and to [plan of London University,256. passes his Christmasat Beckenham, 264.1826. Engaged on West Indiainquiries, v. 267. settles aHighwood, 271.1827. Progress through Yorkshire,v. 274. affectionate reception,278. visit to WentworthHouse, 280. return toHighwood, 281. mode ofpassing his time at Highwood,283.1828. Visit to London, v. 299.engaged in preparations forerecting his chapel on High-woodHill, 299. marriage ofhis third son, 299. visit toDale Park, 301.1829. Commences the buildingof his chapel, v. 302. Mr.williams's opposition thereto,303. reasons for buildinghis chapel, 305.1830. Progress of his chapeldelayed, v. 307. Mr. Williamsissues a pamphlet againsthim, 307. his conduct underfalsehood and abuse, 309.Church Commissioners' judgmentof Williams, 311. engagedin preparing an answerto Williams, 311. doubts ofthe powers of the Commissioners,312. consecration ofhis chapel thereby delayed,312. reduction of his income,312. visit to Battersea Rise,314. takes the chair at a greatmeeting of Anti-Slavery Society,317. his last publicmeeting in London, 317.1831. His religious characterat this time, v. 318. leaves hishouse at Highwood, 325.1832. Death of his seconddaughter, v. 327. retirementto his sons' parsonages in Kentand the Isle of Wight, 330.mode of passing his day, 331.retrospect of life, 343. lastvisit to Battersea Rise, 349.Mr. Richmond's picture, 349.his feelings at this time on theSlave Trade, 351 ; and onthe principle of compensation,353.1833. Last visit to Bath, v. 354.last illness, 355. his calmnessof mind, 357. his conversations,359. removed to Longdon, 366. his last days, 369.his peaceful death, 373. hisfuneral, 375.Wilberforce, Miss, (sister of William,)i. 31. 124. married to theRev. Dr. Clarke, 277 ; and toMr. Stephen, ii. 367. letters toi.31. 99. 102. 110; iv. 41. herdeath, and character, 299.Wilberforce, Mrs. (wife of William,)ii. 220. letters to, 255 ;iii. 282. 326.516; iv. 121.139.205. 310; v. 6. 60, 61. 68. 89,90. 97.Wilderness, township of, i. 1.Williams, Rev. Mr., promises notto oppose Mr. Wilberforce 'schapel, v. 302. his oppositionto it, 303.Wilson, Rev. Daniel, (now Bishopof Calcutta,) v. 50. hischaracter of Mr. Wilberforce,294.Wilson, Jasper,' (Dr. Currie,)ii. 7. 13.Wilson, Sir Robert, v. 120. 176.Winchester, Bishop of, (Dr. C. R.Sumner,) v. 311.Windham, Right Hon. William,i. 136 ; ii. 72. 90. 178. 244.366; iii. 48. 103, 104. 432.445. his last illness, and death,445. 447. his character, 447 ;v. 139. letters from, i. 136. hislibrary, v. 139.Witherspoon, Rev. Dr. ii. 179.his sermon on the world crucifiedto believers, i. 314 ; and onthe glory of God, iii. 125. Mr.Wilber force's Preface to his Essayon Regeneration, v. 161.Witness, constituents of a good,ii. 411.Women, unmarried, improvementin their condition, i. 238.Wood, Alderman, Matthew, (nowSir Matthew,) v. 59. 65. 79.Wood Hall, iii. 114.Woodward's ' History of the Societyfor the Reformation ofManners,' i. 130.Wollaston, Dr. iv. 388.Wordsworth, William, Esq. iv.260. 390.Wordsworth, Miss, iv. 388.Morgan, Mr. iii. 420, 421.World, how poor a master! iii.268.Worry,' iii. 190.Worsley, Hon. Stuart, (now LordWharncliffe,) iv. 30.Wrangham, Rev. Francis, (nowArchdeacon,) ii. 71 ; iii. 350.letter to, 350; v. 108.Wraxall, Sir Nathaniel, a misstatementof, corrected, i. 43.Wyvill, Rev. Christopher, i. 77,78.82; ii.2.6,7.9.120. lettersto and from, i. 160. 164. 186.191. 3D7; ii. 2.6,7. 84.Yates, Sir Joseph, ii. 77.York, H. R. H. the Duke of, i.233; iii. 120. 374; iv. 18. inquiryinto the conduct of, iii.402, 403. 406.York races, i. 276.Yorkshire Address in 1784, i. 388.Yorkshire Association, i. 51.Yorkshire freeholders, their characterof Mr. Wilberforce onhis retirement, iv. 64.Yorkshire meeting, and petitionin favour of the Treason andSedition Bills, ii.122.Young, Sir William, i. 360; ii.48. 142.Young, Arthur, Esq. iv. 244.Zurich, i. 85.JOHN Child AND SON, BUNGAY.