THELIFEWILLIAM WILBERFORCE.BY HIS SONS,ROBERT ISAAC WILBERFORCE, M. A.VICAR OF EAST Harleigh, LATE FELLOW OF ORIEL COLLEGE;ANDSAMUEL WILBERFORCE, M. A.RECTOR OF Brimstone.IN FIVE VOLUMES.VOL. i.Happy is the stateIn which ye, father, here do dwell at ease,Leading a life so free and fortunateFrom all the tempests of these worldly seas.Spencer.LONDON :JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET- - IMDCCfcXXXVtlI r>r>(7,1JOHN Child AND SON, BUNGAY.PREFACE.THE materials of the following Work are drawnprincipally from five sources :1 . Manuscript books, or detached sheets ; theearliest bearing date 1783, the latest 1833, inwhich Mr. Wilberforce was accustomed to notedown daily occurrences. These will be foundreferred to under the head of " Diary."2. A similar set, begun in 1785, and ended in18 18, devoted exclusively to religious reflections,and intended merely as a register of his internalstate. These, the work principally of SundaysVI PREFACE.and other intervals of leisure, are here designatedJournal."In these records he seems to have had no objectexcept to give greater regularity and fixednessto his own mind. Those of earlier datebear upon them an order for their destruction,which it was only within the last years of hislife that he so far recalled as to desire them tobe submitted with his other papers to the judgmentof his nearest relatives. Perhaps he washimself scarcely aware of the value of the documentswhich he was thus laying open, for thoughhe had upon succeeding birth-days, and othertimes of more especial self-examination, referredto his Journal, yet the Diary seems in generalnever again to have met his eye ; and much ofit, dispersed indiscriminately and without dateamong his numerous papers, was wholly inaccessible.When, on Mr. Wilberforce's decease, thesestores were unexpectedly committed to thePREFACE. viiwriters, their first feeling was an unwillingnessto expose to the public gaze what was so plainlyof a confidential character. " A life which isworth reading," was the pointed saying of Mackintosh," ought never to have been written."But there are some characters fitted to exert sopermanent an influence, and so clearly markedas examples to mankind, that in their case privatedelicacy yields to public good. Whetherthe present is one of these excepted instances,the readers of the following work must decide.3. In noticing the private Correspondencewhich makes part of these volumes, the writersfeel pleasure in warmly expressing their thanksto the many friends who have kindly suppliedthem with materials of the utmost value. Theirfirst impression was to express here their obligationto the several contributors of lettersonominatim ; but the list swelled under theirhands to such an inconvenient bulk that theyreluctantly resorted to this briefer, but far lessexpressive, declaration of their thanks.viii PREFACE.4. The MS. Memoranda referred to in thefollowing pages were notes dictated late in lifeby Mr. Wilberforce. He was often urged byhis family and friends to draw up for their instructionsome record of his " Life and Times."From this task he was withheld in great measureby his unwillingness to express those censureswhich he could not have properly withheld.When I assume the office of a biographer, Ivirtually contract an engagement to give a fairaccount as far as I am able of the character ofthe individual in question, and this has morethan once prevented me from writing the lives ofpersons whom I have highly respected andloved, but in whose instances there were reasonswhy a fair statement of the whole of their characterscould not be made without probable violenceto the feelings of survivors"* Fromthis rule he so far swerved, as in intervals ofoccasional leisure, chiefly when travelling, torecord the incidents of his childhood, and a fewCon. Mem.PREFACE. ixinteresting passages of his riper age. Specimensof these detached papers, with some other unfinishedpieces, form an Appendix to the two firstvolumes.5. Mr. Wilberforce's conversation would haveafforded abundant materials to any one who hadmade it his object to provide for the publicamusement. An infinite fund of anecdote, anunvarying fertility of wit, a constant readinessto be pleased and give pleasure, were its mostfamiliar characteristics. But no such thoughtsotainted the domestic intercourse which gladdenedhis family. " He was a burning and a shininglight, and they were willing for a season to rejoicein that light." Occasionally some thoughtor anecdote which dropped from him was recordedfor its own sake, and with no conceptionof its present employment ; while many sayings,deeply impressed on the memory of those whoheard them, have been brought out by the perusalof his papers. These various recollections,increased by some valuable contributions fromX PREFACE.two friends especially, are here referred to asConversational Memoranda."Some further matter of the same sort it isintended to publish in a separate form ; and forthis purpose, as well as for the completion of avolume of Correspondence, which is already inpreparation and will be found to be occasionallyreferred to in the following pages, the assistanceof those who have original materials in theirhands is invited.ERRATA.VOL. I.11, for Guildford read Guilfordfor Vergenne's read Vergenncs'1, for de read du13, for Toalag read Taulay1, for these read his10, for Lady read Lady,19, for subject ; read subject;"21, for and read " and150, 4, for Middleton's. read Middleton's :155, 6, for Lord read Mr.158, 22, for Sir Wm. Eden's read Mr. Eden's160, for Archduchess and Archduke. readArcedeckne163, 8, for levy read levee185, 22, for those read four230, 21, for Glaciers read Claire/or Chedder read Cheddar2, for at the house of Mrs. More read throughMrs. More at Richard Henderson's277, 1, for Dr. read Thomas293, 7> for This reproach read Their report302, 13, for him read Him304, 7, /or with G.'s friend read with G. hisfriendTHELIFE OF WILBERFORCE.CHAPTER I.Birth Parentage Education.WILLIAM WILBERFORCE, only son of Robert Wilberforceand his wife Elizabeth, daughter of ThomasBird Esq. of Barton, Oxon, was born at Hull uponthe feast of St. Bartholomew, August 24, A. D.1759. He was the third of four children, but of histhree sisters the second only arrived at maturity.His ancestors had long been settled in the county ofYork. la the reign of the second Henry, Icterusde Wilberfoss served in the Scottish wars under Philipde Lyme, with a daughter of whose powerful househe had intermarried. The township of Wilberfoss,eight miles east of York, gave him a mansion and aname ; and his property extended to the neighbourhoodof Stamford bridge, a spot then famous for therecent battle between Harold and Tost, the lastvictory of the last Saxon monarch.VOL. I. B2 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE.At Wilberfoss the family was fixed for many generations,until, after a gradual decline in wealth andnumbers, it disappeared from the place about a centuryago. " Note, that all these," says Robert Glover,Somerset Herald, after enumerating sixteen descents,did successively succeed as is here set down, and thatthey did successively occupy the Sake of Cottonwhich contained six villages, &c." ' About themiddle of the sixteenth century, the son of WilliamWilberfoss of Wilberfoss, by his second marriage,settled in the neighbouring town of Beverley. Hisson appears in the Visitation of 1612 as WilliamWilberfoss of Brigham : and here and at Beverleythe younger branch rose into importance as theparent stock decayed.William Wilberfoss was mayor of Beverley at theopening of the great rebellion ; and the same officewas twice filled at Hull, in the succeeding century, bya great-grandson William Wilberfoss, or, as he finallyfixed its spelling, Wilberforce ; who continued in theBaltic trade, though, besides his patrimonial fortune,he inherited a considerable landed property from hismother, an heiress of the Davie family. He was aman of much repute for talent and integrity ; and thesettlement jos Joseph Milner in the grammar schoolat Hull is an abiding record of his well-directedinfluence. Robert, the younger of his two children,father of William Wilberforce, was a partner in thehouse at Hull ; and here was spent the early childhood1 Herald's Vis. A. D. 1584.HIS CHILDHOOD. 3of his distinguished son. The old man had seen muchof life ; and one of those tales of travel with which hecharmed his grandson is even yet preserved. He hadbeen admitted to the intimacy of the Duke of Marlborough,then commanding the allied armies on thecontinent ; and was invited by that general to witnessfrom the safeguard of a neighbouring eminence theincidents of an approaching battle. Through reluctanceto overstep from idle curiosity the strict line of professionalduty, enforced perhaps by a careful regard to hispersonal safety, the offer was prudently declined by thegrateful merchant. Upon a more fitting occasion hedisplayed some military ardour when the arsenal ofHull was prepared for an expected attack in theyear 1745.Of the early years of William Wilberforce little isrecorded. His frame from infancy was feeble, hisstature small, his eyes weak,. . a failing which withmany rich mental endowments he inherited from hismother. It was one amongst the many expressions ofhis gratitude in after-life "that I was not born in lesscivilized times, when it would have been thought impossibleto rear so delicate a child." But with thesebodily infirmities were united a vigorous mind, and atemper eminently affectionate. An unusual thoughtfulnessfor others marked his youngest childhood:I shall never forget," says a frequent guest at hismother's, " how he would steal into my sick room,taking off his shoes lest he should disturb me, andwith an anxious face looking through my curtains to/// B 24 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE.learn if I was better." At seven years old he wassent to the^grammar school of Hull, of which JosephMilner was soon afterwards master. " Even then hiselocution was so remarkable," scythe younger Miller 2at that time his brother's assistant, " that we used toset him upon a table, and make him read aloud as anexample to the other boys." Thus he spent two years,going daily from his father's house to school with hissatchel on his shoulder," and occasionally visitinghis grandfather at Ferry, a pleasant village sevenmiles distant, on the Humber. The death of hisfather in the summer of 1 768 transferred him to thecare of his uncle William Wilberforce ; and after aweek's residence at Nottingham, 3 he was sent to livewith him at Wimbledon and in St. James's Place.Such was then the standard measure of private education,that the school at which he was soon afterwardsplaced was of the meanest character. " Mr. Chalmersthe master, himself a Scotchman, had an usher of thesame nation, whose red beard for he scarcely shavedonce a month I shall never forget. They taughtwriting, French, arithmetic, and Latin . . with Greekwe did not much meddle. It was frequented chieflyby the sons of merchants, and they taught thereforeevery thing and nothing. Here I continued sometimeas a parlour boarder : I was sent at first amongstthe lodgers, and I can remember even now the nauseous2 Isaac Milner, afterwards Dean of Carlisle.3 At the house of A. Smith Esq. father to the present Lord Warrington,who had married his mother's sister.RESIDENCE AT HIS UNCLE'S. 5food with which we were supplied, and which I couldnot eat without sickness." 4He remained two years at this school, spending hisholidays at his uncle's house, with occasional visits toNottingham and Hull. He is described at this timeas " a fine sharp lad," whose activity and spirit madeup in boyish sports for some deficiency of strength.One incident of these years deserves special noticefrom its assisting, as he thought, to form what wasundoubtedly a striking feature in his later character.He received from the late John Thornton, the brotherof his aunt, with whom he was travelling, a presentmuch exceeding the usual amount of a boy's possessions,intended to enforce the precept with which it wasaccompanied, that some should be given to the poor.When he quitted Hull no great pains had been takento form his religious principles. His mother indeedwas a woman of real excellence, as well as of great andhighly cultivated talents, but not possessed at thistime of those views of the spiritual nature of religion,which she adopted in later life : " She was what Ishould call an Archbishop Tillotson Christian." 5 Butinhis uncle's house he was subjected to a new andpowerful influence. His aunt was a great admirer ofWhitefield's preaching, and kept up a friendly connexionwith the early methodists. The lively affectionsof his heart, warmed by the kindness of his friends,readily assumed their tone. A stranger 6 has noticed4 Conversational Memoranda. * Ib.6 Private Journal of J. Russel Esq. to whom at this time he sat forD LIFE OF WILBERFORCE.the rare and pleasing character of piety which markedhis twelfth year ; and there can be little doubtthat the acquaintance with holy Scripture and thehabits of devotion which he then acquired, fosteredthat baptismal seed which though long dormant wasdestined to produce at last a golden harvest.He has himself recorded his deliberate judgment ofthis early promise. " Under these influences my mindwas interested by religious subjects. How far theseimpressions were genuine I can hardly determine, butat least I may venture to say that I was sincere.There are letters of mine, written at that period, stillin existence, which accord much with my present sentiments."7 ." A packet from Hull, enclosing letters ofmine from Pocklington school rather too much in thestyle of the religious letters of that day, and (astonishing!) asking my leave to publish them. As I cannotdoubt my having expressed the sentiments and feelingsof my heart, I am sensibly impressed with asense of the dreadful effects of the efforts afterwardsused but too successfully to wean me from all religion,and to cherish the love of pleasure and the love ofglory in the opening bud of youth." 8How eventful a life," he says in looking back tothis period in his thirty-eighth year, " has mine been,and how visibly I can trace the hand of God leadingme by ways which I knew not ! I think I have neverhis picture, and of whom he says afterwards, " Mr. Russel painted mypicture for W. Hey. He painted me above thirty years before. Areligious man, very high-church indeed." Diary, July 31, 1801.7 MS. Memoranda. 8 Diary, Jan. 1, 1831.RETURN TO YORKSHIRE. 7before remarked, that my mother's taking me frommy uncle's when about twelve or thirteen and thencompletely a methodist, has probably been the meansof my being connected with political men and becominguseful in life. If I had staid with my uncle Ishould probably have been a bigoted despised methodist; yet to come to what I am, through so many yearsof folly as those which elapsed between my last yearat school and 1785, is wonderful. Oh the depths ofthe counsels of God ! what cause have 1 for gratitudeand humiliation ! " 9The symptoms of his changing character were perceivedwith great alarm at Hull, and it was at oncedetermined that his mother should repair to London,and remove him from the dangerous influence. 10He returned with her to Yorkshire, quitting hisuncle's family with deep regret. His presence hadkindled their parental feelings, and he had soon returnedthem the affection of a son. " I deeply felt theparting for I loved them as parents : indeed, I wasalmost heart-broken at the separation." " I cannever forget you," he wrote to his uncle, " as longas I live."At twelve years old he returned to his mother'so Journal, April 14, 1797.10 His aunt expressed openly her sorrow that he should be removedfrom the opportunities of a religious life. " You should not fear," repliedhis mother with a caustic allusion to her peculiar tenets ; " if it be a workof grace, you know it cannot fail." " Billy," said his grandfather, " shalltravel with Milner as soon as he is of age ; but if Billy turns methodist heshall not have a sixpence of mine."8 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE.house, where it became the object of his friends bythe seductions of gaiety and self-indulgence to charmaway that serious spirit which had taken possession ofhis youthful bosomEt sanctus restinguere pontius ignes."The habits of society in Hull assisted their design.It was then as gay a place as could be found out ofLondon. The theatre, balls, great suppers, and card-parties,were the delight of the principal families inthe town. The usual dinner hour was two o'clock,and at six they met at sumptuous suppers. Thismode of life was at first distressing to me, butby degrees I acquired a relish for it, and became asthoughtless as the rest. As grandson to one of theprincipal inhabitants, I was every where invited andcaressed : my voice and love of music made me stillmore acceptable. The religious impressions which Ihad gained at Wimbledon continued for a considerabletime after my return to Hull, but my friends sparedno pains to stifle them. I might almost say, that nopious parent ever laboured more to impress a belovedchild with sentiments of piety, than they did to giveme a taste for the world and its diversions." 11 Thestrength of principle they had to overcome was indeedremarkable. When first taken to a play, it wasalmost, he says, by force. At length however theysucceeded ; and the allurements of worldly pleasureled his youth away from all serious thought. AtMS. Mem.EARLY INTEREST IN THE SLAVE TRADE. 9home there was nothing but gaiety and amusement; at school there was little diligence or restraint.He was placed, soon after his return to Hull, with theRev. K. Basket, master of the endowed grammarschool of Pocklington and formerly Fellow of St.John's College, Cambridge, a man of easy and polishedmanners, and an elegant though not profoundscholar. Here he was treated with unusual liberality ;but, especially during the latter part of his stay, he ledalife of idleness and pleasure. His talents for generalsociety with his rare skill in singing rendered himevery where an acceptable guest, and his time waswasted in a round of visits to the neighbouring gentry.Already however he gave proofs of an active mind,and one remarkable anticipation of his future courseis yet remembered. " His abomination of the slavetrade," writes a surviving school-fellow, 12 " he evincedwhen he was not more than fourteen years of age.He boarded in the master's house, where the boyswere kept within bounds. I lived in the village.One day he gave me a letter to put into the postoffice,addressed to the editor of the York paper,which he told me was in condemnation of the odioustraffic in human flesh." He cultivated also a tastefor literature. " He greatly excelled all the otherboys in his compositions, though he seldom beganthem till the eleventh hour." For his own amusementhe committed English poetry to memory, 13i* Rev. T. T. Walmsley, D. D.13 Southey remarks of "Battle's Minstrel" Life of Cowper, vol. ii.B 3LIFE OF WILBERFORCE.and he went up to the University " a very fairscholar."With the self-indulgent habits formed by such alife he entered St. John's College, Cambridge, Oct.1776, at the age of seventeen years. And here he wasat once exposed to new temptations. Left, by the deathof his grandfather and uncle, the master of an independentfortune under his mother's sole guardianship,I was introduced," says he, " on the very first night ofmy arrival, to as licentious a set of men as can well beconceived. They drank hard, and their conversationwas even worse than their lives. I lived amongstthem for some time, though I never relished theirsociety, . . often indeed I was horror-struck at theirconduct, . . and after the first year I shook off in greatmeasure my connexion with them." For the lasttwo years he spent at Cambridge he was the centreof a higher circle. Amiable animated and hospitable,he was a universal favourite. " There was no one,"says the Rev. T. Gisborne, " at all like him for powersof entertainment. Always fond of repartee and discussion,he seemed entirely free from conceit andvanity." He had already commenced the system offrank and simple hospitality, which marked his Londonlife. " There was always a great Yorkshire pie inhis rooms, and all were welcome to partake of it. Myp. 180 " No poem has ever given more delight to minds of a certainclass, and in a certain stage of their progress, that class a high oneand that stage perhaps the most delightful in their pilgrimage." TheMinstrel " was at this time his especial favourite, and was learnt byheart during his morning walks.COLLEGE LIFE. 11rooms and his were back to back, and often when Iwas raking out my fire at ten o'clock, I heard his melodiousvoice calling aloud to me to come and sit withhim before I went to bed. It was a dangerous thingto do, for his amusing conversation was sure to keepme up so late, that I was behind-hand the next morning."He lived much at this time amongst the Fellowsof the college. " But those," he says, " with whomI was intimate, did not act towards me the part ofChristians, or even of honest men. Their object seemedto be, to make and keep me idle. If ever I appearedstudious, they would say to me, ' Why in theworld should a man of your fortune trouble himselfwith fagging ? ' I was a good classic, and acquittedmyself well in the college examinations ; but mathematics,which my mind greatly needed, I almost entirelyneglected, and was told that I was too clever torequire them. Whilst my companions were readinghard and attending lectures, card parties and idleamusements consumed my time. The tutors wouldoften say within my hearing, that ' they were meresaps, but that I did all by talent.' This was poisonto a mind constituted like mine." This life ofidleness at college was only exchanged in vacationtime for the ordinary gaieties of Hull, now increasedby the presence of the militia, or for journeys insearch of pleasure with his mother and sister. Itwas surely of God's especial goodness that in such acourse he was preserved from profligate excess. Forthough he could say in after-life, that upon the habits12 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE.thus formed by evil influence and unbounded licencehe could not look back without unfeigned remorse,"yet he had rather to deplore neglected opportunitiesof moral and intellectual profit, than vicious practiceor abandoned principles. 14I certainly did not then think and act as I do now,"he declared long afterwards ; " but I was so far fromwhat the world calls licentious, that I was rather complimentedon being better than young men in general."Diligently did he strive in after-years to supply theomissions of his youth ; but to the end of life he ceasednot to deplore a certain want of mental regularity,which he traced to the neglect of early discipline, andhe subsequently remonstrated with the tutor to whosecharge he had been confided, on the guilt of sufferingthose, of whom he was in some sort the guardian, toinflict upon themselves so irreparable an injury.That there was even in this time of thoughtlessnessa hidden vein of deeper feeling was shown byhis refusing, when unexpectedly required, to declarehis assent to the Articles of the church, though therefusal cost him for a time the convenience of anacademical degree. Further inquiry removed hishesitation, but he would not at mature age, when hiseducation was completed, declare his concurrence inreligious dogmas which he had not examined. 1514 Lord Clarendon, his friend at college and through life, thus describeshis conduct. " He had never in the smallest degree a dissolutecharacter, however short his early habits might be of that constant pietyand strictness, which was soon perfected in his happy disposition.">* A. B. 1781 : A. M. 1788. Graduate Cantab.CHAPTER II.178Q1783.Hull election Wilberforce comes to London Goostree'sCured of gambling Houses at Wimbledon and RayriggIntimacy with Pitt Lord Camden Independents Foreigntour Rheims Fontainbleau Letter to Banks.BEFORE he quitted college, Mr. Wilberforce had resolvedto enter upon public life. The house whichhis grandfather had founded at Hull, had beenmanaged for him during his minority by his cousinAbel Smith. But his ample fortune, and a taste formore liberal pursuits, gave a different direction to histhoughts. He declined business, and as a speedydissolution was expected, commenced a canvass forthe representation of his native town in parliament.The intercourse with various characters which ourpolitical institutions require from every candidate forpopular election, was not lost upon him ; and hismemory was stored with many anecdotes characteristicof society at that time. " When I first canvassedthe town," he has said in conversation, " there livedat Hull a fine athletic fellow, by trade a butcher,named John, or, as he was usually addressed, Johnny14 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1780Bell. I rather shrunk from shaking hands with him,saying to one of my staunch supporters, that I thoughtit going rather too low for votes. * O sir,' was hisreply, ' he is a fine fellow if you come to bruising.'The day following the election he came to me privatelyand said, ' I have found out who threw the stoneat you, and I '11 kill him to-night.' The threat wasseriously intended, and I was forced to repress hiszeal by suggesting, that it would be too severe apunishment for what had proved, after all, a harmlessattempt : 'you must only frighten him.' 'After a successful canvass on the spot, he repaired toLondon, where about three hundred Hull freemenresided in the vicinity of the river; these he entertainedat suppers in the different public houses of Tapping,and by his addresses to them, first gained confidence inpublic speaking. During this year he resided in lodgingsin the Adelphi, and constantly frequented thegallery of the House of Commons. Here he often fellin with Mr. Pitt, then serving the same apprenticeshipto public business. They had formed at Cambridge1 His conversation has preserved another anecdote, of which JohnnyBell was the hero. While Mr. Thornton sat for Hull, Bell visited London,and called upon the member for his town. A city party dined thatday with Mr. Thornton, and as Bell must be unknown to all his guests,Mr. Thornton ventured to invite his townsman to join them. Mr. Bellwas introduced at dinner-time, and passed muster admirably. Everythingproceeded smoothly, until, in the course of dinner, the host tenderedsome apology for the appearance of a joint which Johnny Bell wascarving ; when, to the dismay of his host, and the amazement of his companions,Johnny, thrown off his guard by professional feeling, exclaimedaloud, " No, Mr. Thornton, there's nought the matter with the beef, Inever cut up a finer beast myself."1780. HULL ELECTION. 15a slight acquaintance, which now ripened into intimacy.As the summer advanced, he returned to Hull, withthe most flattering prospects of success at the ensuingelection. His hopes were almost disappointed by ahasty dissolution of the sitting parliament, which wouldhave fixed the day of election before the expiration ofhis year of nonage, that " piger annus pupils." Thesession however survived his birth-day, the feast ofSt. Bartholomew, which was welcomed by his friendswith suitable rejoicing ; and the townsmen were regaledwith an ox roasted whole in one of his fields.The election opportunely followed ; and on the lathof September he was engaged in all the bustle of asharp contest. Against him were arrayed the interestof Lord Rockingham, the most powerful nobleman inthe county ; that of Sir George Savile, its wealthyand respected representative, himself a frequent residentat Hull ; and that of government, always strongat a sea-port. To these he could oppose nothing butthe personal influence and independent character ofa young man of twenty. Yet such was the commandhe had established over the affections of his townsmen,that, at the close of the poll, he numbered singlyas many votes as his opponent* had received together.The numbers were,Lord Robert Manners 673David Hartley 453William Wilberforce 1126This election cost him between 8000 and 9000.16 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1780.By long-established custom, the single vote of aresident elector was rewarded with a donation of twoguineas ; four were paid for a plumper ; and the expensesof a freeman's journey from London averaged10 a piece. The letter of the law was not broken,because the money was not paid until the last day onwhich election petitions could be presented. But themore matured judgment of Mr. Wilberforce condemnedthe custom to which he now conformed ; andrather than so enter parliament, with his later principles,he has declared that he would have remainedalways a private man. His great success threw nosmall lustre on his entry into public life ; and he waswelcomed upon his re turn to London into every circle.He was at once elected a member of all the leadingclubs. " When I went up to Cambridge," he hassaid, speaking of the risks to which he was thenexposed, " I was scarcely acquainted with a singleperson above the rank of a country gentleman ; andeven when I left the University, so little did I knowof general society, that I came up to London storedwith arguments to prove the authenticity of Rowley'sPoems ; and now I was at once immersed in politicsand fashion. The very first time I went to Boodle'sI won twenty-five guineas of the Duke of Norfolk.I belonged at this time to five clubs, . . Miles andEvans's, Brookes's, Boodle's, White's, Goostree's.The first time I was at Brookes's, scarcely knowingany one, I joined from mere shyness in play at theFaro table, where George Selwyn kept bank. A1780. GOOSTREE's. 17friend who knew my inexperience, and regarded me asavictim decked out for sacrifice, called to me,What, Wilberforce, is that you ? * Selwyn quite resentedthe interference, and turning to him, said in hismost expressive tone, * O sir, don't interrupt Mr.Wilberforce, he could not be better employed.'Nothing could be more luxurious than the style ofthese clubs. Fox, Sheridan, Fitzpatrick, and allyour leading men, frequented them, and associatedupon the easiest terms ; you chatted, played at cards,or gambled as you pleased." Though he visitedoccasionally these various clubs, his usual resort waswith a choicer and more intimate society, who assembledfirst in the house since occupied by Scope andNorland's bank, in Pall Mall, and afterwards on thepremises of a man named Goostree, now the ShakespeareGallery.They were about twenty-five in number, 2 and forthe most part were young men who had passed togetherthrough the University, and whom the generalelection of 1780 had brought at the same time intopublic life. Pitt was an habitual frequenter of theclub at Goostree's, supping there every night duringthe winter of 1780-81 . Here their intimacy increasedIt consisted of Mr. Pratt, (now Marquis of Camden,) Lords Euston,Chatham, Graham, Duncaunon, Thorpe, Apsley, G. Cavendish, andC. Lennox, Mr. Eliot, (elder brother of Lord St. Germains,) St. Andrew(afterwards Lord) St. John, Bridgeman, (afterwards Lord Bradford,)Morris Robinson, (afterwards Lord Rokeby,) R. Smith, (nowLord Warrington,) W. Grenville, (afterwards Lord Grenville,) PepperArden, (afterwards Lord Alvanley,) Mr. Edwards, (now Sir GerardNoel,) Mr. (now Dr.) Marshal, Mr. Pitt, Mr. Wilberforce, Mr. Banks,Mr. Thomas Steele, General Smith, and after a time Mr. Gingham.18 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1780every day. Though less formed for general popularitythan Fox, Pitt, when free from shyness and amongsthis intimate companions, was the very soul of merrimentand conversation. " He was the wittiest man Iever knew, and what was quite peculiar to himself,had at all times his wit under entire control. Othersappeared struck hy the unwonted association of brilliantimages ; but every possible combination of ideasseemed always present to his mind, and he could atonce produce whatever he desired. I was one of thosewho met to spend an evening in memory of Shakespeare,at the Boar's Head, East Cheap. Many professedwits were present, but Pitt was the most amusingof the party, and the readiest and most apt in therequired allusions. He entered with the same energyinto all our different amusements ; we played a gooddeal at Goostree's, and I well remember the intenseearnestness which he displayed when joining in thosegames of chance. He perceived their increasingfascination, and soon after suddenly abandoned themfor ever." 3It was by this vice that he was himself most nearlyensnared. A brief diary of this period records morethan once the loss of 100 at the Faro table. Hewas weaned from it in a most characteristic manner.We can have no play to-night," complained some ofthe party at the club, " for St. Andrew is not here tokeep bank." " Wilberforce," said Mr. Bankes, (whonever joined himself,) " if you will keep it I will giveCon. Mem.1781. HOUSE OF COMMONS. 19you a guinea." The playful challenge was accepted,but as the game grew deep, he rose the winner of600. Much of this was lost by those who were onlyheirs to future fortunes, and could not therefore meetsuch a call without inconvenience. The pain he feltat their annoyance cured him of a taste which seemedbut too likely to become predominant.In spite of his life of gaiety, Mr. Wilberforce attendedclosely to the House of Commons. He wasesteemed a more active member of parliament thanany of his predecessors : perhaps the memory ofAndrew Marvel had faded from their common birthplace.From the first he was an independent man :he had entered parliament as the opponent of the warwith America, and of Lord North's administration ;yet to this ministry he gave his first vote, opposingthe re-election of Sir Fletcher Norton, 4 as Speaker ofthe House of Commons.In January, 1781, he was joined by Mr. Pitt, whohaving contested Cambridge University without successat the general election, now took his seat for theborough of Appleby. Community of objects naturallyincreased their friendship ; yet not even to friendshipwith Pitt would he sacrifice his independence. '* Iwell remember," he said long afterwards, " the painI felt in being obliged to vote against Pitt, the second4 " When they were all talking of Sir Fletcher's health requiringhis retirement, Rugby came into the House, and said with his ordinarybluntness, ' Don't tell me about health, he has flown in the king's face,and we won't have him.' " Con. Mem.20 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1781time he spoke in parliament." Yet though attentiveto public business, he did not take an early part in thedebates. " Attend to business," he said in later lifeto a friend 5 entering the House of Commons, " and donot seek occasions of display ; if you have a turn forspeaking, the proper time will come. Let speakingtake care of itself. I never go out of the way tospeak, but make myself acquainted with the business,and then if the debate passes my door I step out andjoin it."Upon the 31st of April he wrote to a constituent,Sir George Savile gave notice yesterday, that onTuesday next he should move that the Delegates' 6 *Petition be taken into consideration. The paperswould inform you by what a trick it was laid upon thetable. The petitioners were said to be private freeholders; and as such were gravely read over the namesof Christ. Wyvill, C. Fox, R. Fitzpatrick, &c. Theywill I doubt not proceed artfully, but let them once butput in their noses in their Delegate capacity, and theywill be hunted out as they deserve ; and though I willnot promise to open, I will accompany the hounds infull cry with my Lord Advocate" [Dundas] " at theirhead, and a fine leader of a pack he is."His first speech was upon the 17th of May,1781, in a debate upon the laws of revenue, when,having presented a petition from the town ofSir Thomas Dyke Aslant, Bart.6 From the Deputies of Associated Counties. Wyvill's Pol. Papers,1.332.1781. LETTER TO THOMPSON. 21Hull, he forcibly attacked them as oppressive andunjust.TO B. B. THOMPSON, ESQ. HULL.London, June 9, 1781.My dear Thompson,We have a blessed prospect of sitting till theend of next month. Judge how agreeable this mustbe to me, who was in the hope ere now to be indulgingmyself amongst the lakes of Westmoreland. Assoon as ever I am released from my parliamentaryattendance I mean to betake myself thither, where Iexpect you and Mrs. T. will make your appearance,and judge how far the country justifies my choice.Between business in the morning and pleasure atnight my time is pretty well filled up. Whatever youand Breathed used to say of my idleness, one is, Iassure you, as much attended to as the other.You say, ' the Lord Advocate will give them atrimming on the India affairs.' I agree with you inthinking him the first speaker on the ministerial sidein the House of Commons, and there is a manliness inhis character which prevents his running away fromthe question ; he grants all his adversaries' premises,and fights them upon their own ground. The onlyIndia affairs we have yet had before us relate to LordNorth's claim on the Company of 600,000, and it isnot in the power even of the Lord Advocate to put agood face on that transaction. Upon my honour I believeit to be a transaction which, were it to take place22 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1781.ia private life, would be considered as a direct robbery.The matter is too long to be explained in a letter, butwe will nave some conversation on the subject atRayrigg, and, to use your own mode of arguing, Iwill bet you any sum that you will finally be of myopinion.The papers will have informed you how Mr. WilliamPitt, second son of the late Lord Chatham, hasdistinguished himself ; he comes out as his father dida ready-made orator, and I doubt not but that I shallone day or other see him the first man in the country.His famous speech, however, delivered the othernight, did not convince me, and I staid in with theold fat fellow : 7 by the way he grows every day fatter,so where he will end I know not.My business requires to be transacted at placesvery distant from each other, and I am now going tocall on Lord R. M. 8 thence to Horton, and next toTower Hill ; so you may judge how much leisure Ihave left for letter writing.Adieu, give my best respects to Mrs. T. and allfriends, and believe me very truly yours,W. WILBERFORCE."yHis landed property in Yorkshire was much scattered,and contained no country mansion. He wastherefore left at liberty, when released from parliamentaryattendance, to choose his place of residence.His passion for the beauties of scenery and the retireLord North. s L or d Robert Manner*1782. ROCKINGHAM MINISTRY. 23ment of the country, was unusually strong. " When,"he has said, " I was much confined in later life toLondon, I could scarcely leave the country for a towncampaign without being affected even to tears."A visit to a college friend had made him well acquaintedwith Westmoreland, then little visited bystrangers ; and for seven years he rented a house atRayrigg, on the banks of Windermere. Hither heretired with a goodly assortment of books, " classics,statutes at large, and history," as soon as the recesscommenced, both in this and the succeeding summer.His studious attentions were however frustrated bythe attractions of society. " St. Andrew St. Johnwas with me here for months together during thissummer ; occasionally too my mother and my sister,and different college friends, joined our party. Boating,riding, and continual parties at my own houseand Sir Michael le Fleming's, fully occupied my timeuntil I returned to London in the following autumn." 9He took more part this session in general business ;and by a speech on the 22nd of February, 1782, againstLord North's administration, obtained the loud commendationsof Thomas Townshend. " In 1782," hesays, " I first knew Fox well . . he giving us dinnerstwice or thrice . . very pleasant and unaffected." 10 Atthe same time he was treated with attention by othermembers of the new administration. " I was invitedto attend at Tommy Townshend's during the formationof the ministry, and can remember when theeMS. Mem. > Ib.24 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1782.jealousy between the Rockingham and Shelburneparties was first betrayed by Fox's awkward manner,when he let out that the king had been seen by noone but Lord Shelburne." uFrom Lord Rockingham himself he received manycivilities, and was amongst his guests shortly beforehis death. So prevalent at this time was the ideathat he was to be included in the new official arrangements,and raised to the Upper House, that he receivedvarious applications for the supply of his robesupon that occasion. The death of the Lord Rockingham,in July, 1782, was followed by Mr. Pitt's accessionto the Shelburne ministry ; and though Mr. Wilberforce,as he at this time assured a friend by letter,would do nothing which obliged him to pledge himselfto government, yet he was led to assume a more forwardposition amongst the general supporters of hisfriend. They were now united in the closest intimacy.In the course of this spring, they set off forBrighton, to spend the Easter holidays together ; andbeing driven thence on the very night of their arrival,by the inclemency of the weather, proceeded to Bathfor the rest of the vacation. " We fixed our quartersat the York House, and as Pitt was then upon thewestern circuit, he entertained the barristers, Jekyllamongst the rest. We had, too, abundance of corporationdinners and jollity." 12 The early possession of hisfortune increased their intimacy, as he was the onlymember of their set who owned a villa within reach of11 MS. Mem. Ib.1782. PITT AT WIMBLEDON. 25London. The house of his late uncle at Wimbledon,with some trifling alteration, gave him the commandof eight or nine bed-rooms ; and here Pitt, to whom itwas a luxury even to sleep in country air, took up notunfrequently his residence : their easy familiarity permittinghim to ride down late at night and occupy hisrooms, even though the master of the house was keptin town. In one spring Pitt resided there four months,and repaired thither when, in April, 1783, he resignedhis official residence to the Coalition ministry.Eliot, Arden, and I," writes Pitt one afternoon,will be with you before curfew, and expect an earlymeal of peas and strawberries. Bankes, I suppose,will not sleep out of Duke Street, but he has not yetappeared in theHouse of Commons,Half-past four."On the llth of December, 1782, Lord Shelburne'sministry met the House of Commons : and throughoutthe stormy season which followed, Mr. Wilberforce'sDiary is full of interesting notices of succeedingincidents.Sat, Feb. 15th. Dined Tommy Townshend's.Pitt asked me at night to second the address. Bedat twelve, and sleep disturbed at the thought of a fullHouse of Commons.16th. Walked after church till almost fotfr. Dinedat home, then called at Pitt's. Went to hear theaddress read at Tommy Townshend's.VOL. i. c26 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1783.17th. Walked down morning to House to getMiller into gallery. Seconded the address. Lost themotion by sixteen. Did not leave House till abouteight in the morning, and bed about nine."The treaties for peace upon which this address wasmoved, were the great measure of the new government.It was the critical moment of the notoriouscoalition, and when he came down to the House tosecond the address he inquired of Mr. Bankes, " Arethe intentions of Lord North and Fox sufficientlyknown to be condemned?" " Yes," was the reply,and the more strongly the better." In his speechaccordingly he inveighed against that scandalousintrigue, with a vehemence and force which never forsookhim in all his subsequent hostility to party spirit.Friday, 21st. Tommy Townshend's. Debate onLord John's motions, (which condemned the recenttreaty). Beat by seventeen. Spoke. Pitt spokemost capitally for two hours and three quarters.Home immediately after the House, and bed a littleafter four."This speech he has elsewhere noted as an instanceof those amazing powers of mind, which bodily infirmityseemed never to obscure in Mr. Pitt. " Pitt'sfamous speech on second day's debate first day's notso good. Spoke three hours, till four in the morning.Stomach disordered, and actually holding Solomon'sporch 13 door open with one hand, while vomitingduring Fox's speech to whom he was to reply." 1413 Portico behind the old House of Commons. 14 MS. Mem.1783. COALITION. 2724th. Dined Pitt's heard of the very surprisingpropositions." (The proposal made by the King toMr. Pitt, that he should form a government.)25th. Ministry still undecided. 28th. Ministersstill unappointed. T. Townshend called, and in vainpersuaded Pitt to take it. 29th % Morning frosty butextremely fine. Church Lindsey's the chariot toWimbledon. Pitt, &c. to dinner and sleep. Nothingsettled. March 3rd. This evening, or on Sundayevening, the King sent for Lord North, having previouslyseen Lord Guildford, and they parted onbad terms ; Rex refusing to take Charles Fox, andNorth to give him up. 5th. Dined Independents.King saw North a second time. Both continue stout.12th. House. Lord Abingdon's concert. Suppedat Goostree's, and bed about two. This day LordNorth was commissioned, being sent for by the King,to desire the Duke of Portland to form a Ministry.20th. Dined up-stairs, Bankes, Pepper Arden, &c.then home. Read. My eyes bad. Bed early. Thematter said by Lord G. Cavendish and Lord Dun-cannonto be completely off, by Fox and North notbeing able to agree about Torment. 21st. DinedPitt's. Fox's friends gave up the point of LordTorment ; and Coke did not make his motion, understandingarrangement likely. Staid at Pitt's till late.Sunday 23rd. All day at Wimbledon. Eyes indifferent.Sent for Mr. Seymour (afterwards his amanuensis).24th. Dined Pitt's. All off between thecoalition and the King, owing to the one demanding ac 228 LIFE OF Wilberforce. 1783.complete list, the other refusing it. 31st. Pitt resignedto-day. Dined Pitt's, then Goostree's, wheresupped. Bed almost three o'clock. April 3rd. Wimbledon,where Pitt, &c. dined and slept. Eveningwalk bed a little past two. 4th. Delicious day,lounged morning at Wimbledon with friends, coiningat night, and run about the garden for an hour or two."Little was it known, by those who saw him only inhis public course, that the stiffness of Mr. Pitt's ordinarymanner could thus at times unbend, and wantonin these exuberant bursts of natural vivacity. Thesports of the rigid Scipio and meditative Laetus intheir unguarded hours were equalled by the "mornings"of the garden at Wimbledon, where Pitt's overflowingspirits carried him to every height of jest.We found one morning the fruits of Pitt's earlierrising in the careful sowing of the garden beds withthe fragments of a dress hat, in which Ryder had overnightcome down from the opera." It was in thisvaried and familiar intercourse that their mutual affectionwas matured ; an affection which Mr. Wilberforceretained through life in spite of difference in politics andon yet more important subjects, and the remembranceof which would often cast a momentary sadness overthe habitual cheerfulness of his aged countenance."Sunday, May 18th. To Wimbledon with Pittand Eliot, at their persuasion. 26th. House. Spoke.Dined at Lord Advocate's, Mr. and Mrs. John-stone,Thurlow, Pepper, Pitt : after the rest went,we sat till six in the morning. Monday, June 30th.1783. LORD Camden. 29From Cambridge to London about half-past four.House. Supped at home. Ranelagh, Mrs. Longthere with Lord George Gordon. Sunday, July 6th.Wimbledon. Persuaded Pitt and Pepper to church.llth. Fine hot day, went on water with Pitt andEliot fishing, came back, dined, walked evening.Eliot went home, Pitt staid."This was the most critical period of his course.He had entered in his earliest manhood upon the dissipatedscenes of fashionable life, with a large fortuneand most acceptable manners. His ready wit, hisconversation continually sparkling with polishedraillery and courteous repartee, his chastened liveliness,his generous and kindly feelings ; all secured himthat hazardous applause with which society rewardsits ornaments and victims. His rare accomplishmentin singing tended to increase his danger. " Wilberforce,we must have you again, the Prince says he willcome at any time to hear you sing," was the flatterywhich he received after his first meeting with thePrince of Wales, in 1782, at the luxurious soirees ofDevonshire House.He was also an admirable mimic, and until reclaimedby the kind severity of the old Lord Camden, wouldoften set the table in a roar by his perfect imitation ofLord North. His affection for Lord Camden was anintimation at this very time of the higher texture ofhis mind. Often would he steal away from the merrimentand light amusements of the gayer circle, togather wisdom from the weighty words and chosen30 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1783.anecdotes in which the veteran Chancellor abounded.His affection was warmly returned by Lord Camden,who loved the cheerful earnestness with which hesought for knowledge. " Lord Camden noticed meparticularly," he said, 15 " and treated me with greatkindness. Amongst other things, he cured me of thedangerous art of mimicry. When invited by myfriends to witness my powers of imitation, he at oncerefused, saying slightingly for me to hear it, ' It is butavulgar accomplishment.' ' Yes, but it is notimitating the mere manner ; Wilberforce says thevery thing Lord North would say.' ' Oh,' was hisreply, ' every one does that.' ' : This friendly intercoursewas long continued. " How many subjects ofpolitics and religion," writes the old lord, with a pressinginvitation to Camden Place, in 1787, " might wenot have settled by this time, in the long evenings."But if he escaped the seductions of frivolity andfashion, he was in equal danger from the severertemptations of ambition. With talents of the highestorder, and eloquence surpassed by few, he enteredupon public life possessed of the best personal connexions,in his intimate friendship with Mr. Pitt.Disinterested, generous, lively, fond of society, bywhich he was equally beloved, and overflowing withaffection towards his numerous friends, he was indeedin little danger from the low and mercenary spirit ofworldly policy. But ambition has inducements formen of every temper ; and how far he was then safe14 Con Mem.1783. LETTER TO HIS SISTER. 31from its fascinations, may be learned from the conductof his brother " Independents." They were a club ofabout forty members of the House of Commons, mostof them opponents of the Coalition Ministry, whoseprinciple of union was a resolution to take neitherplace, pension, nor peerage. Yet in a few years so farhad the fierceness of their independence yielded tovarious temptations, that he and Mr. Bankes alone ofall the party retained their early simplicity of station.He himself was the only county member who was notraised to the peerage. He too would no doubt havebeen entangled in the toils of party, and have failedof those great triumphs he afterwards achieved, 16 butfor the entrance into his soul of higher principles. Hislater journals abound in expressions of thankfulnessthat he did not at this time enter on official life, andwaste his days in the trappings of greatness. Thoughhe was practically thoughtless, ambition had not hardenedhis heart or destroyed the simplicity of his tastes.TO MISS WILBERFORCE.Wimbledon, June 5, 1783.My dear Sister,From my retirement at Wimbledon, I write toyou in your retirement at Drinkston, and I wish you mayfind as much comfort in the one as I do in the other.The existence I enjoy here is of a sort quite differentfrom what it is in London. I feel a load off my mind ;> 6 " After all," said one of the most famous and successful of modernpoliticians in 1833, " which of us shall ever do what he has done ?"32 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1783.nor is it in the mighty powers of Mrs. Siddons, nor inthe yet superior and more exalted gratifications of theHouse of Commons, which you seem to think mysummum bonum, to compensate to me for the loss ofgood air, pleasant, walks, and what Milton callseach rural sight, each rural sound." This you willsay is a bigoted attachment, and so perhaps it maybe; yet it is an attachment which I strive rather tostrengthen than diminish, for, not to observe that it isa natural one, I am sure that I derive from it the mostsolid and substantial advantages. If my moral andreligious principles be such as in these days are notvery generally prevalent, perhaps I owe the continuanceof them in a great measure to solitude in thecountry. This is not merely the difference betweentheory and practice, it is not merely (though that besomething) that one finds oneself very well able toresist temptations to vice, when one is out of the wayof being exposed to them ; but in towns there is noleisure for thought or serious reflection, and we are aptto do that with regard to moral conduct, which we arein vain advised to do in the case of misfortunes tolook only on those who are worse than ourselves, tillwe flatter ourselves into a favourable opinion of ourmodes of life, and exalted ideas of our own virtue. Butinthe country a little reading or reflection presents uswith a more complete and finished model, and we becomesensible of our own imperfections ; need I addthat trite maxim, which however I will, for it is a trueone, that humility is the surest guide both to virtue1783. LETTER TO HIS SISTER. 33and wisdom. Besides, custom and habit operatealmost as powerfully on our opinions and judgments ason our carriage and deportment ; and lest we becomethoroughly tainted with the fashionable ways of thinkingand acting, we should retire to converse and keepcompany a little with our faithful mentor, who willgive us good advice, if we will but have the prudenceand the spirit to attend to it. For my own part, Inever leave this poor villa without feeling my virtuousaffections confirmed and strengthened; and I am afraidit would be in some degree true if I were to add, thatI never remain long in London without their beingsomewhat injured and diminished. After this eulogiumon the country, and solitude, you will tell me itis an odd reason I am about to give for having almostlaid aside my attention of going abroad, that I cannotfind any friend to travel with me ; but really the ideais so uncomfortable, of spending three or four weeksalone in a post-chaise, and of not being able to join inthe conversation . . when one does at last see the humanface divine, that it staggers the resolution to which Ihad come of taking a tower; and my inclination isseconded by my reason, which suggests to me that Ican pass my summer to much better advantage inEngland. Should the latter be my lot, and this wordI take to be the properest that can be used on the occasionfor it is a good deal a matter of chance, I shallbe on the ramble, and endeavour in some of my excursionsto show myself not wholly without bowels, andto stumble on you. But of all this I shall be betterc 334 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1783.able to speak in about three weeks, when I expectparliament will rise, and you must not then besurprised to receive a letter from me dated from anyplace in or out of his Majesty's dominions."The close of the session, July 16th, set him atliberty. After visiting the St. Johns at TunbridgeWells he spent the month of August in Yorkshire,and repaired early in September to the seat of Mr.Bankes in Dorsetshire, to meet Mr. Pitt and Mr.Eliot, with whom he had engaged to pay a visit tothe continent. A few days spent at Kingston Hallin shooting, Averse signalized by the narrow escape ofMr. Pitt from Mr. Wilberforce's gun ; " So at least,"said he, " my companions affirmed, with a roguishwish, perhaps, to make the most of my shortsightednessand inexperience in field sports."On the llth of September the three friends met atCanterbury, and on the following day embarking atDover in spite of a heavy sea crossed to Calais.Thence they proceeded straight to Rheims, to gainsome knowledge of the language before they went toParis. Each had trusted to the other to obtain theneedful introductions ; and when at last the omissionwas discovered they had only time to write to Mr.Robert Smith for letters. He had no better resourcethan to obtain from Peter Thellusson an introductionto the correspondent of his house. With these credentialsthey arrived at Rheims, then under thatepiscopal government which had lasted from the timeof Clovis, and to which may be traced, according to1783. FRENCH TOUR. 35Guizot, the origin of European civilization. At thetime of their arrival the Archbishop (Period) wasabsent, and the ordinary routine of government devolvedupon Mons. De Lageard, as secretary to the conseild'etat. Their first adventures are thus related in aletter to Mr. Bankes. " From Calais we madedirectly for Rheims, and the day after our arrivaldressed ourselves unusually well, and proceeded to thehouse of a Mons. Coustier to present, with not alittle awe, our only letters of recommendation. Itwas with some surprise that we found Mons. Coustierbehind a counter distributing figs and raisins. I hadheard that it was very usual for gentlemen on the continentto practise some handicraft trade or other fortheir amusement, and therefore for my own part I concludedthat his taste was in the fig way, and that hewas only playing at grocer for his diversion ; andviewing the matter in this light, I could not helpadmiring the excellence of his imitation ; but we soonfound that Mons. Coustier was a 'veritable epicier,' andthat not a very eminent one. He was very fair andcandid however, and acknowledged to us that he wasnot acquainted with any of the gentry of the place,and therefore could not introduce us to them. Wereturned to our inn, and after spending nine or ten dayswithout making any great progress in the Frenchlanguage, which could not indeed be expected fromus, as we spoke to no human being but each otherand our Irish courier, when we began to entertainserious thoughts of leaving the place in despair, by36 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1783.way of a parting effort we waited on our epicier,and prevailed on him to put on a bag and swordand carry us to the intendant of the police, whomhe supplied with groceries. This scheme succeededadmirably. The intendant was extremely civil to us,and introduced us to the Archbishop, who gave us twovery good and pleasant dinners and would have had usstay a week with him. (N. B. Archbishops inEngland are not like Archeveques in France ; theselast are jolly fellows of about forty years of age, whoplay at billiards, &c. like other people.)We soon got acquainted with as many of the inhabitantsas we could wish, especially an Abbe De Lageard,a fellow of infinite humour, and of such extraordinaryhumanity, that to prevent our time hanging heavy onour hands he would sometimes make us visits of fiveor six hours at a stretch. Our last week passed verypleasantly, and for myself I was really very sorry whenthe day arrived for our setting off for Paris."The Abbe De Lageard (now Mons. de Cheval) hasfurnished some recollections of this visit. "One morningwhen the intendant of police brought me his dailyreport, he informed me,, there are three Englishmenhere of very suspicious character. They are in awretched lodging, they have no attendance, yet theircourier says, that they are 'grands seigneurs,' andthat one of them is son of the great Chatham ; but itis impossible, they must be 'des intrigues.' I hadbeen in England, and knew that the younger sons ofyour noble families are not always wealthy, and I said1783. RHEIMS. 37to Mons. Du Chapel, who wished to visit them officiallyand investigate their character, ' Let us be in nohurry, it may be perhaps as they represent, I will inquireabout them myself.' I went to their lodgingsthe same evening and got their names from thecourier, and true enough they were said to be Mr.W. Pitt, Mr. Wilberforce, and Mr. Eliot, all threemembers of the British parliament, and one of themlately a leading member of the government. Thenext morning I visited them, and as I was at oncesatisfied by their appearance I asked whether I couldbe of any use to them, and offered whatever the townof Rheims could afford for their amusement. Amongstother things Mr. Pitt complained, ' Here we are in themiddle of Champagne, and we cannot get any tolerablewine.' ' Dine with me tomorrow,' I replied, ' and youshall have the best wine the country can afford.'They came and dined with me, and instead of movingdirectly after dinner, as we do in France, we sat talkingfor five or six hours."The Abbe De Lageard, a man of family and fortune,was one of those whom the revolution stripped of everythingbut their faith and loyalty ; and when residingas an emigrant in England, he received from Mr.Wilberforce a willing and ample return of his presenthospitality. Nothing could exceed his kindness tothem : for a fortnight he was their constant attendant ;he made them acquainted with the noblesse whoresided in the neighbourhood of Rheims; he gavethem permission to sport over the domain of the38 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1783.Archbishop ; and upon his return, introduced themto a familiar footing at the palace. In their manyconversations with the Abbe, Mr. Pitt was the chiefspeaker. Although no master of the French vocabulary,his ear, quick for every sound but music, caughtreadily the intonations of the language ; and he soonspoke it with considerable accuracy. He inquiredcarefully into the political institutions of the French ;and the Abbe has stored up his concluding sentence . .Monsieur, vous naves point de liberty" politique,mais pour la liberty civile, vous en avez plus que vousne croyez."As he expressed in the strongest terms his admirationfor the system which prevailed at home, theAbbe was led to ask him, since all human things wereperishable, in what part the British constitution mightbe first expected to decay ? Pitt, a parliamentaryreformer, and speaking within three years of the timewhen the House of Commons had agreed to Mr.Dunning's motion, that the influence of the Crown hadincreased, was increasing, and ought to be diminished,after musing for a moment, answered ; " The part ofour constitution which will first perish, is the prerogativeof the King, and the authority of the Houseof Peers." " I am greatly surprised," said the Abbe,that a country so moral as England can submit tobe governed by a man so wanting in private characteras Fox ; it seems to show you to be less moral thanyou appear." " C'est que vous naves pas e^e" sous labaguette du Magician," was Pitt's reply ; " but the1783. FRENCH PROVINCIAL SOCIETY. 39remark," he continued, " is just." Through theAbba's kindness they mixed familiarly with differentranks, and saw much of the interior of French society.Oct. 3rd. Dined at Valley La Mareschald'Etre"es, &c." A following entertainment at the houseof a wealthy wine merchant of Rheims is described asasad party drunken prior sang seventy-three[years old." At this house they witnessed an amusingestimate of English appetite. Whilst the Frenchmendid ample justice to an abundant supper, thethree friends ate rather sparingly. Their host attributedtheir moderation to their disinclination to thelight dishes of which the repast consisted, and significantlyhinted that their taste would soon be gratified.A vast joint of ill-roasted beef, which was placed uponthe table amongst the winks and smiles of the company,soon fulfilled his promise ; and though theEnglishmen could not be persuaded to touch it, theirfriends retired with the conviction, that if they hadbeen free from observation they would have liberallyindulged in their national fare.The position Mr. Pitt had occupied at home,attracted the observation of the French. An agedMareschal at Rheims sought in him a purchaser forher most costly wines, and disclaimed earnestly hisassurances of poverty. " Le ministre doit avoir, sansdoute, cinque ou six mille livres sterling de rente."And at Paris, whither they removed upon the 9thof September, it was hinted to him through the interventionof Horace Walpole, that he would be an40 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1783.acceptable suitor for the daughter of the celebratedNeckar. Neckar is said to have offered to endow herwith a fortune of 14,000 per annum : but Mr. Pittreplied, " I am already married to my country." Thestory of their embarrassments at Rheims precededthem to Fontainbleau, where, by special invitation,they soon joined the gala festivities of the court, andMr. Pitt was often rallied by the Queen, who askedwhether he had lately heard from his friend the epicier.The diary of this period gives a brief notice ofeach day's proceedings.Oct. 16th. Breakfasted at home, dressed by eleven,and went with ambassador. Introduced to King,Queen, Monsieur, Madame, Compte and ComtesseArtois, and two aunts. Dined Mons. de Castries,minister of the marine department. Saw thereVicomte de Noailles pleasant fellow, and Marquisde la Fayette, Chailliere, Castries's son and his wife.Marmontel there. After dinner went to Vergenne's,and then to Madame Polignac's to visit the Queen ;she chatted easily. Then salle des ambassadeurs,and opera : words by Marmontel, music by Picking ;both good Dion. Then supped at Count Jonson's.Round table : all English but Jonson, Noailles,Dupont. Queen came after supper. Cards, trictrac,and backgammon, which Artois, Lauzun, and Chartresplayed extremely well. Home at one."Oct. 17th." Morning Pitt stag hunting. Eliotand I in chaise to see King. Clumsy, strange figurein immense boots. Dined home then play. .Fontainebleau. 41dame Gazon in Babe in Droit de Seigneur. Thenhome, and supped Castries's, at small table veryrudely. 17 Afterwards to Polignac's to the Queen, whocame there after supper billiards. Home, wherelounged till almost three o'clock.18th. Morning foggy. Called Manchester's.Dined home Eliot. The boar hunting. Afterdinner called Vergenne's. Supped Seducers. AfterwardsLamballe's, where the Queen. Great assemblybilliards.19th. Up early. Returned to Paris. DinedWalpole's. Then home.20th. Saw sights. Bought books. Dined Marquisde la Fayette's, pleasing enthusiastic man : his wifea sweet woman. Dr. Franklin, Mr. Page, Crimson'said du camp, young Franklin, Noailles, MadameBoufflers there. Free the Spanish colonies. Athome at night preparing for departure."Mr. Wilberforce received with interest the heartygreetings which Dr. Franklin tendered to a risingmember of the English parliament, who had opposedthe war with America. But it was the singularposition occupied by La Fayette which most ofall attracted his attention : he seemed to be therepresentative of the democracy in the very presenceof the monarch, the tribune intruding with his>7 The English then at Fontainbleau made a considerable party, andinstead of mingling with their hosts, they assembled at a separate table,headed by their ambassador, (the Duke of Manchester,) to discuss Englishpolitics in their own language.42 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1783.veto within the chamber of the patrician order. Hisown establishment was formed upon the Englishmodel ; and amidst the gaiety and ease of Fontainebleau,he assumed an air of republican austerity.When the fine ladies of the court would attemptto drag him to the card table, he shrugged hisshoulders, with an affected contempt for the customsand amusements of the old regime. Meanwhile thedeference which this champion of a new state ofthings received, above all from the ladies of thecourt, intimated clearly the disturbance of the socialatmosphere, and presaged the coming tempest. Aspecial messenger recalling Mr. Pitt to London, cutshort their further observations; and after a sixweeks' absence Mr. Wilberforce returned to Englandon the 24th October, " better pleased with his owncountry than before he left it." He thus reports toMr. Bankes his foreign operations in a letter, part ofwhich has been already given.TO HENRY Banes, ESQ.London, 28th Oct. 1783.My dear Bankes,You would have good reason to complain ofmy having forgotten the promise of giving you anaccount of our continental proceedings, which I madeyou as I was dolefully walking down-stairs to stepinto my ' post-clay ' at Kingston Hall, if I had it notin my power to assure you that it was the weakness ofmy eyes alone which was the occasion of my silence ;1783. LETTER TO Banes. 43for a fortnight or three weeks I got up constantly witha determination to write to you, which this complaintas constantly obliged me to break. We have withsome difficulty escaped with our lives from the complicatedmiseries of incessant travelling from Paris,which I shall not attempt to describe to you, whoknow what it is to spend four-and-twenty hours togetherin a carriage, and are no strangers to the horrorsof sea-sickness. I assure you it was with no small joy,after all my perils by land and water, that I foundmyself at my lodgings in Little Conduit Street.As we shall meet in a fortnight, and have anopportunity of reading over together the journal of ourtour, I shall not send it you at present, but only mentionsome of the great features of it. From Calais wemade directly for Rheims, &c. p. 34.At Paris we staid nearly a week, 18 and from theswarms of English, we should not have found out thatwe were out of London, except from the circumstanceof our going every night to a play, of which we werenot able to make out a syllable. But it was not tosee sights that we went abroad, but to study the people ;and it was not in the power of the amusements ofParis to detain us long from Fontainbleau, where thecourt is spending a month of gala ; and where, in four19 At Paris, Mr. Pitt first became acquainted with Mr. Rose, thentravelling with Lord Thurlow. This circumstance gave occasion,perhaps, to Sir Nathaniel Wraxall's misstatement, that Mr. Pitt andMr. Rose were fellow-travellers on the continent. He adds, that hehad met them together at Antwerp, a place which Mr. Pitt never visited,having reached Rheims by way of St. Omens, Arras, Camera, St.Question, and Lion, and returned straight from Paris.44 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1783.days, the time of our stay, we had an opportunity ofseeing as many people of distinction as we could havedone in a month in Paris. Here we dined and suppedwith ministers, and every night we spent with theQueen, who is a monarch of most engaging mannersand appearance. The King is so strange a being, (ofthe hog kind,) that it is worth going a hundred milesfor a sight of him, especially a boar hunting. Theyall, men and women, crowded round Pitt in shoals ;and he behaved with great spirit, though he was sometimesa little bored when they talked to him about theparliamentary reform. They are certainly, we haveevery reason to say, a most obliging people ; and weall returned from Fontainbleau charmed with ourreception. I hope you will come in a few days, andsee our improvement by foreign travel.I am ever yours,W. WILBERFORCE."CHAPTER III.1783-4.FIRST ELECTION FOR YORKSHIRE.State of parties in the autumn of 1783 Diary Meeting atYork against the coalition Dissolution of parliamentYorkshire election Wilberforce suddenly proposed to representthe county Elected for Hull Nomination for thecounty Elected member Letter from Pitt Effect of thiselection on the country.THE month, of November, 1783, when Mr. Wilberforcereturned to London, was a season of great politicalexcitement. " Returned," he says, 1 " to England inNovember, and secret plotting. The King groaningunder the ministry which had been imposed upon him.Difference about provision for Prince of Wales, whenministry gave up the measure rather than their places.Afterwards Fox's India Bill, which thrown out .Lord Temple's fracas, and long interregnum atlength Pitt prime minister." Then came that memorableseason, when one man swayed the destinies of apeople ; when Pitt, undismayed by threats and incensedby provocations, upheld with a strong handand a bold heart the prerogatives of the Crown andthe liberties of the subject. Throughout this periodMS. Mem.46 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1783.Mr. Wilberforce shared constantly in the privatecounsels and parliamentary labours of his friend.The part he took in these debates attracted morenotice than any of his previous speeches ; and theopposition papers of the day defy Mr. Pitt " in spiteof the assistance he receives from the eloquence ofMr. Wilberforce."The Diary of this period is full of interesting allusionsto the progress of affairs.Oct. 25th. Travelled all day at London aboutone o'clock in the morning. Supped Goostree'sbed half-past three.28th. Kemble, Hamlet and Goostree's.Nov. 1st. Wimbledon. Pitt and Eliot came inat four dined and slept.2nd. Pitt staid all day.3rd. They left me alone read.8th. Sat. Eliot and Pitt came to dinner; andall night.9th. Pepper and John Villiers came, and staidall night. Pitt and Eliot left after dinner."llth. House (met) up at six. Dined Gooseplay. Begun hard at Reports.13th. House Reports. Supped Edwards'sRamsay, negroes.15th. Dined Baxter's Johnians.16th. Did not go to Wimbledon Cambridgeelection.17th. Pitt went to Cambridge to meet Euston.Went to Surrey nomination meeting.1783. FOX'S INDIA BILL. 4718th. House Fox's India Motion. Expressfrom Euston that the Duke would not let him stand.Debate about Pitt Bankes. Determined he shouldnot stand. 1"20th. House spirited debate about putting offIndia Bill. Dined Goostree's.24th. Dined R. Smith's. Night, Pitt's Indiapeople.27th. Great day in the House. Sat till pastfour in the morning.28th. No House. Dined Tom Pitt's Mrs.Crewe charming woman.29th. Went to see Mrs. Siddons Mrs. Crewe atplay.30th. Dined Lord Chatham's meeting. Wrotefor ladies to go to the gallery, but disappointed.Dec. 1st. House late night. Home about five,immediately after debate. Fox spoke wonderfully."2nd. Catch-club Sandwich then opera. Mrs.Crewe there. Supped Lord George's. Lord Johnthere Mrs. Crewe Duchess of Portland converts.Mrs. Crewe made the party [promise] to adjourn toDowning Street next night.3rd. Dined Goostree's. Supped Duchess ofPortland's, Downing Street. Charles Fox came inwhispering over chair. Heavy evening.4th. House. Supped tete-astute Lord and LadyChatham.6th. Dined Hamilton's opera. Supped BurningMr. Mansfield (Solicitor-general) was re-elected.48 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1783.ton House Mrs. Crewe Duchess of Portland.Mrs. Sheridan sang old English songs angelicallypromised her our votes.7th. Church Lock De Coetlegan thenGoostree's.8th. House sat till near four. Spoke ill confused.16th. House resolutions relative to King's interference.Home late.19th. Pitt, Lord Temple, Thurlow, accepted.20th. Morning Pitt's.21st. Pitt's supped Lord Chatham's.22nd. Lord Temple resigned. No dissolutiondeclared. Drove about for Pitt. 'So your friend Mr.Pitt means to come in,' said Mrs. Crewe : 3 * well, hemay do what he likes during the holidays, but itwill only be a mince-pie administration, dependon it.'23rd. Morning Pitt's. Dined Sir C. Middleton's.Pitt nobly firm. Evening Pitt's. Cabinetformed." " We had a great meeting that night ofall Pitt's friends in Downing Street. As Pratt, TomSteele, and I were going up to it in a hackney coachfrom the House of Commons, ' Pitt must take care,'I said, ' whom he makes Secretary of the Treasury ;it is rather a roguish office.' ' Mind what you say,'answered Steele, ' for I am Secretary of the Treasury.'At Pitt's we had a long discussion ; and I rememberwell the great penetration showed by Lord Mason.3 MS. Mem,1783. PITT PRIME MINISTER. 49What am I to do,' said Pitt, ' if they stop the supplies.'* They will not stop them,' said Mahon, ( itis the very thing which they will not venture to do."24th. House spoke very well.25th. Dined Lord Chatham's."26th. Pitt's.Jan. 1st, 1784. After breakfast to CambridgeComb n . room, Townshend asked me if Pitt wouldstand.*"3rd. Set off for Ex ton where got late andslept.4th. In vain pressed Mr. Noel to attend Monday,12th.20th, House coalition talked of. Dined Independents'opera and supped Goostree's.23rd. House Pitt's Bill up at three.29th. Dined White's by way of forming a club.Feb. 2nd. House till twelve. Then home anddreamed about debate.10th. White's to ballot for a committee. Suppedthere. Wanted, but in vain, old North to come in.22nd. Dined G. Harding's. Mrs. Siddons sungcharmingly.24th. Lady Howe's ball danced till half-pastfour.25th. They put off the House by a trick. Addresscarried up.4 At the ensuing general election, Mr. Pitt and Lord Euston werereturned for the University of Cambridge in the place of Messrs.Townshend and Mansfield.VOL. I. n50 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1784.26th. Dined at Lord Chatham's to settle aboutthe 25.28th. Pitt returned from city. Affray he gotsafe into White's. Called there and bed aboutthree o'clock."March 1st. Spoke at night to Dundas'sextremely tired.4th. Dined D'Adhemar's French ambassador.Called White's settled the 26th.Pitt bolted in.7th. Sunday morning church. Dined LordSalisbury's. Then with Dundas to Mr. Seaton's tosup with Mrs. Siddons.12th. House till eleven Parliamentary Reform.17th. Came to town. Dined Lord Berkeley's.Then Pitt's, where supped."I can well remember," he has said of this importantcrisis, " how anxiously we watched the eventsof each succeeding day, counting every vote, in theearnest hope that Pitt might make a successful standagainst the coalition." But the time was now come,when he could render more essential service to hisfriend, than by beating up the quarters of doubtfulmembers, or even by supporting him with his eloquencein the House of Commons.The rising feeling of the country in support of Mr.Pitt, had been already shown in the many urgentaddresses presented to the King. But Yorkshire hadnot as yet declared itself; and the supporters of thecoalition, calculating upon the influence of their vast1784. IMPORTANCE OF YORKSHIRE. 51possessions in the county, looked eagerly for its declarationin their favour. " Great head," say thepapers 5 of the day, " is making in Yorkshire againstthe address to be proposed there on the 28th ; theFitzwilliams and Cavendish are all gone down, andare busy in their canvass. Their success in Yorkshireis now the sheet-anchor of the coalition. An addressfrom that populous and extensive county would provea death-blow to their future hopes. Their agents andemissaries, therefore, are driving about from place toplace, day and night. Some of their ablest hands areemployed in this important service. As some principalsof their party have so great an interest in thecounty, a failure there would entirely blow up theircause ; and besides, the example of Yorkshire couldnot fail to determine other counties, which have notyet addressed." To this overbearing influence, therewas a strong spirit of opposition in the county. TheWest Riding clothiers were all Tories, and ready torise in support of the throne. The Yorkshire Associationdeclared against the coalition. It had beenformed in 1779, from the gentry of moderate fortunesand the more substantial yeomen, under the pressureof those burdens which resulted from the war with America,with the view of obtaining, first an economical,and then a parliamentary, reform. But in the variouschanges which soon afterwards perplexed the politicalworld, its first object was almost forgotten ; and itsmost important character was the front of opposition,Public Advertiser, March 18th and 19th.D 252 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1784.which it now maintained against that powerful aristocracy,which had long ruled the county with absolutedominion. To the general hostility to the coalition,Yorkshire therefore added a peculiar element ofopposition. In contending with the great Whig lords,she fought the battle of her own freedom, as well as ofpolitical right. The sturdy yeomen of the north, liketheir forefathers, might be influenced, but could notbe compelled, ( ' Jam domini ut parent nondum ut servant,"They gathered round the Association, andformed a union of all the middle classes against the greatbarons of the county. The castle yard at York was to betheir Runnymede, and the address their Magna Charta.Yet so undisputed hitherto had been the ruleagainst which they were about to rise, that in spiteof this state of feeling, Mr. Wilberforce declared,three days before the county meeting, " I hope we maybeable to get up an opposition in Yorkshire, thoughI doubt whether it be possible." He had determinedupon making the attempt, and though the poet Mason,then a canon residentiary at York, was well nigh hissole acquaintance beyond his own corner of the county,he hastened into Yorkshire to head the party. Onthe 21st of March he went as far as Cambridge,and reached York the following afternoon at fouro'clock. " Dressed," says his Diary, " and went andsupped at York Tavern. Lord Falconer, Wyvill,and I, helped to draw up an address Mason, &c.24th. Up early at York Tavern and walkingall day. Numbers came to York.1784. COUNTY MEETING. 5325th. Cold hailing day. Castle yard meetingfrom ten till half-past four. Messenger came to methere."In those days' he has said " they kept up avast deal of state, and the great men all drove up intheir coaches and six. An immense body of the freeholderswas present. It was a wonderful meeting fororder and fair hearing." An address to the King condemningthe coalition ministry, was proposed byMr. Buck, Recorder of Leeds, and supported byMr. H. Duncombe, Mr. Barnes, Mr. Milnes, Mr.Stanhope, and Lord Fauconberg. On the otherside appeared the late Duke of Norfolk, (thenLord Surrey,) Lord Carlisle, Lord John Cavendish,Lord Fitzwilliam, and many other men of rankand influence. When the proposers of the addresshad spoken, and the Whig lords had been heardin answer, the day was far advanced, and thelisteners were growing weary of the contest. Atthis time Mr. Wilberforce mounted the table, fromwhich, under a great wooden canopy before the highsheriff's chair, the various speakers had addressedthe meeting. The weather was so bad " that itseemed," says an eye-witness, " as if his slight framewould be unable to make head against its violence."The castle yard, too, was so crowded, that men of thegreatest physical powers had been scarcely audible.Yet such was the magic of his voice and the grace ofhis expression, that by his very first sentence he arrest -6 MS. Mem.54 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1784.ed, and for above an hour he continued to enchain,the attention of the surrounding multitude. " Darbytells me," writes Pepper Arden, " that you spoke likean angel. That, indeed, I hear from many others."The disadvantage under which his figure had at firstappeared, from the scale and construction of the hustings,was soon forgotten in the force and animation ofhis manner. " I saw, said Boswell, 7 describingthe meeting to Dundas, " what seemed a mereshrimp mount upon the table ; but, as I listened, hegrew, and grew, until the shrimp became a whale."It is impossible," says one who heard him, " thoughat the distance of so many years, to forget his speech,or the effect which it produced. He arraigned withthe utmost vigour the coalition ministry, and theIndia Bill which they had proposed . . a measure whichhe described as ' the offspring of that unnatural conjunction,marked with the features of both its parents,bearing token to the violence of the one, and the corruptionof the other'" " His argumentative and eloquentspeech," says a York paper of the day, " waslistened to with the most eager attention, and receivedwith the loudest acclamations of applause. It was areply to all that had been urged against the address ;but there was such an excellent choice of expressions,so rapidly pronounced, that we are unable to do it7 " I rejoice in the happy prospect of things with you," writes Mr.Dundas from Edinburgh to Mr. Wilberforce, March 30th. " Boswellhas just been with me, and gives me an account of your feats atYork."1784. LETTER FROM PITT. 55justice in any account we can give of it." He was distinctlyheard to the utmost limits of the crowd, andinterrupted only by an express from Mr. Pitt, whichwithout disconcerting him, enabled him with thegreatest possible effect to announce to the assembledcounty, that by dissolving parliament, the King hadat that very moment appealed to the decision of thenation.TO WILLIAM WILBERFORCE, ESQ.Dear Wilberforce,Parliament will be prorogued to-day, and dissolvedtomorrow. The latter operation has been insome danger of delay, by a curious manoeuvre, that ofstealing the great seal last night from the Chancellor's;but we shall have a new one ready intime.I send you a copy of the speech which will bemade in two hours from the throne. You may speakof it in the past tense, instead of the future.A letter accompanies this from Lord Mahon toWyvill, which you will be so good as to give him.I am told Sir Robert Hilyard is the right candidatefor the county. You must take care to keep allour friends together, and to tear the enemy topieces.I set out this evening for Cambridge, where Iexpect, notwithstanding your boding, to find every56 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1784.thing favourable. I am sure however of a retreatat Bath.Ever faithfully yours,W. PITT.Downing Street,Wednesday, March 24th, half-past twelve.Our prospect as to elections improves every hour. "At the commencement of the meeting," he hassaid, " the two parties opposed to Mr. Fox werethemselves divided, and I was able to unite them. Ihad considered the subject carefully, and what I Saidmade a great impression." The sheriff, W. Darby,Esq. could not decide positively on the result of adivision, but as the address was carried by a show ofhands, it was signed by him as the decision of themeeting, and presented to the King. " The honestindependent freeholders of that great county," saysthe Public Advertiser, " looked the Duke of Devonshire,Lord John Cavendish, the Earls of Carlisleand Fitzwilliam, in the face ; and against that mightyaristocracy voted a loyal address to their Sovereign."The great ability which he had thus displayed beforethe county, produced the most unexpected consequences.The immense expense of contesting its representationhad reduced Yorkshire to the condition ofa nomination borough in the hands of the Whignobility. " Hitherto," said its popular representativeSir George Savile, when in 1780 he was supportedby the Yorkshire Association, before which1784. YORKSHIRE REPRESENTATION. 57his colleague had given place to Mr. Henry Dun-combe," hitherto I have been elected in LordRockingham's dining-room now I am returned bymy constituents." " To get up an opposition" at theapproaching election had been one end of Mr.Wilberforce's presence. And he himself, warneddoubtless by that internal consciousness of power, bywhich great men are prepared for high attempts, hadalready secretly presaged the actual issue.8:1 1 had formed within my own heart the project ofstanding for the county. To any one besides myself Iwas aware that it must appear so mad a scheme, that Inever mentioned it to Mr. Pitt, or any of my politicalconnexions. It was undoubtedly a bold idea, but I wasthen very ambitious. 9 However, entertaining it, Icarefully prepared myself for the public debate, whichwas soon to follow in the face of the whole county;and both at the public meeting, and in the subsequentdiscussions, it was this idea which regulated the line,as well as animated the spirit, of my exertions. Allcircumstances indeed considered . . my mercantileorigin, my want of connexion or acquaintance with anyof the nobility or gentry of Yorkshire . my beingelected for that great county appears to me, upon theretrospect, so utterly improbable, that I cannot butascribe it to a providential intimation, that the idea ofMS. Mem.9 " Notables in my life. My being raised to my present situationj must before I became acquainted with the truth, and one year and a halfbefore I in any degree experienced its power. This, humanly speaking,would not have taken place afterwards." Journal, September 4th,1796.D 358 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1784.my obtaining that high honour suggested itself to myimagination, and in fact fixed itself within my mind."Great as our majority may be at the county meeting,"writes Mr. Wyvill, 10 " what friend have we topropose, who could hazard the expense of a contest,or what probability is there that any candidate wouldbe supported by a subscription." Sir ChristopherSykes (one of the wealthiest members of the Association)had been the only person announced in thecounty papers as a possible candidate. But eventswere advancing to a different issue. Whilst he wasyet speaking in the castle yard, the admiration of thefreeholders burst forth in the shout, " We '11 have thisman for our county member ;" and his conduct in thesucceeding meetings suggested the same idea to independentmen of greater influence.The meeting in the castle yard was followed bya great public dinner of our side, at the York Tavern.The Fontes met at Bluitt's. In the evening, whenthey were all half tipsy, I made up a quarrel whichhad broken out between associators and non-associators,Whigs and Tories. Whigs, Lord Effingham,&c. Tories, West Riding clothiers. Already some weresaying, ' We can't agree we had better separate ;' butI united them again, by showing them the folly ofgiving up our common object because there weredifferences between us, and by reminding them of thegreat constitutional principles which we all maintained.This confirmed the disposition to propose me"> Letter to Rev. W. Mason, Feb. 28, 17&1.1784. CANDIDATE FOH YORKSHIRE. 59for the county, an idea which had begun to be buzzedabout at dinner, amongst all ranks." n " Mr. Wilberforce,"wrote one of the company to Lord Hawke, " hasgained the hearts and admiration of all that heard himspeak ; and when we broke up at the York Tavern, attwelve o'clock on Thursday night, there was a suddenand spontaneous cry of 'Wilberforce and liberty,'which was his first nomination for the county.""Thursday, 25th March. Dined at the YorkTavern sat late. Non-associators and associatorsquarrelled reconciled them. At the end of myspeech they declared (Pierce, Morris, Thorpe, &c.) Ishould be their member Lord Fauconberg had mentionedit to me at dinner.26th. Meeting called at York Tavern. Messagefrom Bluitt's, about supporting any one, if we wouldsupport Foljambe our answer. Stanhope, Fauconberg,&c. mentioned me. Sir Robert Hilyard spoke.I speechified again and they agreed, that all shouldseparately sound their neighbours, and come with theresult to the county meeting about a week afterwards,so putting off the determination concerning me tillthe nomination." 12Strong as was now the feeling in his favour, itseemed a thing so incredible, that a young man,utterly unconnected with the aristocracy of thecounty, should actually displace their nominee, thatit was not deemed safe for him to resign his presentseat. On the evening therefore of the 26th, he " set11 MS. Mem * Diary.60 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1784.off to secure his election at Hull, where " he " arrivedat two o'clock in the morning."27th. Canvassed the York voters, and got them allfor Galway and Milnes. People not pleased at my notcanvassing.Friday, 28th. Morning busy made some calls.29th. Began canvass, which continued till night.Hartley drawn into the town.30th. Canvass all day extremely hard work tillnight tired to death.31st. Morning election went on well. At three,poll interrupted Hartley desired in vain by friends togive up.April 1st. Hartley declined election went on.Snow-balls, &c. thrown at me in the chair." 13 Thisslight expression of resentment was aimed at hisintended resignation of his seat, if elected for thecounty. " But when," says an eye-witness, " the processionreached his mother's house, he sprung fromthe chair, and presenting himself with surprisingquickness at a projecting window . . it was that ofthe nursery in which his childhood had beenpassed . . he addressed the populace with such completeeffect, that he was able afterwards to decidethe election of his successor."The same evening he was on his road to York."April 7th. At night went to Market Leighton,twenty-one miles crowds orgies in Beverley.At the close of the poll the numbers stood, W. Wilberforce 807,S. Thornton 751, D. Hartley 357.1784. NOMINATION. 618th. Up early to York nomination day'He found a welcome greeting upon reaching York ;and was immediately proposed with Mr. Duncombe,in opposition to Mr. Weddell and Mr. Foljambe,both men of large fortune and great connexions, andone 14 the former member, and heir to the influenceof his uncle Sir George Savile.The brunt of opposition was of course directedagainst the new candidate; whom Lord Margraverecommended to the freeholders as " approvedalready by a large part of the county, the bosomfriend of the present minister, and second only to himin eloquence, unexampled at their years." C( It was agreat meeting for the nomination, in a long roombetween the courts ; the speakers mounted on atable, and haranguing thence. I replying to lawyerHill of Lancaster." 15 This speech in a vein of cuttingsarcasm, of which in after-life he would never allowhimself the use, " I well remember," says one whoheard it, " for the hearty mirth which its powers ofridicule excited." The show of hands was, by avast majority," in favour of himself and Mr.Duncombe ; and the reports made upon the day ofnomination, as the result of local canvassing, gavethem a return of promises, 16 as three or four to one. To14 Mr. Wilberforce would often mention with peculiar pleasure thegenerous feeling with which, at a subsequent election, Mr. Foljambecame to York, as one of his supporters. li MS. Mem.16 An exact revision of the county, by which the names, residences,and possessions of every freeholder were ascertained, showed thatwhilst there were doubtful, or against them, 2510 votes, no less than11,173 were promised to the two independent candidates.62 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1784.meet the anticipated charge of such a contest, a subscriptionwas immediately commenced, to which thecandidates in vain requested leave to add 2000a-piece. Of the sum thus contributed, (18,670,)about one fourth proved sufficient to defray thewhole expense of the election.From the hall of nomination the candidates passedto another public dinner at the York Tavern ; and onthe following morning set out to spend in a hastypersonal canvass the four days which preceded theelection. Their road by Doncaster led them througha hostile neighbourhood. "We passed many greathouses that morning, but not one did we see that wasfriendly to us. * This looks very ill,' was myremark to Duncombe." But with night their tide ofpopularity set in."April 3rd. To Rotherham drawn into townpublic dinner. At night to Sheffield vast supportmeeting at Cutlers' Hall.4th. Off to Barnsley. Honest Edmund of Marlborough,in sight of Lord Fitzwilliam's, but a warmfriend. Then to Wakefield, where slept.5th. Canvassed. Then off to Halifax. Drawninto town. One hundred people dined with us.Speechified at the other house after dinner warmfriends. After dinner (drunken postboy) to Bradford.Drawn into town vast support. Then on to Leeds,and bed."6th. Wonderful cloth halls kindly received. AtYork tavern Lord John Cavendish and Sir W.1784. ELECTION. 63Milner beat. At eight o'clock a message from Bluitt's,saying Foljambe and Weddell decline. Wrote numberof letters.7th. Up early breakfasted tavern rode friskyhorse to castle elected chaired dined YorkTavern. Spencer Stanhope spoke to me.8th. Walked called air balloon dined YorkTavern."Many were the greetings which poured in uponhim, and not the least affectionate was that withwhich Mr. Pitt closed a series of daily letters."Downing Street, April 8th, 1784.My dear Wilberforce,I can never enough congratulate you on suchglorious success. I am going to dine at Wimbledonto-day, to mix my joy with Mrs. Dixon's, who hasall the trophies of victory, such as handbills, ballads,&c. to adorn your kitchen, and your boy. I hope youwill have a worthy successor in the person of SpencerStanhope. I have seen Manners, who has no thoughtof standing, and will write to his friends in favour ofStanhope. I hope his accomplishments cannot fail toconciliate the previous confidence necessary for yoursanction.Ever yours,W. PITT.P. S. Westminster goes on well, in spite of theDuchess of Devonshire, and the other iwmen of thepeople, but when the poll will close is uncertain."64 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1784.Thus was accomplished this great triumph ofindependent principles. Its effect upon the greatstruggle then at issue was not less important. "Numbersof members have confessed to me," writes Mr.Duncombe, 17 " that they owed their success in theirown counties to the example set by ours." By it, andnearly two hundred other victories over the adherentsof the coalition party, Mr. Pitt became as strong inthe House of Commons, as he had been hitherto inthe affections of the people. " He was then able,"says Mr. Wilberforce, " if he had duly estimated hisposition, to have cast off the corrupt machinery ofinfluence, and formed his government upon the basisof independent principle." The issue of the Yorkshirecontest might have suggested the possibility ofsuch an effort. Its result was altogether new andunexpected. The return of a candidate who cameforward upon ground which none had taken heretofore,was an intimation of that power, with whichintelligence and property had now armed the middleranks of society. As the man of the middle classes,he took his place in public life ; as their representative,he was opposed alike to party influence and democraticlicence ; as their representative, he demandedand obtained the Abolition of the Slave Trade.7 To W. Wilberforce, Esq. 1789.CHAPTER IV.APRIL 1784 TO APRIL 1786.Takes his seat for Yorkshire Travels to Nice with IsaacMilner His stay there Return to London Session ofParliament Parliamentary reform Return to the continentGenoa Geneva Lavater Spa Gradual change in hisprinciples.AFTER a hasty tour hi Devonshire, Mr. Wilberforcereached London upon the 14th of May, and took hisseat in parliament, as member for the county of York.He possessed already enough to intoxicate his mind,whilst prospects of gratified ambition seemed to openwithout limit before him. He attended constantlythrough the first session of the new parliament, andswelled the triumphant majorities, which secured thesupremacy of his friend. Upon the prorogation ofparliament, he went down into the north, and presentinghimself at York as " the joy" of the races, spenthis twenty-fifth birth-day at the top wave and highestflow of those frivolous amusements, which had Swallowedup so large a portion of his youth. Yet at thisvery time the providence of God was guiding himinto that path which issued in his altered character.66 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1784.Whilst at York, he proposed to his friend, W.Burgh, to become his companion in a continentaltour. To his great surprise the offer was declined ;and being thrown soon afterwards at Scarboroughinto the company of Isaac Milner, the invitation wastransferred to him. His strong sense and well furnishedmind recommended him as an agreeable companion; but little could either party then imagine thegracious purpose for which this choice was ordered.After a hasty visit to Westmoreland, and " lookingagain on all the old scenes with vast pleasure," 1 hestarted for the continent upon the 20th of October.One carriage was occupied by Isaac Milner and himself,whilst in another followed his mother, sister, andtwo female relatives. Crossing France to Lyonsthey embarked upon the Rhone ; and whilst droppingdown its stream to Avignon, " a voyage of four daysunder a cloudless sky," he writes from " just in sightof Valence,TO LORD Lancaster, Lancaster CASTLE,CUMBERLAND.My dear Lancaster,With much labour and difficulty, by trying everypossible half hour when my eyes would bear writing,I have at last completely got through the answers toall my letters of business, which were accumulatinginto an immense heap on my table in Breton Street,whilst I was muttering my wayward fancies on theDiary, Sept. 19.1784. LETTER TO LORD Lancaster. 67banks of Windermere ; and which, to my sore annoyanceand discomfort, I have brought in my chaise intothe heart of France. At last they are gone, and thedevil go with them. 2 For the first time since I havebeen out, I now take up my pen without reluctance, togive you a little account of my proceedings since weparted at the foot of Hardknot. 3I staid at Rayrigg a very few days, exploring everyquarter, in order to select some spot for my future residence,blest with a more than common share of beauty ;but though I saw several where I could be content tofix myself, if the eye alone were to be consulted in thechoice, yet as long as one lives in this gross world onemust have regard to matters of a more ignoble kind,and a less refined nature. Some situations wererejected because I should be too far from Kendalmarket, others because of their distance from thegreat boat ; and at last, after a most accurate examinationof the whole lake, I left the country withoutdeciding any thing, but sorely sinning againstthat commandment which forbids our coveting ourneighbour's house ; for near Cathay Bridge there isa field which is in all respects supereminent, butwhich, as it is very near the house of the gentlemanwho lately bought the Cathay estate, I have no hopesof being able to purchase, except upon one ground,that, I mean, of the owner's being insensible to itsvalue ; a conclusion to which one is naturally led,The propriety of inserting this letter unaltered will be manifest fromthe sequel.3 A mountain in Eskdale.68 LIFE OP WILBERFORCE. 1784.when one recollects how pure white he has made thebridge; and though in all cases I now agree withLady Lancaster, that grey is better, yet I don't knowif to gain Mr. Law's consent to sell me his field, Ishould not be induced to promise him to make myhouse, stables, and every foot of building about measwhite as white can be. Well, after leaving WestmorelandI repaired to London, and spent about tendays in that neighbourhood, chiefly vibrating betweenWimbledon and Brighthelmstone, and preparing formy journey into foreign parts, where I have beenproceeding by slow marches ever since, with mymother, a couple of sick cousins, very good girls,whose health we hope to re-establish by the changeof air, and a most intelligent and excellent friend ofmine, a tutor of a college in Cambridge, whose wig Isee excites no small astonishment in the Gallicperruquiers : he has equipped himself, however, withone of a smaller size, which he is to put on when wefix. At present we are sitting in our carriage in aboat, and driving down the Rhone to Avignon. Thescenes are more romantic and wonderful than any onecan conceive, except an inhabitant of Cumberland;and in truth, they are so like your north country, thatmy thoughts would naturally recur to Eskdale, fromthe similarity of the surrounding objects, if they hadnought else to lead them thither ; but this, my dearLancaster, you will do me the justice to believe, is notthe case ; and I assure you I have often been lookingout of your window, when you have not seen me, and1784. LETTER TO LORD Manchester. 69been endeavouring thus to live over again the pleasantdays I passed with you in Cumberland. I frequentlyramble in the wood, and I assure you I approve ofyour alteration in front, even more than I expected ;for it does still better in theory than in practice. You,I suppose, are about this time encountering a moreformidable antagonist, and if you are not a bettersailor than myself, who was desperately sick betweenDover and Calais though in the finest morning I everbeheld, you are sincerely to be pitied in your passageacross the Irish Channel. When you get across, I hopeyour troubles will be over ; 4 and it will give me pleasureto learn this from you on two grounds, both because Ishall conclude your private concerns are brought to adesirable issue, and I shall hope that public mattersare in a better train than when they were last thesubject of our conversation. The coelum non animalmutant is strictly true with respect to me ; for thoughI am five hundred miles from the white cliffs of Albion,yet I do not feel my anxiety diminished either forthe General' 3 or the other friends I have left behindme : I beg you will bear this in your mind, and satisfyme of the existence and well-being of one of them.You have no excuse, whose eyes are as stout as therest of your carcass ; and a book on one's knee is as4 Lord Lancaster had some claim upon the Irish property of Lordwhich, owing to the uncertain administration of justice in thatcountry, he had not been able to enforce. In the hope of obtaining hisright through the possession of a seat in the Irish House of Lords, hehad obtained his peerage ; and about this time happily succeeded.Mr. Pitt.70 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1784.good a writing-table as a plank put through the forewindow of the post chaise. I shall direct to you atLancaster, where if you are, I beg my best remembrancesto Lady M. and my little friends, Camel andPenny. Believe me, dear Lancaster,Yours very sincerely,Nov. 12, 1781. W. WILBERFORCE."Wednesday, Nov. 10th. Off," says his Diary, " bywater on the Rhone. Boat very inconvenient; butsat comfortably enough in our carriages, and decentinns at moderate distances from each other, close tothe water ; but beware of the coche d'eau, which fillsthe house with a sad crew, and often takes it entirelyup. Our weather delightful the whole time, and thescenes uncommonly beautiful : the river running betweentwo mountains be-dined, and immense rockswith towers on their pinnacles ; and at a distance theSavoy mountains : finest at Rivers, and near Valence.Three miles from the first, Rosamond, an old castleon a pinnacle : climbed him, and had a tremendousview of a chasm. Stones seemed to have been fused.Without wind, one makes four or five miles an hour ;with it strong against you, can't get on at all. Ourboat held three carriages, and ten of us : for it wepaid sixteen louis, and two to the men for themselves.The plains by the side planted with mulberry treesfor the silk-worms. The wines, Cote Rote, Hermitage,&c. all strong. The coche d'eau, a good boatwith a room in it, may be hired for twenty-five louis.1784. JOURNEY TO NICE. 71If you do not take it to yourself it would be likea Margate hoy. Beautifully situated convent ofRivers."Afternoon of Sunday, 14th. Got to Avignon. . . Thesalt for the Lyonnois, and many other provinces, goesup the Rhone in great boats drawn by horses fromAries, where it is made. . . The place sweetly situated,but a most dirty hole ; particularly our inn, the St.Omens. A crew of fellows to receive us at landing,and drag our carriage to the inn, more like ourcountrymen in the brutality of their manners than thegenerality of supple Frenchmen, who always makeyou a bow where an Englishman would give youan oath. Laura's tomb not worth seeing : nothingbut a flat stone under which they say she is laid.Left Avignon 16th Nov. and by a hard journey throughbad roads, where have been robberies, (scene in TonyBumpkin realized,) to Aix ; and for want of horses,could not get off the next day. Walked about thetown a large, quiet, sleepy one. Good baths. Thehot water at fountains in the public street. 18th, toMarseilles. The last half of the way execrable road.Whilst there, lived most with Governor S., Lord Chatham's' Man of Steel'. . His extraordinary facultiesof hearing, seeing, smelling, tasting, feeling heardat five miles off, &c. The earnest man living greatin getting, philosophy, politics can smell the windwithal, a very shrewd fellow of a very indifferentcharacter, and suspected to be a spy. . . Marseillesthe most entertaining place I ever saw, all bustle and72 LIFE OF Wilberforce. 1784.business ; the port wonderful, and the dock thelargest in Europe. Fine market the course thecastle ; and that built by Louis XIV. by a strokeof policy, commanding the harbour. Coral necklacesof 1000 value easy process got on theAlgerine shore, and merely rubbed into beads. (Thepictures of the plague in the Town Hall LazarettoIsle dieu, where your young prodigals are confined onthe application of their parents to the court : notso much in use as formerly ; they live on a moderateallowance, but are always on the island.) Left Marseilles,26th, for Toulon astonishing rocks hewnthrough, and ready to close over you, at Olioullesfirst oranges just after about twenty ships of the linewould not let us see the dock said 3000 peopleat work 27th, neglected Haeres and its orangegroves 28th, to Frejus 29th, Antibes 30th, Nicethe whole of Provence abounding in aromaticsof all kinds : roads hitherto very bad dusky olivesstriking view from the Estrelles formerly infested bybanditti trees cut down near the road to prevent theirsudden attack the country more delightful than canbe imagined every thing to constitute beauties ofprospect, but rivers and verdure the olives too almostthe only wood except where you have pines."Here they were soon settled " in a house separatedfrom the Mediterranean only by a grove of orangetrees," and found themselves surrounded by many ofthe higher ranks of their own countrymen. " Dukeof Gloucester, Lady Rivers, and G. Pitt, Sir I.1784. NICE. 73Wrought, Banquet, Duchess of Ancaster andLady Charlotte, &c. here the commandant Comtede St. Andre, and the Comte de Revel, and Chevalierde Revel, extremely obliging to the English." 5The natives were in general a wretched set severalof them, however, poor noblesse. There were nightlycard parties at the different houses, and a great dealof gambling. The most respectable person amongstthem was the Chevalier de Revel : he spoke Englishwell, and was a great favourite of Frederic North's,who was then at Nice in a very nervous state, andgiving entire credit to the animal magnetized. Thechief operator, M. Toalag, tried his skill on Milnerand myself, but neither of us felt any thing, owingperhaps to our incredulity. North, on the contrary,would fall down upon entering a room in which theypractised on him ; and he even maintained to me,that they could affect the frame though in anotherroom, or at a distance, and you were ignorant of theirproceedings." 6 " Staid here till Feb. 3rd 7 dinedfrequently in the open air during the last three weeksrode before breakfast till Christmas day the climateextremely changeable the fineness of it seems to beowing to the sun and the mountains, which, makinga complete basin, reflect his rays in all possible intersectionsand reverberations, until the air is so warmedas to dry up every particle of moisture never once afog before I left it, beans in flower, and almond treesin general (argument respecting sun making up toDiary. 6 MS. Mm. 7 Diary.VOL. I. E74 LIFE OP WILBERFORCE. 1784.tender plants for frost drawn from the orange trees, peas,carnations) all the country flat round Nice a gardenwith olives in it terraces raised by the hills veryvaluable the hills filled with myrtle, lentiscus, rosemary,thyme, lavender, and all our garden aromatics.It must be a bad place for consumptive persons, butgood for convalescents, who will be very cautious, asthey may take air every day country soon dry afterrain ; and the rides and walks so various, if you willquit the muddy Var road, that if you stay six monthsyou may have variety. It is safest to ride a mule, bothon account of their sure-goodness, and because themules will attack horses, particularly the savage Turin-roadmules, which are large and powerful animals,some seventeen hands high, surprisingly sure-footed,and patient of hunger and hardship the universal carriers.Roads good for horses ; but not for carriagesexcept two miles on the Turin and four on the Var road.Smuggling carried on from Nice, Genoa, and Leghorn,of French wines. Lived in the Pavilion Houserode out with Milner, and saw the country dinedearly, and to bed. Out at assemblies and ballsfrequently. Gave dinners often."In all these scenes he was constantly accompaniedby Milner, whose vivacity and sense, joined with rusticand unpolished manners, continually amused his friends.Pretty boy, pretty boy," uttered in the broadestYorkshire dialect, whilst he stroked familiarly hishead, was the mode in which he first addressed theyoung Prince William of Gloucester. " Though1784. ISAAC Miller. 15Milner's religious principles were even now, in theory,much the same as in later life, yet they had at thistime little practical effect upon his conduct. Hewas free from every taint of vice but not more attentivethan others to religion ; " 8 (though a clergyman, henever thought of reading prayers during their wholestay at Nice ;) " he appeared in all respects like anordinary man of the world, mixing like myself in allcompanies, and joining as readily as others in theprevalent Sunday parties. Indeed, when I engagedhim as a companion in my tour, I knew not that hehad any deeper principles. The first time I discoveredit, was at the public table at Scarborough. The conversationturned on Mr. Stillingfleet; 9 and I spoke ofhim as a good man, but one who carried things too far.Not a bit too far,' said Milner ; and to this opinionhe adhered, when we renewed the conversation in theevening on the sands. This declaration greatly surprisedme ; and it was agreed that at some future timewe would talk the matter over. Had I known at firstwhat his opinions were, it would have decided meagainst making him the offer ; so true is it that agracious hand leads us in ways that we know not, andblesses us not only without, but even against, our plansand inclinations." 10 The imperfect recollection whichhe now retained of what he had seen and felt, whenbeneath his uncle's roof at Wimbledon, made himthe more ready to condemn, as extravagance and8 MS. Mem. 9 Rev. I. Stillingfleet, rector of Hutham.10 MS. Mem.E 276 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1785.methodism, all serious attention to religion ; and thistendency had doubtless been increased by his attendanceat Mr. Lindsey's meeting, which he frequented,not from any preference for his peculiar doctrines,for in this, except on some great festivals, his preachingdiffered little from that which was then commonamongst the London clergy, but because he seemedmore earnest and practical than others." n Milner, onthe contrary, though deficient in practical religion,knew enough to regard it with reverence in others,and whenever his lively companion treated it withraillery, would seriously combat his objections, adding,I am no match for you, Wilberforce, in this runningfire, but if you really wish to discuss these subjectsseriously, I will gladly enter on them with you." Nogreat impression could be expected on another fromreasonings which so little influenced himself; andtheir discussions appear to have been merely speculativeup to the period of their quitting Nice inthe winter of 1784-5. Just before this journey,Mr. Wilberforce took up casually a little volume,(Doddridge's Rise and Progress of Religion,) whichMr. Unwin, Cowper's correspondent, had given tothe mother of one amongst his fellow-travellers, andcasting his eye over it hastily, asked Milner what wasits character. " It is one of the best books everwritten," was his answer ; " let us take it with us andread it on our journey." He easily consented, and theyread it carefully together, with thus much effect, that11 Con. Mem.1785. PARLIAMENTARY REFORM. 77he determined at some future season to examine theScriptures for himself, and see if things were statedthere in the same manner. In this journey he wasalone with Milner.Leaving his family at Nice, he returned to supportthe cause of parliamentary reform. " As there canbe no doubt' wrote Mr. Robert Smith, " of the administrationbeing very strong at the opening of thesession, on Jan. 25th, I do not see the least necessityfor your being at home at that time, but I think youought not, if possible, to be absent on the great questionof Parliamentary Reform, which Pitt now publiclydeclares he will bring on early in the session. It is aspecific proposition to increase the county members,with a plan for diminishing the number of the rottenboroughs. Pitt declares that he will exert his influenceto the uttermost in this measure. Wyvill is in townand all the reformers are stirring." Late in January heheard from Mr. Pitt that a day was fixed for thediscussion of the motion, and he set out at once togive it his support. The journey across France at thatseason of the year was not then accomplished withoutsome risks. Leaving 'summer behind them at Nice,they travelled from Antibes, through eighteen days ofsnow. Once upon the hills of Burgundy, as theyclimbed a frozen road, the weight of their carriageoverpowered the horses, and it was just running overa frightful precipice, when Milner, who was walkingbehind, perceived the danger, and by a sudden effortof his great strength of muscle arrested its descent.78 LIFE OF Wilberforce. 1785.They reached Dartford about midnight, (Feb. 21st,)and heard that they might still be soon enough for theexpected division of that morning upon the Westminsterelection, but he would not go on. The nextday, (Feb. 22nd,) he reached London, " and foundthat government had barely carried it. Took up myquarters at Pitt's. 24th. Allotted into Penryn committeePitt's maid burnt my letters" 12 a dangerousmistake to the young representative of Yorkshire.March 3rd. Cambridge's motion to discontinue thescrutiny carried by thirty-nine, and opposition inhigh spirits sat late did not vote. 10th. DinedCamelford's ' Pitt does not make friends.' llth.Our committee wanted to explain away its Resolutionssad quarrelling all the time between Wind-barnand Barber Gascony the two nominees."- Mr.Pitt's motion for Reform was fixed for the 23rd ofMarch, when, says Mr. Wilberforce's Diary, " Pitt'sReform put ois for want of a ballot." They were nowclosely engaged in perfecting its details. " At Pitt'sall day it goes on well sat up late chatting withPitt his good hopes of the country, and noble,patriotic heart. To town Pitt's House ParliamentaryReform terribly disappointed and beatextremely fatigued spoke extremely ill, but commended.13 Called at Pitt's met poor Wyvill." 14He was attacked in this debate by Mr. Fox, foradopting a tone which would not gain the House ofCommons to his views. But he would not suppress>* Diary. Ib. April 18. Ib. 19.1785. PARLIAMENTARY REFORM. 79these sentiments out of deference to any class of men.The consequence of this measure' he said, " willhe that the freedom of opinion will be restored, andparty connexions in great measure vanish ; for partyon one side begets party on the other, and for myselfI wish to give my vote not with a view to men, butmeasures." Ever since the days of Walpole partyconnexions had led to purchased support. With thissystem he believed that Mr. Pitt, even as it was, mighthave dispensed ; and the present measure would haveinsured its destruction. Civil and still more ecclesiasticalappointments would no longer have beenregarded as materials of parliamentary influence,while faction in the country would have been preventedby making property the condition of power.During the remainder of the session he attended constantlyin his place, and took part occasionally in thedebates. " May 12th. House all night, till eight o'clockin the morning Lord Surrey differ from constituentsso affected that I could not get on Pitt spoke wonderfully."" House spoke but cannot preserve the trainas some could do, and too hot and violent." 15 He stilllived in a constant round of company and amusement,dining twice or three times a week with Mr. Pittjoining in the festivities in which Dundas delightedat Wimbledon and Richmond ; whilst " sitting up allnight singing shirked Duchess of Gordon, at alack'sdanced till five in the morning;" are fairsamples of the common descriptions of his days. YetDiary, May 19.80 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1785.already, amongst these lighter memorials, there appearsfrom time to time a new tone of deeper feeling.Dined Hamilton's christening very indecent alllaughing round. 16 Opera shocking dance of Festinde Pierre, and unmoved audience. 17 S. and I talkedstrange that the most generous men and religious,do not see that their duties increase with theirfortune, and that they will be punished for spending itin eating, &c. 18 Sir G. Beaumont and Lady Phipps,&c. to dine with me at Wimbledon Phipps's chat fromLocke to New Testament." But these thoughts wereas yet entirely speculative ; exercising no apparentinfluence upon his conduct. The session which hadbeen expected to terminate in May, was not concludedat the end of June, and before he could leave town onhis return to Provence the increasing heat of summerhad emptied Nice. " The beau monde," wrote Mrs.Wilberforce, 19 " are removing to summer quarters.Lady Lindsay took her leave at a ball, in her ownhouse, last night. The Buckles, Winnings, LordBarnard, Grosvenor, Farewell, and Banquet are gone.The Duchess of Ancaster and Lady Charlotte departtomorrow for Montpelier. In consequence of theserevolutions our evening meetings are thin. I grieve atthe necessity of your stay on all accounts"' " TheDuke of Gloucester and his family purpose halting thisday at Montpelier, and fixing at Geneva for the summer.Observe, we do not wish their neighbourhoodmuch ceremony and little pleasure might be the16 Diary, April 4. v Ib. April 14. " Ib. April 19. l9 April 1.1785. LETTER FROM HIS SISTER. 81consequence. The Duchess took a gracious leave,desired her compliments to you, and hoped that wemight meet in Switzerland. None of us have anyfear of travelling under La Plume's care ; we can proceedto any place you shall appoint." 20 " I hope tocheer you' adds his sister, " by the assurance that B.rides out with unfailing perseverance. M. has voiceenough to abuse the wood-cutter audibly, and if mylife and conversation were put into the Diary, goodhours would make some figure. B. certainly gainsstrength ; for a few days she was prevented from ridingby the lameness of her pony, but now she and thegay La Plume again sally forth. The Duchess ofAncaster is gone. O. was one of her great attendantsin my opinion a very disagreeable man. When inspiritshe laughs and is pert, and reminds me of a dogin a sunshiny day after rainy weather, who upon beinglet out of doors shakes his head, wags his tail, andlooks brisk. If your arrival is delayed, fix upon anyplace for us to go to, and with one who has travelledas much as La Plume, joined to our own experience,we may do very comfortably." Genoa was fixed onfor their rendezvous ; and thither they were adventurousenough to sail in a felucca under the sole escortof their courier. Here they were joined by Mr.Wilberforce and I. Milner, upon the 7th of July, andon the llth set out together on their road to Switzerland.They travelled as in their former journey, andthe conversation between Mr. Wilberforce and Milner*> May 6.E 382 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1785.became more important than before. They began, asMilner had proposed, to read the Greek Testament,and to examine carefully the doctrines which it taught.From Genoa they went by Turin to Geneva, and fellin there with several of their English friends. 21 " Metwith Wyvill at Miss Darby's, and returned with him ;he deep in the constitution of Geneva. Often withRyder, who shows his understanding by his curiosity :he will make a figure." 22 " De Lageard dined andWyvill dispute about government Lavater, anoriginal looking man with appearance of strong animation,which increased by being distressed for languageDe Lageard at him immediately and disputing Tissota Petite, and most here the same." 23 "De Lageardwith us again a great deal of eloquence seems notso sanguine in his prospects Queen likes not clergy.Evening fine and sun on rocks Lord Spencer calledStories about Lavater's miracles, and Baron Swedenborg."From Geneva the party passed on to Berne,whence he wrote playfully to his friend in Cumberland.TO LORD Lancaster.Berne, 14th Aug. 1785.Dear Lancaster,That a man who has been for the last weekenvironed by eternal snows, and hemmed in by theShreckhorn, and the Wetterhorn, and the Jungfrau,should stoop to take notice of a grovelling being, who41 Diary, July 22. ** Ib. Aug. 3.Ib. Aug. 7.1785. LETTER TO LORD Lancaster. 83crawls along the level surface of the county of Cumberland,is an instance of genuine steadiness and equalserenity of temper, which will not pass unobservedand admired before so accurate an observer asyourself. Yet I dare say you think yourself mostmagnificent, with your Hardknot and Wrynose, anddiscover in your Lilliput, risings and fallings invisibleto the grosser organs of the inhabitant of Brooding.If you read on thus far, I am sure your patience willhold out no longer, and my letter goes into the fire,which in your cold part of the world you will certainlybe sitting over when my packet arrives, about the endof the month. You then go to Lady Lancaster, andwith a glance on your sevenfold shield, on whichthe setting sun is gleaming with a brilliancy whichwould throw a stoic into raptures, you lament over measa poor, infatuated, perverted renegade, ' false to mygods, my country, and my father. 5 The greatestpunishment your old regard will suffer you to inflicton me, will be a perpetual condemnation to breathethe air of the House of Commons and to have noother ideas of a country prospect, or a country life,than can be collected from a stare from Richmondhill, or a dinner at the Star and Garter. No,Lancaster, I am no renegade. True to my first love,a long and intimate acquaintance has made me find outso many excellences and perfections that my affectionsare not to be changed, though in the course of my travelsT see a fairer face, or a more exquisite symmetry,'Tis the dear, the blest effect of Celia altogether.'84 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1785.If therefore you should hear of my taking a countryhouse in one of the Swiss cantons, don't take it forgranted that I have forgot the land of promise. Allownow and then a transient infidelity ; my constancyshall be unshaken to my time Dulcinea. * These aremy visits, but she is my home.'But to drop all metaphor, I have never been in anyother part of the world, for which I could quit a residencein England with so little regret : God grant thatthe public and private state of our own country maynever reduce it to such a situation as to give this thepreference in my esteem. At present I have the sameunalterable affection for Old England, founded as Ithink in reason, or as foreigners would tell me, in prejudice; but I feel sometimes infected with a little ofyour own anxiety ; I fancy I see storms arising, whichalready ' no bigger than a man's hand,' will by and byoverspread and blacken the whole face of heaven. Itis not the confusion of parties, and their quarrelling andbattling in the House of Commons, which makes medespair of the republic, (if I knew a word half waybetween ' apprehend for' and 'despair,' that wouldbest express my meaning,) but it is the universalcorruption and profligacy of the times, which takingits rise amongst the rich and luxurious has nowextended its baneful influence and spread its destructivepoison through the whole body of the people.When the mass of blood is corrupt, there is no remedybut amputation.I beg my best remembrances to Lady Lancaster, and1785. Latter. 85my little friends, Penny and Gam. Tell the latter ifhe will meet me at Spa, I will turn him into a pancakeas often as he will.Believe me to beever yours most affectionately,W. Wilberforce."Upon the 12th he went on to 24 " the paradise ofInterlaced," upon " a heavenly day, with not onecloud above the horizon." Upon the 13th theywere " in a terrible squall of wind and rain uponthe lake of Thun run ashore ; at last safe in atThun, and got to the fire, wet and knocked up. 14th.Ladies had caught no cold fright their great coat."Upon the 20th they reached Zurich, and on the 21stSaw Lavater He says that the English areremarkable for smooth foreheads, and strong-markedeye-brows. We called upon him in the evening hecould give us he said only half an hour, but we got himon the subject; his supposed revelations . . physiognomyhe dismissed as not serious enough to be mentionedin comparison . . and he said, on our offering to go,such a conversation as that not to be broken off itwould be to go against Providence strange storiesforty guineas revelation his papers prevented beingdiscovered." ^ "I had been chosen treasurer," saidLavater, " of a certain charitable institution, and hadreceived the funds subscribed for its conduct, when afriend came in great distress, and begged me to advance*< Diary. Ib.86 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1785.him a sum of money to save him from bankruptcy. ' Youshould have it at once, but I have no such sum.' ' Youhave the charity fund in your power ; lend me what Ineed from that : long before the day comes on whichyou must pay it over, I shall be able to replace it, andyou will save me and mine from ruin.' At last Ireluctantly consented. His hopes, as I had foreseen,were disappointed; he could not repay me; and onthe morrow I must give in my accounts. In anagony of feelings, I prayed earnestly that some way ofescaping from my difficulties might yet present itself,that I might be saved from disgracing religion bysuch an apparent dishonesty. I rose from my knees,and in the nervous restlessness of a harassed mind,began to pull open every drawer I had, and ransack itscontents. Why I did it I know not, but whilst I wasthus engaged, my eye caught a small paper parcel, tothe appearance of which I was a stranger. I opened it,I took it up, and found that it contained money : Itore it open, and found in it the sum I needed to settlemy accounts. But how it came there, or where itcame from, I could never learn." 26 " Child spoke forwhom he had prayed on christening. san excellent manin his whole conduct kissed us with extreme affection,and said, if he received any thing we should too. He andmany others ardently look for the coming of some ' Elu,'who is to impart to them a large measure of grace. Hewill know the ' Elu' the moment he sets eyes on him. 28*> Conversant. Mem. w Diary, Aug. 22.48 " Milner subsequently endeavoured to reclaim Lavater from hismystical nations, by a Latin letter, in the composition of which he took1785. DISCUSSIONS WITH ISAAC Miller. 87"24th. Schaffhausen falls of Rhine birth-day.Then off and got to Waldshut ball at nightcurious couples, and dance 26th. Brisac town ofwar soldiers did not inarch so well as ours grandreview of horse ; very strong, but not quick or activein their evolutions as our own. Review of artillerybombs cannons they hit very ill." Travellingon by easy stages he reached Spa upon the 8th ofSeptember.His discussions with Isaac Milner were continuedthroughout this journey, until "by degrees 29 1 imbibedhis sentiments, though I must confess with shame, thatthey long remained merely as opinions assented to bymy understanding, but not influencing my heart. Myinterest in them certainly increased, and at length Ibegan to be impressed with a sense of their importance.Milner, though full of levity on all other subjects, neverspoke on this but with the utmost seriousness, and allhe said, tended to increase my attention to religion."So interesting were these conversations now becometo him, that his fellow-travellers complained of theinfrequency of his visits to their carriage. In thisstate of feeling he arrived at Spa, and spent almost sixweeks in that " curious assemblage from all parts ofEurope." Amongst the rest were many of his Englishfriends ; and though on some few points he now con-vastpains. 'I am a poor man," Lavater briefly replied, 'and thepostage of long letters is inconvenient to me.' " Con. Mem. In otherquarters, however, Lavater's correspondence was considerable. Vit,Goethe, Dictum und Wahrheit.MS. Mem.88 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1785.traversed their opinions, yet in general he joined freelyin their ordinary pleasures. " Mrs. Crewe," he says,cannot believe that I can think it wrong to go to theplay. Surprised at hearing that halting on theSunday was my wish, and not my mother's." Yetthough his outward appearance gave little evidence oftheir existence, deeper feelings were at work beneath.so Often while in the full enjoyment of all that thisworld could bestow, my conscience told me that in thetrue sense of the word, I was not a Christian. Ilaughed, I sang, I was apparently gay and happy, butthe thought would steal across me, < What madness isall this ; to continue easy in a state in which a suddencall out of the world would consign me to everlastingmisery, and that, when eternal happiness is within mygrasp ! ' For I had received into my understanding thegreat truths of the gospel, and believed that its offerswere free and universal ; and that God had promisedto give his Holy Spirit to them that asked for it. Atlength such thoughts as these completely occupied mymind, and I began to pray earnestly." " Began threeor four days ago," he says, 31 Oct. 25th, " to get up veryearly. In the solitude and self-conversation of themorning had thoughts, which I trust will come tosomething." " As soon as I reflected seriously uponthese subjects, the deep guilt and black ingratitude ofmy past life forced itself upon me in the strongestcolours, and I condemned myself for having wastedmy precious time, and opportunities, and talents."30 Mem. of Conversation ; and MS. Mem. 31 Diary,1785. RETURN HOME. 89Thus he returned home ; another man in his innerbeing, yet manifesting outwardly so little of the hiddenstruggle, " that it was not," says one of his companions,until many months after our return, that I learnedwhat had been passing in his mind."Upon the 10th of November he reached Wimbledon,and as parliament did not meet until the followingFebruary, he was much alone and had leisure tocommune with himself. The more he reflected, thedeeper became his new impressions. " It was not somuch," he has said, " the fear of punishment by whichI was affected, as a sense of my great sinfulness inhaving so long neglected the unspeakable mercies ofmy God and Saviour ; and such was the effect whichthis thought produced, that for months I was in astate of the deepest depression, from strong convictionsof my guilt. Indeed nothing which I have ever readin the accounts of others, exceeded what I then felt." KThese were now his habitual feelings ; carefullyconcealed from others, and in some measure nodoubt dispelled by company, but reviving in theirfull force as soon as he retired into himself.Whilst this struggle was at its height, he commenceda private Journal, with the view of makinghimself " humble, and watchful." 33 The entries of thisprivate record mark the difficulties and variations ofhis mind, while they show strikingly the spirit ofpractical improvement by which he was directed.Nov. 24th. Heard the Bible read two hoursCon. Mem. 33 Journal, Nov. 21.90 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1785.Pascal one hour and a quarter meditation one hourand a quarter business the same. If ever I takemyself from the immediate consideration of seriousthings, I entirely lose sight of them ; this must be alesson to me to keep them constantly in view. Pittcalled, and commended Butler's Analogy resolved towrite to him, and discover to him what I am occupiedabout : this will save me much embarrassment, and Ihope give me more command both of my time andconduct'25th. Up at six private devotions half an hourPascal three quarters to town on business. I feelquite giddy and distracted by the tumult, except whenin situations of which I am rather ashamed, as inthe stage coach : the shame, pride ; but a usefullesson. St. Anthony's Mr. Forster's felt muchdevotion, and wondered at a man who fell asleepduring the Psalms : during the sermon I fell asleepmyself. Walked, and stage coach, to save theexpense of a chaise.26th. Went out early wrote to S. and got hisanswer, very affectionate and kind, God bless himrefused to go to Camden Place, and to Pitt's; butall religious thoughts go off in London I hope byexplaining my situation and feelings, to relieve myselffrom my embarrassment.Sunday, 27th. Up at six devotions half an hourPascal three quarters Butler three quarterschurch read the Bible, too tremblingly, for an hourheard Butler, but not attentively, two hours1785. JOURNAL. 91meditated twenty minutes hope I was more attentiveat church than usual, but serious thoughts vanishedthe moment I went out of it, and very insensible andcold in the evening service some very strong feelingswhen I went to bed; God turn them to account, and inany way bring me to himself. I have been thinking Ihave been doing well by living alone, and readinggenerally on religious subjects ; I must awake to mydangerous state, and never be at rest till I have mademy peace with God. My heart is so hard, my blindnessso great, that I cannot get a due hatred of sin,though I see I am all corrupt, and blinded to theperception of spiritual things.28th. I hope as long as I live to be the better forthe meditation of this evening ; it was on the sinfulnessof my own heart, and its blindness and weakness.True, Lord, I am wretched, and miserable, and blind,and naked. What infinite love, that Christ should dieto save such a sinner, and how necessary is it Heshould save us altogether, that we may appear beforeGod with nothing of our own ! God grant I maynot deceive myself, in thinking I feel the beginningsof gospel comfort. Began this night constant familyprayer, and resolved to have it every morning andevening, and to read a chapter when time.Tuesday, 29th. I bless God I enjoyed comfortin prayer this evening. I must keep my own unworthinessever in view. Pride is my greatest ; and there is danger in it in two ways lestit should make me desist from a Christian life, through92 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1785.fear of the world, my friends, &c. ; or if I persevere,lest it should make me vain of so doing. In alldisputes on religion, I must be particularly on myguard to distinguish it from a zeal for God and hiscause. I must consider and set down the marks wherebythey may be known from each other. I will form aplan of my particular duty, praying God to enable meto do it properly, and set it before me as a chart of thecountry, and map of the road I must travel. Everymorning some subject of thought for the hours ofwalking, lounging, &c. if alone.Nov. 30th. Was very fervent in prayer thismorning, and thought these warm impressions wouldnever go off. Yet in vain endeavoured in the eveningto rouse myself. God grant it may not all prove vain ;oh if it does, how will my punishment be deservedlyincreased ! The only way I find of moving myself, isby thinking of my great transgressions, weakness,blindness, and of God's having promised to supplythese defects. But though I firmly believe them,yet I read of future judgment, and think of God'swrath against sinners, with no great emotions. Whatcan so strongly show the stony heart ? O God, giveme a heart of flesh ! Nothing so convinces me of thedreadful state of my own mind, as the possibility,which, if I did not know it from experience, I shouldbelieve impossible, of my being ashamed of Christ.Ashamed of the Creator of all things ! One whohas received infinite pardon and mercy, ashamed ofthe Dispenser of it, and that in a country where his1785. JOURNAL. 93name is professed ! Oh, what should I have done inpersecuting times ? (Forgot to set down that whenmy servants came in the first time to family prayer,I felt ashamed)"I thought seriously this evening of going to conversewith Mr. Newton waked in the night obligedto compel myself to think of God."Dec. 2nd, Resolved again about Mr. Newton. Itmay do good ; he will pray for me ; his experience mayenable him to direct me to new grounds of humiliation,and it is that only which I can perceive God's Spiritemploy to any effect. It can do no harm, for that is ascandalous objection which keeps occurring to me,that if ever my sentiments change, Shall be ashamedof having done it : it can only humble me, and, whateveris the right way, if truth be right I ought to behumbled but, sentiments change ! Kept debatingin that unsettled way to which I have used myself,whether to go to London or not, and then how wishingto save expense, I hope with a good motive, wentat last in the stage to town inquired for old Newton ;but found he lived too far off for me to see himlingered till time to go to Mr. Forster's much struckwith [the text, 2 Chron. xv. 2 afterwards walkedhome."He now began to open to his friends the changewhich had passed upon him. His own way he hopedwould be clearer when his principles were understood ;and the frank avowal of his altered views was due tothose with whom he had lived hitherto in levity and94 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1785.thoughtlessness. Some treated this announcement asthe effect of a temporary depression, which social intercoursewould soon relieve ; one threw angrily his letterin the fire ; others knowing that his past life had notbeen vicious, imagined that he could but turn ascetic,and regretted their expected loss of his social accomplishmentsand political assistance. He wrote toMr. Pitt amongst the rest ; opening fully the groundson which he acted, and the bearing of his new principlesupon his public conduct " I told him that thoughI should ever feel a strong affection for him, and hadevery reason to believe that I should be in generalable to support him, yet that I could no more be somuch a party man as I had been before." 34 On the2nd of December " I got," he says, " Pitt's answermuch affected by it to see him in the morning." 35It was full of kindness nothing I had told him, hesaid, could affect our friendship ; that he wished mealways to act as I thought right. I had said that Ithought when we met we had better not discuss thetopics of my letter. ' Why not discuss them ? ' was hisanswer ; ' let me come to Wimbledon tomorrow, totalk them over with you.' He thought that I was outof spirits, and that company and conversation wouldbe the best way of dissipating my impressions." x Mr.Pitt came the next morning as he had proposed, andfound Mr. Wilberforce not unprepared for the discussion." I had prayed," he says, 37 " to God, I hope84 Conversant. Mem. Diary.36 Ib. w Journal1785. CONVERSATION WITH PITT. 95with some sincerity, not to lead me into disputing formy own exaltation, but for his glory. Conversed withPitt near two hours, and opened myself completely tohim. I admitted that as far as I could conform to theworld, with a perfect regard to my duty to God,myself, and my fellow-creatures, I was bound to do it ;that no inward feelings ought to be taken as demonstrationsof the Spirit being in any man, (was not thistoo general ? ( witnesseth with one Spirit,' &c.) but onlythe change of disposition and conduct." " He triedto reason me out of my convictions, but soon foundhimself unable to combat their correctness, if Christianitywere true. The fact is, he was so absorbedin politics, that he had never given himself timefor due reflection on religion. But amongst otherthings he declared to me, that Bishop Butler'swork raised in his mind more doubts than it hadanswered." 38Though he now felt more than ever the need of somelike-minded associates in the narrow path which lay beforehim, he could scarcely bring himself to form thesenew connexions. " Had a good deal of debate withmyself," he says, Dec. 3rd, " about seeing Newton ;but the rather right if I talk upon the subject withthose who differ from me, as I am so new to it myself."This self-debate issued in his writing to Mr.Newton.33 Convcrsat. Mem.96 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1785.TO THE REV. JOHN NEWTON.Dec. 2, 1785.Sir,There is no need of apology for intruding onyou, when the errand is religion. I wish to have someserious conversation with you, and will take theliberty of calling on you for that purpose, in half anhour ; when, if you cannot receive me, you will havethe goodness to let me have a letter put into my handsat the door, naming a time and place for our meeting,the earlier the more agreeable to me. I have hadten thousand doubts within myself, whether or not Ishould discover myself to you ; but every argumentagainst doing it has its foundation in pride. I amsure you will hold yourself bound to let no one livingknow of this application, or of my visit, till I releaseyou from the obligation." (What follows, as well asthe signature, is torn off.)P. S. Remember that I must be secret, and thatthe gallery of the House is now so universally attended,that the face of a member of parliament is prettywell known."This letter he took with him, upon Sunday,Dec. 4th, into the city, and " delivered it" himself " toold Newton at his church." The following Wednesdaywas named for an interview ; and then, says he, 39after walking about the Square once or twice before39 Journal, Dec. 6.1785. AT HO L WOOD. 97I could persuade myself, I called upon old Newtonwas much affected in conversing with him somethingvery pleasing and unaffected in him. He told me healways had entertained hopes and confidence thatGod would some time bring me to Him that he hadheard from J. Thornton we had declined Sundayvisits abroad on the whole he encouraged methough got nothing new from him, as how could I,except a good hint, that he never found it anew r er todispute, and that it was as well not to make visitsthat one disliked over agreeable. When I cameaway I found my mind in a calm, tranquil state, morehumbled, and looking more devoutly up to God."It was part of Mr. Newton's counsel, that he shouldnot hastily form new connexions, nor widely separatefrom his former friends. This very day, accordingly,he says, " as I promised, I went to Pitt's sad workI went there in fear, and for some time kept anawe on my mind my feelings lessened in the evening,and I could scarce lift up myself in prayer to God atnight."7th. At Holwood up early and prayed, butnot with much warmth then to the St. John's atBeckenham. In chaise opened myself to , whohad felt much four years ago when very ill. He saysthat H. took off his then religious feelings but query,what did he give him in the room of them ? Rathertried to show off at the St. John's, and completelyforgot God came away in a sad state to town,and was reduced almost to wish myself like othersVOL. I. F98 LIFE OP WILBERFORCE. 1785.when I saw the carriages and people going to court,&c. With what different sensations of confidenceand comfort did I come away from Newton andBeckenham ! the one was confidence in myself; theother in God. Got out of town; but instead ofmending when alone, as I dismissed all caution, Igrew worse, and my mind in a sad state this evening,could scarcely pray, but will hope and wait on God.Thursday, 8th. Very cold all day, and dead to religiousthings, could not warm myself in prayer or meditation ;even doubted if I was in the right way : and allgenerals : no particular objection. O God, deliver mefrom myself ! when I trust to myself I am darkness andweakness."He had not yet attained that self-command,which afterwards enabled him to mingle in thesegay scenes with an untainted spirit. Yet even nowhe saw through the gaudy show. " At the levee," hesays some weeks before this time, " and then dined atPitt's sort of cabinet dinner was often thinking thatpompous Thurlow, and elegant Carmarthen, wouldsoon appear in the same row with the poor fellow whowaited behind their chairs." Solitude and self reflectionrestored him to himself. " Dec. 9th. God Ihope has had mercy on me, and given me againsome spark of grace. Dined at Mrs. Wilberforce's(his aunt) Mr. Thornton there. How unaffectedlyhappy he is oh that I were like him. I growhardened and more callous than ever a littlemoved in prayer, but when I leave my study I1785. TO HIS SISTER. 99cannot keep religious thoughts and impressions onmy mind.Dec. llth. Sunday. Heard Newton on theaddiction'' of the soul to God. ' They that observelying vanities shall forsake their own mercy.' Excellent.He shows his whole heart is engaged. Ifelt sometimes moved at church, but am still callous.12th. More fervent, I hope, in prayer resolvedmore in God's strength ; therefore, I hope, likely tokeep my resolutions rather shocked at Lady L's :these people have no thought of their souls.13th. I hope I feel more than I did of divineassistance. May I be enabled to submit to it in distrustof myself. I do not know what to make of myself ;but I resolve, under God, to go on. Much struck inMr. Newton's Narrative, where he says he oncepersevered two years, and went back again. Oh mayI be preserved from relapse ! and yet if I cannot standnow, how shall I be able to do it when the strugglecomes on in earnest ? I am too intent upon shining incompany, and must curb myself here."Behold me," he writes * to his sister, " by myown fire-side, in all the state of an arm-chair, andthe peaceable possession of my own time, which Iam endeavouring to improve to some more rationalpurposes than those to which I have in general madeit subservient. My studies chiefly point one way,but then it is that way in which it is of infiniteimportance that our views should be clear and< Dec. 14F 2100 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1785.settled. I hope, my dear sister will in some degreebe the better for them ; at least, if nothing else, shewill have a proof of my affection, when, as I design,I send her from time to time a sheet full of my lucubrations.Letter-writing like conversation shouldbe a transcript of the thoughts for the hour in whichone has the pen in hand; and as my thoughts rungenerally in one current, it would be a violence toattempt to turn the stream into another channel : notthat I mean to give up the propriety of ' from grave togay,' but the one should be the business, the other therelaxation of life ; and there is no such firm groundon which to fix the foundation of a perpetual gaiety,(though gaiety but ill expresses my idea,) as to havebeen grave to good purpose. I will give it a moreworthy epithet than gay. Let me call it serenity,tranquillity, composure which is not to be destroyed ;though, in the limited degree in which we yet possessit, it may alas be ruffled by all the tumult and noise,and even all the accidents and misfortunes, of theworld. May you my dear sister be possessed of thattemper which we can only get one way, but in thatmay be sure of it."To this serenity of mind he had not yet attained.I go ois sadly," he says now of himself on differentdays, 41 " I am colder and more insensible than I wasI ramble O God, protect me from myself I neveryet think of religion but by constraint I am in amost doubtful state. To Newton's, but when he41 Journal.1785. JOURNAL. 101prayed I was cold and dead; and the moment wewere out of his house, seriousness decayed." " Verywretched all sense gone." " Colder than ever veryunhappy called at Newton's, and bitterly moved : hecomforted me." Yet some gleams of the coming sunshineeven now gladdened him at favoured intervals.Tuesday, Dec. 20th. More enlarged and sincere inprayer went to hear Romaine dined at the Adelphi :both before and afterwards much affected by seriousness.Went to hear Forster, who very good : enabledto join in the prayers with my whole heart, andnever so happy in my life, as this whole eveningenlarged in private prayer, and have a good hopetowards God." " Got up Wednesday morning in thesame frame of mind, and filled with peace, and hope,and humility ; yet some doubts if all this real, or willbe lasting Newton's church he has my leave tomention my case to my aunt and Mr. Thorntonnot quite so warm, but still a good hope I trust Godis with me : but he must ever keep beside me ; for Ifall the moment I am left to myself. I staid in townto attend the ordinances, and have been gloriouslyblest in them.23rd. I do not find the use of keeping a diary inthis way ; I will therefore try how I go on withoutit. I think it rather makes me satisfied with myself,by leading me to compare the number of hoursI spend seriously with those others do ; when all dependson doing it to good purpose. Was strengthenedin prayer, and trust I shall be able to live more to102 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1785.God, which determined to do much affected byDoddridge's directions for spending time, and hopeto conform to them in some degree : it must be byforce at first, for I find I perpetually wander fromserious thoughts when I am off my guard.24th. Up very early, and passed some hourstolerably, according to my resolutions ; but indolencecomes upon me. Resolved to practise Doddridge'srules, and prayed to God to enable me. I wish totake the sacrament tomorrow, that it may fix thisvariable, and affect this senseless heart, which of itselfis dead alike to all emotions of terror and gratitude inspiritual things."He did not venture to communicate according tohis wish : he had learned probably at this time, fromDoddridge, to view the eucharist rather as an act ofself-dedication than as a means of grace ; or the spiritwhich induced him to record, 42 " there is nothing soblessed to me as the gospel ordinances," would haveled him at this season to the table of the Lord. Hisdiligence in using all the means of grace was a strikingfeature of his new character. " What my heart mostimpels me now to say to you," he writes to his sister,is ' Search the Scriptures,' and with all that earnestnessand constancy which that book claims, in whichare the words of eternal life.' Never read it withoutpraying to God that he will open your eyes to understandit; for the power of comprehending it comesfrom him, and him only. ' Seek and ye shall find,'Dec, 23.1785. LETTER FROM JOHN THORNTON. 103says our Saviour ; ' Take heed how ye hear ;' whichimplies, that unless we seek, and diligently too, weshall not find ; and, unless we take heed we shall bedeceived in hearing. There is no opinion so fatal asthat which is commonly received in these liberal days,that a person is in a safe state with respect to a futureworld, if he acts tolerably up to his knowledge andconvictions, though he may not have taken muchpains about acquiring this knowledge or fixing theseconvictions." What he pressed on her, he diligentlypractised. He now spent several hours daily inearnest study of the Scripture ; he took lodgings inthe Adelphi, that he might be within reach of pastoralinstructions which simply inculcated its truths ; andhe began to seek the friendship of those who fearedGod. He withdrew his name from all the clubs ofwhich he was a member . a precaution, which hethought essential to his safety in the critical circumstancesin which he was placed. " Living in town,"he says, " disagrees with me, I must endeavour tofind Christian converse in the country." 43 To thishe was seasonably invited two days afterward, by hisnear connexion Mr. Thornton.TO WILLIAM WILBERFORCE, ESQ.Clapham, Dec. 24.My dear Sir,You may easier conceive than I can express thesatisfaction I had from a few minutes' converse withJournal, Dec. 22.LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1786.Mr. Newton yesterday afternoon. As in nature, so ingrace, what comes very quickly forward, rarely abideslong : I am aware of your difficulties, which call forgreat prudence and caution. Those that believe,must not make haste, but be content to go God'space, and watch the leadings of his providence, as ofthe pillar and the cloud formerly. There is a dangerin running from church to church to hear : more profitis obtained under one or two ministers. You cannotbe too wary in forming connexions. The fewer newfriends, perhaps, the better. I shall at any time beglad to see you here, and can quarter you, and let yoube as retired as possible, and hope we shall never beon a footing of ceremony.I am, my dear Sir,your most devoted kinsman,JOHN THORNTON."By Newton's advice," he says, " Jan. 3rd, wentto Mr. Thornton's ; dined with them J. Thorntonperfectly happy and composed. I will go there asoften as I dare any where. 44 Long talk with Unwin ; 45he is right. To Mahon's : he earnestly busy aboutuseful things, but all of this life returned dinedand slept at Pitt's. Jan. llth. To town and Wool-northafter church, brought Mr. Newton down inchaise dined and slept at Wimbledon composure andhappiness of a true Christian : he read the account ofhis poor niece's death, and shed tears of joy. 12th.44 Jan. 5. Rev. John Unwin, Vicar of Stock.1786. LETTER TO HIS MOTHER. 105Newton staid Thornton Astell surprised us togetheron the common in the evening. Expect to hearmyself now universally given out to be a methodist :may God grant it may be said with truth."To his mother, who had been alarmed by some suchrumour, he explained soon afterwards his real sentiments." It is not, believe me, to my own imagination,or to any system formed in my closet, that I look for myprinciples ; it is to the very source to which you referme, the Scriptures All that I contend for is,that we should really make this book the criterion ofour opinions and actions, and not read it and thenthink that we do so of course ; but if we do this, wemust reckon on not finding ourselves able to complywith all those customs of the world, in whichmany who call themselves Christians are too apt toindulge without reflection : we must of course[therefore] be subject to the charge of excess andsingularity. But in what will this singularity consist? Not merely in indifferent things ; no, in theseour Saviour always conformed, and took occasion tocheck an unnecessary strictness into which he sawmen were led by overstraining a good principle. Inwhat then will these peculiarities appear ? Take ourgreat Master's own words ; * Thou shalt love the Lordthy God with all thy heart, with all thy mind, andwith all thy strength ; and thy neighbour as thyself.'It would be easy to dilate on this text ; and I am afraidthat we should find at the close of the discourse thatthe picture was very unlike the men of this world,F 3106 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1786.But who is my neighbour ? ' Here, too, our Saviourhas instructed us by the parable which follows. It isevident we are to consider our peculiar situations, andin these to do all the good we can. Some men arethrown into public, some have their lot in private life.These different states have their corresponding duties ;and he whose destination is of the former sort, willdo as ill to immure himself in solitude, as he whois only a village Hampden would, were he to head anarmy or address a senate. What I have said will, Ihope, be sufficient to remove any apprehensions that Imean to shut myself up either in my closet in town,or in my hermitage in the country. No, my dearmother, in my circumstances this would merit nobetter name than desertion ; and if I were thus to flyfrom the post where Providence has placed me,I know not how I could look for the blessing of Godupon my retirement : and without this heavenlyassistance, either in the world or in solitude our ownendeavours will be equally ineffectual. When I considerthe particulars of my duty, I blush at the review ;but my shame is not occasioned by my thinking thatI am too studiously diligent in the business of life ; onthe contrary, I then feel that I am serving God bestwhen from proper motives I am most actively engagedin it. What humbles me is, the sense that I foregoso many opportunities of doing good ; and it is myconstant prayer, that God will enable me to serve himmore steadily, and my fellow-creatures more assiduously: and I trust that my prayers will be granted1786. LETTER TO o'lIARA. 107through the intercession of that Saviour ' by whom 'only * we have access with confidence into this gracewherein we stand ; ' and who has promised that hewill lead on his people from strength to strength, andgradually form them to a more complete resemblanceof their divine original." ^This is not the heated tone of enthusiasm, but thesober reality of a reasonable faith. It was to agradual work that he looked forward ; yet at this timea x real change was passing over all his feelings andprinciples of action. So he ever judged himself. " Yourletter," he wrote ten years later to a college friend,touches a string in my heart which sounds in unisonwith your declaration, that you look back on theinterval which has elapsed since our being fellow-collegianswith a sort of melancholy sensibility. ButI find myself constrained to add that the prospect,closed as it is with the view of the time I passed atCambridge, presents to my eye a still deeper tinge.It is a gloomy and humiliating retrospect to one who,like myself, can behold only a long period of whatour master poet has so emphatically styled ' shapelessidleness ;' the most valuable years of life wasted,and opportunities lost, which can never be recovered.Your too tender allowance for my youth representsme to you in a less unfavourable point of view ; butthis, alas, is the true one, and it is scarce too strong tosay, that I seem to myself to have awakened aboutnine or ten years ago from a dream, to have recovered,Feb. 19.108 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1786.as it were, the use of my reason after a delirium. Infact till then I wanted first principles ; those principlesat least which alone deserve the character ofwisdom, or bear the impress of truth. Emulation,and a desire of distinction, were my governing motives ;and ardent after the applause of my fellow-creatures,I quite forgot that I was an accountable being ; that Iwas hereafter to appear at the bar of God ; that ifChristianity were not a fable, it was infinitely importantto study its precepts, and when known to obey them ;that there was at least such a probability of its notbeing a fable, as to render it in the highest degreeincumbent on me to examine into its authenticitydiligently, anxiously, and without prejudice. I knowbut too well that I am not now what I ought to be ;yet I trust I can say, ' Non sum qualis era,' and Ihope, through the help of that gracious Being who haspromised to assist our weak endeavours, to becomemore worthy of the name of Christian ; more livingabove the hopes and fears, the vicissitudes and evilsof this world; more active in the discharge of thevarious duties of that state in which the providenceof God has placed me, and more desirous of fulfillinghis will and possessing his favour. I find it difficultto break off." 47It was to this gradual advance, rather than tosudden changes, that he always looked. " Watch andpray," he wrote earnestly to his sister ; 48 " read theword of God, imploring that true wisdom which may<? To Mr. O'Hara, June 27, 1795. * May 21.1786. LETTER TO HIS SISTER. 109enable "you to comprehend and fix it in your heart,that it may gradually produce its effect under theoperation of the Holy Spirit, in renewing the mindand purifying the conduct. This it will do more andmore the longer we live under its influence ; and it isto the honour of religion, that those who when theyfirst began to run the Christian course, were inextremes . . enthusiastic perhaps, or rigidly severe . .will often by degrees lose their several imperfections,which though by the world laid unfairly tothe account of their religion, were yet undoubtedly somany disparagements to it : . like some of our Westmorelandevenings, when though in the course of theday the skies have been obscured by clouds andvapours, yet towards its close the sun beams forthwithunsullied lustre, and descends below the horizonin the full display of all his glories : shall I pursuethe metaphor, just to suggest, that this is the earnestof a joyful rising, which will not be disappointed ?The great thing we have to do, is to be perpetuallyreminding ourselves that we are but strangers andpilgrims, having no abiding city, but looking for acity which hath foundations ; and by the powerof habit which God has been graciously pleasedto bestow upon us, our work will every day becomeeasier, if we accustom ourselves to cast our care onhim, and labour in a persuasion of his cooperation.The true Christian will desire to have constantcommunion with his Saviour. The easternnations had their talismans, which were to advertise110 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1786.them of every danger, and guard them from everymischief. Be the love of Christ our talisman."He who thus sought for peace, could not fail offinding it. Upon Good Friday, April 14th, he forthe first time communicated ; and upon the followingEaster Sunday enters in his Journal : " At Stockwith the Unwind day delightful, out almost all ofit communicated very happy."TO MISS wilberforce.Stock, April 16, 1786.About five o'clock yesterday I put myselfinto a post-chaise, and in four hours found myselfsafely lodged with the vicar of Stock. It is morethan a month since I slept out of town, and I feel allthat Milton attributes to the man who has beenlong in populous cities pent,Where houses thick and sewers annoy the air.'I scarce recollect to have spent so pleasant a day asthat which is now nearly over. My heart opensinvoluntarily to Unwin and his wife ; I fancy I havebeen with them every day since we first becameacquainted at Nottingham, and expand to them withallthe confidence of a twelve years' intimacy. Canmy dear sister wonder that I call on her to participatein the pleasure I am tasting. I know how yousympathize in the happiness of those you love, and Icould not therefore forgive myself if I were to keep1786. TO HIS SISTER. IllNmy raptures to myself, and not invite you to partake ofmy enjoyment. The day has been delightful. I wasout before six, and made the fields my oratory, the sunshining as bright and as warm as at Midsummer. Ithink my own devotions become more fervent whenoffered in this way amidst the general chorus, withwhich all nature seems on such a morning to beswelling the song of praise and thanksgiving; andexcept the time that has been spent at church andat dinner . . and neither in the sanctuary nor at table Itrust, had I a heart unwarmed with gratitude to theGiver of all good things . . I have been all day baskingin the sun. On any other day I should not have beenso happy : a sense that I was neglecting the duties ofmy situation might have interrupted the course ofmy enjoyments, and have taken from their totality ;for in such a situation as mine every moment may bemade useful to the happiness of my fellow-creatures.But the sabbath is a season of rest, in which we maybeallowed to unbend the mind, and give a completeloose to those emotions of gratitude and admiration,which a contemplation of the works, and a considerationof the goodness, of God cannot fail to excite in amind of the smallest sensibility. And surely thissabbath, of all others, is that which calls forth thesefeelings in a supreme degree ; a frame of united loveand triumph well becomes it, and holy confidence andunrestrained affection. May every sabbath be to me,and to those I love, a renewal of these feelings, ofwhich the small tastes we have in this life should112 LIFE OF Wilberforce. 1786.make us look forward to that eternal rest, whichawaits the people of God ; when the whole will be anever-ending enjoyment of those feelings of love andjoy and admiration and gratitude, which are, even inthe limited degree we here experience them, thetruest sources of comfort; when these, I say, willdictate perpetual songs of thanksgiving without fearand without satiety. My eyes are had, but I couldnot resist the impulse I felt to call on you and tellyou how happy I have been."The sky was now brightening over him into aclearer sunshine. "By degrees," he said in thecalm retrospect of a peaceful age, "by degrees thepromises and offers of the gospel produced in mesomething of a settled peace of conscience. I devotedmyself for whatever might be the term of my futurelife, to the service of my God and Saviour, and withmany infirmities and deficiencies, through his help,I continue until this day."CHAPTER V.APRIL 1786 TO SEPTEMBER 1787.Registry and Surgical-Subject Bills Gives up his villa atWimbledon Journal Intercourse with his family andfriends Employment of time Visit to Bath Returns toLondon Feb. 1787 State of religion Resolves to attemptits revival Society for the reformation of manners Hevisits the Bishops and establishes the association.IN the spring of 1786, Mr. Wilberforce returned analtered man to his business in the House of Commons.There were indeed no external symptoms toannounce the change which had passed over him.Though I had told Pitt," he says, " that I could notpromise him unqualified support, I was surprised tofind how generally we agreed." Yet many silent intimationsnow bespoke the presence of higher motivesthan a mere desire of personal distinction. In thisvery session he was diligently occupied with twoimportant measures. Hopeless, after Mr. Pitt'sfailure, of at present carrying any general measure ofparliamentary reform, he applied himself to introducesome practical improvements into the representationof the people. The plan which he proposed wasaimed directly at purifying county elections, by114 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1786.providing a general registration of the freeholders,and holding the poll in various places at the sametime.He had at first proposed to limit his attempt toYorkshire, which chiefly needed such a change ; butat the request of Lord Mahon, its mover, who duringthis session succeeded to a seat in the Upper House,he undertook the conduct of a general measure tothe same effect : " Fought through Lord Stanhope'sbill," he says, May 15th. In the House of Lordsit was afterwards defeated, "by a coalition of theKing's friends and the Whig aristocracy." ' Hissecond measure was defeated in the House of Lords :it was a bill by which the power the judges alreadypossessed of giving up the bodies of convictedmurderers after execution to surgical dissection, wasextended to the case of certain other felons. The receptionof this measure in the House of Lords, washis first experience of a mode of treatment with whichin his conduct of the Abolition he was afterwards madetoo well acquainted. It was thrown out through theinfluence of Lord Loughborough, who boldly assertedthat it was the project of an inexperienced youth,unacquainted with the law. " If this were fact," Mr.Wilberforce writes to Mr. Hey of Leeds, at whosesuggestion he undertook the measure, " you would havejust reason to complain of my having taken so littlepains to insure the success of your proposal ; but thecase is directly the reverse : I was aware how necessary1 Wyvill's Parliamentary Papers, iv. 542.1786. LEAVES WIMBLEDON. 115it was to secure the concurrence of the gentlemen ofthe profession, and so put the business a good dealinto their hands. The Solicitor-general drew up theBill ; the Attorney-general corrected it ; it was thenput into the hands of one of the most active judges,who undertook to communicate upon the subjectwith the rest of the bench at a general meeting thevery next day ; and at the same time" I desired someof the principal lawyers to bespeak a favourablereception of it with any of the judges over whomthey possessed influence. The Bill was returned tomewith some amendments suggested in writing ;and though I disliked the alterations, yet on grounds ofpolicy I submitted to them." 2 Lord Loughborough,at this time a bitter oppositionist, meant only to discreditthe lawyers who adhered to Mr. Pitt.In the latter part of the session Mr. Wilberforce,who delighted in escaping for a single night fromLondon, " began to sleep constantly at Wimbledon ;"yet thinking it an unfavourable " situation for hisservants," a needless increase of his personal expenses,and a cause of some loss of time, he determined toforego in future the luxury of such a villa. Theinfluence of his new principles was rapidly pervadingall his conduct. After a public breakfast given atthis time he subjected himself to the severest scrutiny.In how sad a state," he says, " is my soul to-day !Yesterday when I had company at Wimbledon, I gavethe reins to [myself] ; sometimes forgetting, at othersJuly 13.116 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1786.acting in defiance of God. If Christ's promise, thathe will hear those who call upon him, were less directand general, I durst not plead for mercy, but shouldfall into despair; and from what I perceive of theactual workings of my soul, the next step would be anabandoning of myself to all impiety. But Christ hasgraciously promised that he will be made unto us notredemption only but sanctification. O ! give me anew heart, and put a right spirit within me, that Imay keep thy statutes and do them. This week hasbeen sadly spent ; I will keep a more strict watch overmyself by God's grace." 3Nor was this watchful self-inspection a rare thingthe result of his conscience being alarmed by somecompliance with the temptations by which he wassurrounded; it was growing into his daily habit.To endeavour from this moment," he says, June21st, " to amend my plan for time, and to take accountof it to begin tomorrow. I hope to live more thanheretofore to God's glory and my fellow-creatures'good, and to keep my heart more diligently. Booksto be read Locke's Essay Marshall's LogicIndian Reports. To keep a proposition book withan index a friend's book" (i. e. memoranda to renderhis intercourse with them more useful accordingto their characters and circumstances) " a commonplacebook, serious and profane a Christian-dutypaper. To try this plan for a fortnight, and thenmake alterations in it as I shall see fit. To animate3 Journal, June 18.1786. Self-examination. 117myself to a strict observance of my rules by thinkingof what Christ did and suffered for us ; and that thislife will soon be over, when a sabbath will remain forthe people of God.June 22nd. Near three hours going to and seeingAlbion Mill. Did not think enough of God. Didnot actually waste much time, but too dissipatedwhen I should have had my thoughts secretly bentonGod. Meditation, ' What shall I do to besaved?' 23rd. Thought too faintly. Meditation,Heart deceitful above all things.' 25th. I thisday received the sacrament : I fear too hastily ;though I thought it right not to suffer myself to bedetermined by my momentary feelings. I do notthink I have a sufficiently strong conviction of sin;yet I see plainly that I am an ungrateful, stupid,guilty creature. I believe that Christ died that allsuch, who would throw themselves on him, renouncingevery claim of their own and relying on his assuranceof free pardon, might be reconciled to God, andreceive the free gift of his Holy Spirit to renew themafter the image of God in righteousness and trueholiness ; and I hope in time to find such a changewrought by degrees in myself, as may evidence to methat he has called me from darkness to light, andfrom the power of Satan unto God. I wander dreadfullyat church.July 2nd. I take up my pen because it is my rule ;but I have not been examining myself with thatseriousness with which we ought to look into LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1786.selves from time to time. That wandering spiritand indolent way of doing business are little if atall defeated, and my rules, resolved on with thoughtand prayer, are forgotten. O my God, grant that Imay be watchful, and not mistake that disapprobationwhich cannot but arise in me when I look into myselfand recollect all my advantages, and my first sensationsand resolutions, and how little the event isanswerable let me not mistake this for that contritionand repentance which operates upon the mind witha settled force, and keeps the whole man . . if notalways, yet for the most part . . waiting and anxiouslylooking for God." 4With the close of the session " I got off" at lastfrom town," says the Diary. " July 6th. Slept atPepper's, 5 Highgate ; and Friday at Graham ;thence through Hull to Scarborough." Here hejoined his mother and sister, and with them the followingweek arrived at Wilford, the seat of his cousinMr. Samuel Smith. His first care was to recommendhis new opinions by greater kindness in domesticlife. Strange rumours of his altered habits had precededhis arrival, and his mother was prepared tomourn over eccentric manners and enthusiastic principles.All that she observed was greater kindnessand evenness of temper. " It may tend," he hadwritten down before he joined her as a rule for hisobservance, " to remove prejudices of 6 if Iam more kind and affectionate than ever, consult4 Journal. * Pepper Arden's. 6 A blank in the original.1786. EMPLOYMENT OF TIME. 119her more, show respect for her judgment, and manifestrather humility in myself than dissatisfactionconcerning others." His habitual cheerfulness, andthe patient forbearance of a temper naturally quick,could not escape her notice ; and her friend Mrs.Sykes, who had shared in her suspicions, remarkedshrewdly, when they parted company at Scarborough,If this is madness, I hope that he will bite us all."At Wilford he remained almost two months, diligentlyemploying the quiet time afforded him by itsretirement. The entrance of God's word into hisheart gave light to his intellectual as well as to hismoral nature. A keen remembrance of wasted time. " what madness, I said to myself, is this ! here haveI been throwing away my time all my life past ! ". . anda sense of his deficiency in the power of steady application,led him to set about educating himself. Variousand accurate were now his studies, but the bookwhich he studied most carefully, and by which perhapsabove all others, his mental faculties wereperfected, was the Holy Scripture. This he readand weighed and pondered over, studying its connexionand details, and mastering especially, in theirown tongue, the apostolical epistles. This was hischief occupation at Wilford. It was now his dailycare to instruct his understanding and discipline hisheart. Nor was it an easy path upon which he had setout. Though its later stages were gladdened by asettled peace, at this period almost every entry of hisJournal records a struggle and a conflict " At120 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1786.church, I wander more than ever," he says July 30th,and can scarce keep awake my thoughts arealways straying. Do Thou, O God, set my affectionson purer pleasures. Christ should be a Christian'sdelight and glory. I will endeavour by God's help toexcite in myself an anxiety and longing for the joys ofheaven, and for deliverance from this scene of ingratitudeand sin ; yet, mistake not impatience under thefatigues of the combat for a lawful and indeed an enjoinedearnestness for, and anticipation of the crown ofvictory. I say solemnly in the presence of God thisday, that were I to die, I know not what would bemy eternal portion. If I live in some degree underthe habitual impression of God's presence, yet I cannot,or rather I will not, keep true to him ; and everynight I have to look back on a day misemployed, ornot improved with fervency and diligence. O God !do Thou enable me to live more to Thee, to look toJesus with a single eye, and by degrees to have therenewed nature implanted in me, and the heart ofstone removed." And again, a fortnight later, 7 hesays, " I see plainly the sad way in which I amgoing on. Of myself I have not power to change it.Do Thou, O Thou Saviour of sinners, have mercy onme, and let me not be an instance of one who havingmonth after month despised Thy goodness and long-suffering,has treasured up to himself wrath againstthe day of wrath. The sense of God's presenceseldom stays on my mind when I am in company ;i Journal, Aug. 13.1786. AT Milford. 121and at times I even have doubts and difficultiesabout the truth of the great doctrines of Christianity."Yet in spite of difficulties he was resolved to persevere." With God," he reasons with himself,nothing is impossible. Work out then thy ownsalvation. Purify thy heart, thou double-mindedlabour to enter into that rest. The way is narrow ;the enemies are many, to thee particularly ; . . rich,great, &c. ; 8 . . but then we have God and Christ on ourside : we have heavenly armour ; the crown is everlastinglife, and the struggle how short, comparedwith the eternity which follows it ! Yet a littlewhile, and he that shall come will come, and will nottarry." While he thus encouraged himself, hopingagainst hope, there were at times already on hispath gleams of brighter light. " On this day," hesays August 24th, " I complete my twenty-seventhyear. What reason have I for humiliation andgratitude ! May God, for Christ's sake, increase mydesire to acquire the Christian temper and live theChristian life, and enable me to carry this desire intoexecution." A few days later 9 he adds, " I am justreturned from receiving the sacrament. I was enabledto be earnest in prayer, and to be contrite and humbleunder a sense of my unworthiness, and of the infinitemercy of God in Christ. I hope that I desire frommy heart to lead henceforth a life more worthy of theChristian profession. May it be my meat and drinkto do the will of God, my Father. May He dailyo Vide Matt. xix. 23. 9 Journal, Sept. 3.VOL I G122 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1786.renew me by His Holy Spirit, and may I walk beforeHim in a frame made up of fear, and gratitude, andhumble trust, and assurance of His fatherly kindnessand constant concern for me."This progress was the fruit of unremitting toil andwatchfulness. " My chief temptations," he says,against which to guard this week particularly, are,first, My thoughts wandering when reading or doingany thing. Secondly, Losing sight of God in companyand at meals. This often begins by an affected vivacity.Thirdly, I am apt to favour my wandering temperby too short and broken periods of study. To formmy plan as carefully as I can to prevent these. Thinkhow to serve those you are in the house with in thevillage your constituents. Look to God throughChrist . . . How does my experience convince methat true religion is to maintain communion withGod, and that it all goes together. Let this be awarning . . . Contempt of this world in itself, andviews constantly set upon the next. Frequent aspirations.To call in at some houses in the village.To endeavour to keep my mind in a calm, humbleframe not too much vivacity. To put my prayersinto words to prevent wandering. Consider alwaysbefore you take up any book what is your peculiarobject in reading it, and keep that in view. Recollectall you read is then only useful when applied to purifythe heart and life, or to fit you for the better dischargeof its duties. To recapitulate verbally, discuti-end causa. Let me try by prayer and contemplation1786. LEEDS. 123to excite strong desires for future heavenly joysto trust less to my own resolutions and more toChrist." 10Upon the 7th of September he was " at the cutlers'feast at Sheffield;" 11 but did not stay the ball, andreturned upon the 8th to Wilford. Upon the 20thhe went " to Major Cartwright's, Markham, staidone day, and then on to Hull." Here he remained afortnight with his mother. " Visited my friendsBasket came to see me." " Remember," he sayshere, " to pray to God that I may be cheerful withoutbeing dissipated. Remember your peculiar dutiesarising out of your parliamentary situation, and whereveryou are, be thinking how you may best answerthe ends of your being, and use the opportunities thenoffered to you. Above all, let me watch and pray withunremitting fervency ; when tempted, recollect thatChrist, who was also tempted, sympathizes with thyweakness, and that he stands ready to support thee,if thou wilt sincerely call on him for help." 12 FromHull he set out for Leeds upon the llth of Octoberand upon the 12th was domesticated with Mr. Hey,in a family that really appears to be serving GodHappy people ! Whilst with him, saw my friends, themanufactory," &c. 13On his road from Leeds to London, he wrote uponthe 20th of October, " from the King's highway,"10 Journal, Aug. 4. u Diary.'* Journal, Oct. 8. " Diary.G 2124 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1786.TO LORD Lancaster, Lancaster CASTLE,CUMBERLAND.My dear Lancaster,1 shall not begin by apologizing to you for mysilence, but by taking you to task for yours. You haveno such cause to plead as I have, and to expect a half-blindman to be as good a correspondent as one thathas the perfect use of his eyes, and in my circumstancesto call on me to return you letter for letter, isso far from putting things on an equal footing, that Iam astonished such a proposition should be countenancedby an inhabitant of a country, which having beenof late so much engaged in making treaties, 14 oughtto be ready at every principle of equitable negociation.When I fix these as the terms of our epistolary connexion,I shall put you on the footing of the mostfavoured nation, and let that be sufficient.I have often meditated, and still more frequentlylonged for, an excursion into your wondrous country ;but have not been able to gratify my wishes, and amnow bound for the south. My summer has been spentwith my sister, the state of whose health, and the natureof whose complaint, rendered my society and supportpeculiarly acceptable. If you have ever known nervouspeople, you will fully enter into this. And while so neara relation would in any case have a right to such goodoffices, my dear sister's worth and affection give her11 Convention with Spain was signed July 14th; Treaty of Commercewith France, Sept. 26th.1786. TO LORD Lancaster. 125a more than ordinary claim to my tenderness and regard.Since I left her, I have been for a few days atLeeds, consulting Mr. Hey about my eyes and generalhealth. Frequent conversations with him have impressedme with the opinion of his skill. He does not expresshimself over-confidently, for which I like him thebetter ; but he says that I may very reasonably hope,that by a perseverance in the plan he recommends, Ishall gradually recover health and strength, in bothof which he thinks I have suffered by living too low ;and he advises a strict adherence to meat and wine,as the most trusty and effectual restoratives. I mustdo you the justice to recollect that this is the verysystem you yourself have so often preached up tome; and as is usual when people agree with us inopinion, I have no doubt of your admitting him to be amost judicious practitioner, on the mere strength ofhis prescription. Another part of his directions is,that I should try with caution the Bath water, and thisI shall possibly do before the meeting of parliament,though my motions are somewhat uncertain, for theywill partly depend on the state in which I find poorEliot and Pitt. I well know how feelingly you havesympathized with them. 15 I don't believe there everexisted between brother and sister a more affectionateattachment, than between Pitt and Lady Harriet.Public business, however, will be an assistance to himin getting over the shock, by necessarily calling himM Lady Harriet Eliot, second daughter of the first Lord Chatham,died Sept. 25th, 1786.126 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1786.from his own melancholy reflections ; but I fear it willgo hard with Eliot, whose natural temper is ill calculatedfor bearing up against such a stroke. If eitherof them should be in such a state, as that I shouldthink my company would be of material service, I shalldedicate myself to this employment ; if otherwise, toKing Bladed.O my dear Lancaster, how can we go on as ifpresent things were to last for ever, when so oftenreminded by accidents like these, ' that the fashionof this world passes away ! ' Every day I live Isee greater reason in considering this life but as apassage to another. And when summoned to thetribunal of God, to give an account of all things wehave done in the body, how shall we be confounded bythe recollection of those many instances, in which wehave relinquished a certain eternal for an uncertaintransitory good ! You are not insensible to thesethings, but you think of them rather like a follower ofSocrates than a disciple of Jesus. You see howfrankly I deal with you, in truth I can no otherwiseso well show the interest I take in your happiness :these thoughts are uppermost in my heart, and theywill come forth when I do not repress my naturalemotions. Oh that they had a more prevailinginfluence over my disposition and conduct ; then mightI hope to afford men occasion ' to glorify our Fatherwhich is in heaven ; ' and I should manifest thesuperiority of the principle which actuated me, by themore than ordinary spirit and activity by which my1786. BATH. 127parliamentary, my domestic, and all my other dutieswere marked and characterized.Mr. Hey did not advise me to write as thoughI were a sound man, and I must not forget thatI am crippled in my operations, for though in theheat of action I forget my aches and sprains, I shallonly feel them the more when I am cold again.This letter is one continued egotism, yet my vanitywill not suffer me to believe that it will be lessacceptable to you on that account. I have not opportunityleft to say a word of politics, to abuse thenew peers, &c. &c. 16 I will not lay aside my pen howeverwithout desiring my best remembrances toLady M. & Co. and so saying I subscribe myself,Yours ever,W. Wilberforce."He was soon after fixed at Bath ; schooling his ownheart as carefully amongst its crowded scenes, as hehad done in the domestic privacy of Wilford. " I amtoo apt," he says Nov. 18th, " to be consideringhow far. I may advance towards sin, in animal indulgencesparticularly ; not remembering that a Christian'slife is hid with Christ in God, that he ought tohave more satisfaction in offering the little sacrificesGod requires, as the willing tribute of a grateful heart,than in gratifying fleshly appetites ; and that he shouldlook for his happiness in fellowship with God, and16 June 15th, Mr. Jenkins was gazetted as Lord Hawkesbury ;August 8th, Sir Harbor Harbor as Lord Sheffield, and Sir Guy Carletonas Lord Dorchester.128 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1786.view with jealousy whatever tends to break in on thiscommunion. I am apt to be thinking it enough tospend so many hours in reading, religious service, study,&c. What a sad sign is this ! how different from thatdelight in the law and service of God in the innerman, which St. Paul speaks of, and which was soeminent in David ! O my God, for the sake of Thybeloved Son, our propitiation, through whom we mayhave access to the throne of grace, give me a new heartgive me a real desire and earnest longing for one.I have got a trick of congratulating myself when Ilook at my watch, or the clock strikes, ' Well, onehour more of this day is gone.' What ingratitude isthis to God, who spares this cumbered of the groundfrom day to day, to give him time for repentance !"Walk charitably," he writes down as his law ;wherever you are be on your guard, rememberingthat your conduct and conversation may have someeffect on the minds of those with whom you are, inrendering them more or less inclined to the receptionof Christian principles, and the practice of a Christianlife. Be ready with subjects for conversation, forprivate thought, as Watts and Doddridge recommend.This week to find opportunities for openingto M. B. and to endeavour to impress her deeplywith a sense of the importance of the one thing needful,and to convince her that the loose religion andpractice of common professors is not the religion andpractice of the Bible." 17'? Journal1787. REFORMATION OF MANNERS. 129Early in the following year he was again in London,attending in his place in parliament. His chiefexertions in the House this session, were efficientspeeches in behalf of Mr. Pitt's treaties with France 18and Portugal; 19 and upon the impeachment of Mr.Warren Hastings. 20 But his thoughts were principallyoccupied through this spring in concerting measuresfor a public effort at reforming manners. He had beenroused out of a deadly lethargy, and when he lookedaround him on the aspect of society, he saw howuniversal was the evil from which he had himselfescaped. He could not wonder that the gay andbusy world were almost ignorant of Christianity,amidst the lukewarmness and apathy which possessedthe very watchmen of the faith. The deadly leavenof Hadley's latitudinarian views had spread to analarming extent amongst the clergy ; and whilst numbersconfessedly agreed with his Socinian tenets, fewwere sufficiently honest to resign with Mr. Lindsey 21the endowments of the church. The zealous spiritwhich had begun to spread during the reign of Anne, 22had been benumbed by this evil influence. No effortswere now making to disseminate in foreign lands thelight of Christ's gospel. At home a vast populationwas springing up around our manufactories, but therewas no thought of providing for them church accommodation.Non-residence without cause and withoutw Feb. 6. is Feb. 15. *o Feb. 7.81 The Rev. Theophilus Lindsey had resigned the living of Catterickiu 1773. Sup. p. 76.2S Vide Nelson's Address to Persons of Quality.G 3130 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1787scruple was spreading through the church ; and all thecords of moral obligation were relaxed as the spirit ofreligion slumbered. Against this universal apathyJohn Wesley had recently arisen with a giant'sstrength. But his mission was chiefly to the poor,and his measures even from the first were such asfostered a sectarian spirit. There was needed somereformer of the nation's morals, who should raise hisvoice in the high places of the land ; and do withinthe church, and near the throne, what Wesley hadaccomplished in the meeting, and amongst the multitude.This, in its whole extent, was a work which thegenius of our church could hardly have committed tothe hands of any ecclesiastic ; while it required forits proper execution the full devotion of rank, andinfluence, and talents of the highest order. To thishigh and self-denying office God put it into the heartof his servant to aspire. " God," he says, " has setbefore me as my object the reformation of [mycountry's] manners." 23 Having once accepted thiscommission, he devoted all his powers to its fulfilment,and for years kept it steadily in view in all his undertakings.His first great effort was suggested by Dr.Woodward's " History of the Society for the Reformationof Manners in the year 1692." He proposed toform a similar association, to resist the spread of openimmorality. This had been the second object of theearlier society, its first aim being the edification of itsmembers. " I am conscious," he tells Mr. Hey,M Journal.1787. REFORMATION OF MANNERS. 131that ours is an infinitely inferior aim, yet surely it isof the utmost consequence, and worthy of the laboursof a whole life." 24 In this zealous spirit he undertookthe work. He endeavoured to infuse amongst hisnumerous friends a determination to resist the growingvices of the times. " The barbarous custom ofhanging," he tells one of them, 25 " has been tried toolong, and with the success which might have beenexpected from it. The most effectual way to preventthe greater crimes is by punishing the smaller, and byendeavouring to repress that general spirit of licentiousness,which is the parent of every species of vice.I know that by regulating the external conduct wedo not at first change the hearts of men, but eventhey are ultimately to be wrought upon by thesemeans, and we should at least so far remove theobtrusiveness of the temptation, that it may not provokethe appetite, which might otherwise be dormantand inactive."In our free state," he maintained, " it is peculiarlyneedful to obtain these ends by the agency of somevoluntary association ; for thus only can those moralprinciples be guarded, which of old were under theimmediate protection of the government. It thusbecomes to us, like the ancient censorship, the guardianof the religion and morals of the people. TheAttorney-general and Secretary of State, who alone inour country can be thought at all to fill this post, aretoo much cramped by their political relations toJune 12. w Mr. WyvilL132 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1787.discharge its duties with effect ; yet some suchofficial check on vice is absolutely needed. It isnot here as with personal injury, which will always besuppressed by private prosecution ; for though themischief done by blasphemous and indecent publicationsand other incentives to licentiousness be greaterthan most private wrongs, yet it is so fractional, anddivided amongst so many thousands, that individualscan scarcely be expected to take up the cause ofvirtue." 26 Having thus prepared men's minds forfurther measures, his next object was to find a properopportunity for founding the association. The planwhich he adopted for this purpose was to obtain aRoyal Proclamation against vice and immorality, andthen suggest the formation of an association for carryingit into effect.TO WILLIAM HEY, ESQ. LEEDS."London, May 29th, 1787.My dear Sir,I trust in a very few days you will hear of aProclamation being issued for the discouragement ofvice, of letters being written by the secretaries ofstate to the lords-lieutenant, expressing his Majesty'spleasure, that they recommend it to the justicesthroughout their several counties to be active in theexecution of the laws against immoralities, and ofa society's being formed in London for the purpose*> Con. Mem1787. KING'S PROCLAMATION. 133of carrying into effect his Majesty's good and graciousintentions. I have been some time at work, thematter is now I hope brought to a crisis ; and thepersons with whom I have concerted my measures,are so trusty, temperate, and unobnoxious, that Ithink I am not indulging a vain expectation in persuadingmyself that something considerable may bedone. It would give you no little pleasure, could youhear how warmly the Archbishop of Canterburyexpresses himself: the interest he takes in the goodwork does him great credit, and he assures me thatone still greater, to whom he has opened the subjectin form, and suggested the measures above mentioned,is deeply impressed with the necessity of opposing thetorrent of profaneness which every day makes morerapid advances. What think you of my havingmyself received a formal invitation to cards, forSunday evening, from a person high in the King'sservice.I mean the society to publish a list of its members,and an account of its institution, when sufficientlynumerous and respectable. It should consist ofpersons of consequence in every line of life, theprofessions, members of both Houses, merchants inthe city, aldermen, &c. I have no doubt of the Dukeof Montagu's accepting the office of president, andhave reason to believe that the Archbishop of Canterburywill give us his name, in which case the rest ofthe bench will follow his example. The objects towhich the committee will direct their attention are134 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1787.the offences specified in the Proclamation, profanationof the sabbath, swearing, drunkenness, licentiouspublications, unlicensed places of public amusement,the regulation of licensed places, &c. One goodconsequence that will result from the institutionof a society stamped with such authorities, maybethe inducing well-meaning and active men to actas magistrates or constables, who have now so littleencouragement to discharge obnoxious duties withfidelity and strictness."It is singular, that whilst we have been cautiouslyand with measured steps proceeding to the desiredobject, our Pontefract friends have got before us.Much use I trust may be made of their resolutions.We mean to transmit them with directions for theformation of societies throughout the country. Ineed not add, that till all this comes to your earsthrough some other channel, you must be silent onthe subject.Believe me to be ever yours,W. WILBERFORCE."His first object was to prevail upon the bishops tobecome members of the new association ; and to effectthis, he resolved upon applying personally to as manyas he could, when they had retired to their respectivesees. 27 He wished to communicate with them india"The bishops, in consequence of a message from his Majesty, aregone into their respective dioceses, for the purpose of giving instructionto their clergy for a co-operation with the civil power, that the King'sProclamation may have its full force." Morning Chronicle, July '25th.1787. APPLICATION TO THE BISHOPS. 135virtually, lest the scruples of a few might prevent theacquiescence of the rest ; and he could not issuecirculars without putting himself forward as theavowed author of the plan. " In your several disclosures'he tells his friend Lord Lancaster, " theless you introduce my name the better. When theseveral parties come to compare notes hereafter, itmay appear as if I had been unseasonably, I hadalmost said, impertinently active, and I shouldgrievously regret any personal jealousy which mightoperate to the prejudice of the great object which wehave in view." 28He determined therefore to travel round the countryto the residence of those whose countenance he hopedto gain; and upon the 21st of June, in spite of thefatigue of the last session, and a strong desire " to putoff this whole business for a time, and allow myself acourse of the Bath waters, . . since it might be dangerousto suffer the impression which the Proclamation mayhave produced to wear away, before I am so firm asnot to fear my gentlemen drawing back," 29 . . he setoff from London without communicating to any one thepurpose of his journey. He spared no labour to attainhis object, visiting in succession the episcopal residencesof the prelates of Worcester, Hereford,Norwich, Lincoln, York, and Lichfield, 30 and gainingmany of the bishops as the first promoters of hisJuly 23. To Mr. Hey, June 12.30 He had designed to visit Chester, hut a favourable answer from theBishop (Porteus) met him on the road.136 LIFE OF wilberforce. 1787.scheme. He called too upon many influential laymen.At Norwich he lingered a whole day in the hope ofseeing Windham, and was followed after his departureby a friendly letter.I have seldom felt more vexed," writes Mr.Windham, " than I do at this instant, at hearing, onalighting at the Angel, that you have left Norwichabout half an hour. You cannot conceive how muchI lament the disappointment ; my only consolation isthat very little of it has happened through my ownfault. If any blame is due, I am punished to the fullextent of my deserts in the pleasure I have lost ofcarrying you back this evening to Felbrigg, of detainingyou there just so long as it suited you to afford meyour company, and afterwards of speeding you on yourjourney by a route more pleasant, and very little longer,than that you have taken. With these prospects Ipassed a livelier evening yesterday, and came on gaily,partly though not entirely on that account, to Norwichthis morning. Among other losses I am to regretthat of not being made acquainted with your plan, inwhich I may venture almost to promise beforehandthat I shall be happy to concur."In his various applications he was no stranger torefusals of co-operation. " So you wish, young man,"said a nobleman whose house he visited, " you wish tobe a reformer of men's morals. Look then, and seethere what is the end of such reformers," pointing ashespoke to a picture of the crucifixion no likelyargument to disarm a Christian warrior. Yet though1787. PROCLAMATION SOCIETY. 137sometimes opposed, upon the whole his plan succeeded.I find from your servant," writes Sir W. Dolben,that you have been in all parts of England since Isaw you last, and as active as Mr. Howard in this greatand congenial work of yours : for to you I shall everattribute the first honour of it." One, at least,amongst his earlier associates joined him zealously inthis good work, and long discharged the somewhatirksome service of a regular committee-man. Afflictionhad opened the heart of Mr. Eliot to the healingpower of true religion, and the thoughtless affection oftheir more careless years ripened into Christian friendship." I am glad," he writes, 31 " you have found somuch success in your plan hitherto, and hope and trustit will go on to receive all to which it is so well entitled.You must be aware, however, that the time for theobjections and difficulties to it is not yet arrived,though I know you are prepared to meet them whenthey come. For me, I am not only willing but desirousof joining myself to it. Lord North's name is sufficientto obviate one difficulty I had respecting it ; andfor the other, every day decreases it. I have everydayless fear of my temper of mind being thought atransitory effect of grief: I feel myself every daylooking upon my condition here with more steadinessand resignation, and to a future life with more earnestnessand desire. In this state, what assistance I cangive to the cause in which you are embarked, I shallbe anxious to contribute. God bless you, and make31 Aug. 29.138 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1787.you happy here, as well as hereafter : you have thatclaim to it, if I may so speak, that you have not requireda visitation of providence to turn you to yourGod."The society was soon in active and useful operation.The Duke of Montagu opened his house for its reception,and presided over its meetings, a post which wasfilled after his death by the late Lord (Chancellor)Bathurst, who was followed by Bishop Porteus : andbefore its dissolution it had obtained many valuableacts of parliament, and greatly checked the spread ofblasphemous and indecent publications. 32 It affordedalso a centre from which many other useful schemesproceeded, and was the first example of those variousassociations, which soon succeeded to the apathy offormer years.By the autumn of this year it was so well establishedas no longer to require the personal attention of itsfounder. He therefore left London, and after a shorthour in Devonshire fixed himself at Bath. " I findhere," writes Hannah More, " a great many friends ;but those with whom I have chiefly passed my timeare Mr. Wilberforce's family. That young gentleman'scharacter is one of the most extraordinary Iever knew for talents, virtue, and piety. It is difficultnot to grow wiser and better every time one converseswith him."3 Vide Hodgson's Life of Porteus, p. 101.CHAPTER VI.SEPTEMBER 1787 TO DECEMBER 1788.Retirement at Bath Causes which led him to the Abolitionof the Slave Trade Lady Middleton's suggestion Letterfrom C. I. Latrobe His previous intentions. Pitt's adviceSlave Trade committee formed Negociation on the subjectwith France His habits in London Burke Pitt's interestin the Abolition Evidence before Privy Council Wilberforcedangerously ill, and compelled to postpone his motionto the next year Middle-Passage bill Cambridge WestmorelandKing's illness.AT Bath Mr. Wilberforce was for a while removedfrom the full press of business ; and had leisure formore serious contemplation, than was possible inthe seasons of active exertion. " By God's help,"he writes, " I will set vigorously about reform. Ibelieve one cause of my having so fallen short ismy having aimed no higher. Lord Bacon says,great changes are easier than small ones. Remember,thy situation abounding in comforts requiresthee to be peculiarly on thy guard, lest when thou hasteaten and art full thou forget God." And again, ona later day, " It is now a year and three quarters since140 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1787.I began to have a serious concern about my soul ; andlittle did I then think that this time would have passedto no better purpose, or that I should now be no furtheradvanced in the Christian walk. Two sessions of parliamentgone over, yet nothing done for the interestsof religion. My intellectual stores not much increased,and I am less able in debate than formerly, which ishighly criminal, considering the weight to be derivedfrom credit for eloquence in this country. But theheart is the worst of all. . . Oh let not, Lord, mycompunction be so transitory as it has been before,when Thou hast impressed me with a conviction ofmy danger, but may it be deeply worked into myheart, producing a settled humility, and an unremittingwatchfulness against temptation, groundedon a consciousness of my own impotence and pronenessto offend."Yet though so little satisfied with his parliamentaryexertions, this year had been in one respect the verycrisis of his usefulness. In it he had been led publiclyto devote himself to his great work, the Abolitionof the Slave Trade. This was the fruit of hisreligious change ; and it is the more necessary distinctlyto establish this, because there has gone forthan opinion most injurious to the real spring of all hislabours, that he was led by accident to undertake thiscause. Thus the late venerable C. Ignatius Latrobeattributed to Lady Middleton the honourable work ofhaving called the appointed champion to the lists :and others, besides Mr. Latrobe, have imagined that1787. ALLEGED CAUSES OF HIS ABOLITION LABOURS. 141the like merit was claimed by Mr. Clarkson, in hisHistory of Abolition." 1Some extracts from a letter which Mr. L. wrote in1815 to his daughter, will furnish an interesting statementof his view of this matter.1 Of this book it is necessary to declare at once, and with a very painfuldistinctness, that it conveys an entirely erroneous idea of the Abolitionstruggle. Without imputing to Mr. Clarkson any intentional unfairness,it may safely be affirmed that his exaggerated estimate of his ownservices has led him unawares into numberless misstatements. Particularinstances might be easily enumerated, but the writers are mostanxious to avoid any thing resembling controversy on this subject.Contenting themselves, therefore, with this declaration, they will henceforthsimply tell their own story, without pointing out its contradictionsof Mr. Clarkson's " History."This is no new charge. An able writer, in a contemporary review,(Christian Observer, No. 169,) after expressing an earnest desire for acompetent history of the Abolition, describes Mr. Clarkson's work asby no means supplying this want; but as "remarkable chiefly for theearnest warmth of heart which it manifests, and for the strange redundancies,and still stranger omissions, and above all, the extravagantegotism with which it abounds." Mr. Wilberforce himself looked intothe book, and saw enough to induce him to refuse to read, lest he shouldbe compelled to remark upon it. With a ready forgetfulness of himself,which they who knew him will understand at once, he told Mr. Clarkson,when obliged to give his opinion, that he was entirely satisfied with whatwas said about himself, but that undoubtedly justice had not been doneto Mr. Stephen. In truth, whilst the two volumes are swelled by adetail of the minutiae of the early business, with which their author waspersonally conversant, a few pages hurry over the events of elevenimportant years, from 1794, when Mr. Clarkson left, to 1805, when heresumed his post.The writers would gladly have omitted all notice of this subject. Butthe interests of truth, and the character of the great leader in the Abolitionstruggle, require this avowal. With the same reluctance, and forthe same reasons, they insert without any comment certain letters, whichthey would gladly have suppressed, but which they cannot conceivethemselves warranted to omit, inasmuch as they exhibit Mr. Wilberforceand Mr. Clarkson in relations very different from any thing which theHistory of Abolition" would suggest.142 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1787.At Sea, on board the Brig Albion,28. 12. South Lat. 18. 38. W. Lon. Dec. 5, 1815.My dear C.You have felt interested in the abolition of theslave trade, and rejoiced with me and many othersthat our nation has been delivered from the ' bloodguiltiness'attached to it. Perhaps you have metwith Clarkson's ' History of the Abolition.' He hasbeen charged with egotism by many reviewers, and Ibelieve no one can read it without an impression leftupon his mind that the author takes great merit tohimself, and almost makes himself out to be the mainspringand chief instrument in bringing about thatgreat event.He was aware that such a charge might bebrought against him, and in some part of his workmakes a kind of apology with a view to avert it, butwhich, as far as I remember, appeared to me to berather lame.As I happen to know more about that businessthan many others, I have sometimes been called uponto give my opinion, and, on a certain occasion, did itwith such effect, that I was desired to commit it towriting for the information of the public. What Ihave heard and seen of those movements which endedin the abolition of the slave trade, if admitted to becorrect, will be my warrant for asserting, that thisgreat and momentous event was brought about by theinstrumentality of a woman.1787. ABOLITION STRUGGLE BEGUN BY RAMSAY. 143When Sir Charles Middleton (afterwards LordBarham) commanded a man of war, he had a surgeonon board whose name was Ramsay. Sir Charles wentto the West Indies, where Mr. Ramsay married alady of St. Kitt's. It was thought most convenientthat Mr. Ramsay should settle in that island, and ashehad an inclination to enter into the church, and aliving offered, he came home, took orders, and becamea clergyman. In St. Kitt's he saw a great deal of themanner of treating the negroes, and felt the greatestpity for them. But having become acquainted with thehorrors of the trade, by which they were obtained, hewas still more shocked with the indignities and crueltiessuffered by those poor creatures on their passagefrom Africa to the islands, and with the brutal mannerof their being bought and sold like cattle. How longhe staid in St. Kitt's I have not here the means of ascertaining;but after some years he received a vocationto the living of Teston, near Maidstone in Kent.Here his diligence, usefulness, and urbanity of mannerssoon brought him into great favour with thefamily, especially as his mild and charitable dispositionwell accorded with that of his patroness Mrs.Bouverie and her friend Lady Middleton. In thecourse of his frequent conversations, the state of theslaves in the West Indies, and the abominable trafficin human flesh and blood, came into discussion. Theladies were shocked with the details given them byMr. Ramsay. Lady Middleton's active mind andindefatigable ardour would not suffer the matter to144 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1787.,rest, and she was continually urging Mr. Ramsay tocall the attention of the whole nation to such cryingsins. To this purpose she wrote him an energeticletter, which you will find in his ' Essay on the Treatmentof, and Traffic in, Slaves.' This book caused agreat sensation, and raised against Mr. Ramsay a hostof enemies. Yet all this which was said and writtenon the subject might have passed away, and producedas little effect as the declamations and writings ofmany good men in England and America, and themental torments experienced and recorded by Mr.Clarkson, but that God put it into the heart of LadyMiddleton to venture one step further, and to urge thenecessity of bringing the proposed Abolition of theSlave Trade before parliament, as a measure in whichthe whole nation was concerned.This was done in the most natural and simplemanner possible, at the conclusion of some very animatedexpressions of her feelings on considering thenational guilt attached to the continuation of such atraffic. Sorry I am, that I did not mark the daywhen I was witness to that remarkable conversation, 2which took place at breakfast, Mr. Ramsay, if I mistakenot, being present. Lady Middleton, addressingher husband, who was member for Rochester, said,Indeed Sir Charles I think you ought to bring thesubject before the House, and demand parliamentaryinquiry into the nature of a traffic so disgraceful toIt took place during Mr. Latrobe's residence at Teston, in theautumn of 1786.1787. LADY MIDDLETON'S SUGGESTION. 145the British character.' Sir Charles granted the proprietyof such an inquiry; but observed, that the causewould be in bad hands if it was committed to him,who had never yet made one speech in the House ;but he added, that he should strenuously support anyable member who would undertake it.This led to an interchange of opinions, respectingthe willingness and fitness of several members whowere named to brave the storm, and defend the causeof humanity ; when some one mentioned Mr. Wilberforce,who had lately come out, and not only displayedvery superior talents and great eloquence, but was adecided and powerful advocate of the cause of truthand virtue, and a friend of the minister. He was thenat Hull, and Lady Middleton prevailed on Sir Charlesimmediately to write to him, and propose the subject.He did so, and communicated the letter he had writtento the family, as well as Mr. Wilberforce's answerwhich he received a few days after, both of which Iheard with these mine ears. Mr. Wilberforce wroteto the following effect ; ' That he felt the great importanceof the subject, and thought himself unequalto the task allotted to him, but yet would not positivelydecline it ; adding, that on his return to townhe would pay a visit to the family at Teston, and consultwith Sir Charles and Lady Middleton, &c. on thesubject.'After Mr. Wilberforce's return from Yorkshire hevisited the family at Teston, as proposed ; and as heendeavoured to make himself master of the subject,VOL. I. H146 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1787.and from every accessible quarter to obtain information,Sir Charles sent him to me, to learn what hadbeen effected by our missionaries among the slaves, inthe different West India islands ; and I furnished himwith every species of intelligence in my power.4f My purpose was to show that the abolition of theslave trade was, under God, and when the time wascome, the work of a woman, even Lady Middleton,who was the honoured instrument of bringing themonster within the range of the artillery of the executivejustice of the kingdom, and selecting and rousingthat noble champion, who so firmly stood hisground, and persevering from year to year, at last sawhis labours crowned with success. Many preparatorysteps had been taken by that excellent man, GranvilleSharpe, and others; and I believe Mr. Clarkson, whenhe says that there arose in many places a spirit ofgeneral inquiry, without any previous communications,as to the nature of that horrible traffic.As to Mr. Clarkson's account, I should have forgivenhim the display of his own laborious and unweariedexertions in the cause, in which he certainlyexceeded others, had he but done justice to the meritsof those, who most contributed to make his labourseffectual in accomplishing the desired end.CHR. IGN. LATROBE."It must be stated in justice to Mr. Clarkson thathe never thought himself entitled to the praise, towhich he was supposed by others to have pretended.1787. TRUE CALL TO ABOLITION FROM WITHIN. 147In a letter dated August 12th, 1834, he says in answerto this very charge, " that Mr. Wilberforce wasrepresented in the ' History of the Abolition of theSlave Trade,' as entering upon this subject originallyat my suggestion," " there are no words of mine tothis effect; nor any from which such an idea, twistand torture them as you will, can ever be inferred ;"and again, " not one word is said, in the account, ofMr. Wilberforce's having taken up the cause at mysuggestion." Of Lady Middle ton's application Mr.Wilberforce has said, " It was just one of those manyimpulses which were all giving to my mind the samedirection." ; Nor was it an unnatural mistake bywhich those who had not known his previous trainingattributed his after-conduct, according to their ownbias, either, to Lady Middle ton in 1786, or to MrClarkson in 1787. But the real cause of his engagingin the work lay far deeper than any such suggestions.It was the immediate consequences of his altered character.The miseries of Africa had long ago attractedhis attention. Even in his boyhood he had written onthe subject for the daily journals "It is," he hassaid in conversation, " somewhat worthy of attentionas indicative of the providential impulses by whichwe are led into particular lines of conduct, that asearly as the year 1780 I had been strongly interestedfor the West Indian slaves, and in a letter asking myfriend Gordon, then going to Antigua, to collect informationfor me, I expressed my determination, or at3 Con. Mem.H 2148 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1787.least my hope, that some time or other I should redressthe wrongs of those wretched and degradedbeings." In November 1783, he records a conversationconcerning the condition of the negroes withMr. Ramsay, who was then upon the eve of publishingthe work from which sprung the long and bitter controversywhich brought the treatment of the negrorace before the public eye. In 1786 was publishedMr. Clarkson's first pamphlet on the trade ; 4 butthrough the years 1784 and 1785 Mr. Ramsay foughtalone, nor did he ever quit the strife until he sunkunder its virulence in the summer of 1789.Nor was Mr. Wilberforce at this time wantingin many high qualifications for the conduct of thecause. His glowing and persuasive eloquence, hishigh political influence rarely combined with independence,marked him out as fitted to achieve that deliverancefor the oppressed for which his generousmind would naturally long. Yet at this time hewanted that one requisite without which all the restwould have proved insufficient. The statue, indeed,was framed with exquisite symmetry, but the etherealfire was wanting. Personal ambition and generousimpulses would have shrunk from the greatness of theundertaking, or grown wearied in the protractedstruggle, and these hitherto had been the mainspringsof his conduct. " The first years that I was4 An Essay on the Slavery and Commerce of the Human Species, particularlythe African ; translated from a Latin dissertation which washonoured with the first prize in the University of Cambridge for theyear 1785 With additions ; published in June 1786.1787. EFFECT OF HIS NEW PRINCIPLES. 149in parliament," he has said, "I did nothing nothing Imean to any good purpose ; my own distinction wasmy darling object." But now he acted upon a newset of principles; his powers of mind, his eloquence inspeech, his influence with Mr. Pitt, his general popularity,were now all as talents lent to him by God,and for their due improvement he must render an account.Now, therefore, all his previous interest inthe condition of the West Indian slaves led to practicalexertion. " God," he says, in undertaking whatbecame at once a sacred charge " God Almighty hasset before me two great objects, the suppression ofthe slave trade and the reformation of manners." 5 Inthis spirit he approached the strife, and let it neverbe forgotten, that it was the fear of God which armedhim as the champion of the liberty of man. That itwas by this general acquaintance with West Indianmatters, and not from any accidental summons, thathe was led to turn his attention to the slave trade, hehas himself recorded. " It was the condition of theWest Indian slaves which first drew my attention, andit was in the course of my inquiry that I was led toAfrica and the abolition." 6 These inquiries hewas busily pursuing amongst the African merchantsthroughout the year 1786^ "I found them," he says, 7at this time ready to give me information freely, thetrade not having yet become the subject of alarmingdiscussion, but their accounts were full of prejudiceJournal, Sunday, Oct. 28, 1787.6 Letter to James Stephen Esq. Jan. 15, 1817. 7 MS. Mem.150 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1787.and error. I got also together at my house from timeto time persons who knew any thing about the matter."Several of us met at breakfast at Sir C. Middleton's.I think also at Mr. Bennet Langton's, and Iam sure at my own house." Mr. Latrobe has preserveda characteristic notice of one of these interviewswhen he was seeking in all quarters for information." I was breakfasting with Sir C. Middleton, atSomerset House, one Wednesday morning, in the beginningof the year 1787, when he said, ' Pray be athome this morning, for I have engaged Mr. Wilberforceto call upon you and inquire about the slavetrade.' I had arranged to spend the day from home,and had left orders that my rooms in Roll's Buildings,Chancery Lane, should have a thorough cleaning.Upon hearing of his intended visit I hastened home toprepare for his reception. A few minutes afterwardshe arrived. My sitting room could not be entered, buthe volunteered to sit. with me in my bed room. Thewhole scene is now before me ; the fire smoked, and Iwas about to open the window, when he prevented meby saying, I can bear smoke better than the toothache.There we conversed, and I gave him a full accountof the trade, our missions in the West Indies,&c. and persuaded him not to bring our missionariesforward, that their labours might not be impeded."Yet it was not with inconsiderate haste that he undertookthe cause. " When I had acquired," he says,so much information, I began to talk the matter overwith Pitt and Grenville. Pitt recommended me to1787. HIS PURPOSE AVOWED, 151undertake its conduct, as a subject suited to my characterand talents. At length, I well remember, aftera conversation in the open air at the root of an oldtree at Holwood just above the steep descent into thevale of Weston, I resolved to give notice on a fit occasionin the House of Commons of my intention tobring the subject forward." In the spring of 1787,Mr. Clarkson, who had published a Prize Essay uponthe subject in the preceding year, was in London, andwas introduced to Mr. Wilberforce ; but though theyfrequently conversed upon the subject, Mr. Wilberforcenever divulged his own determination, untilat Mr. Bennet Langton's table in answer to a questionfrom his host he avowed it publicly.Important consequences followed this avowal.From the time of Granville Sharpe's exertions in akindred cause, and still more since, in 1784, Mr.Ramsay commenced the public controversy, a growinginterest in the question had arisen simultaneouslyin many different places. Several humane men hadbeen for months communicating privately upon thesubject, and they now at once determined upon immediateaction, and formed themselves into a committeeto raise the funds and collect the information necessaryfor procuring the abolition of the trade. Their firstmeeting was held upon the 22nd of May, 1787, whenGranville Sharpe was elected chairman of the twelvewho met together, most of whom were London merchants,and all but two Quakers. This body soonincreased and grew into a valuable ally of Mr. WilderLIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1787.force. It was long indeed before his name was openlyenrolled amongst their number, because his exertionspromised to be more effectual by his being independentof them ; but from the first he directed theirendeavours. 8 By their means many useful publicationswere circulated, and a general knowledge of thehorrors of the trade extensively diffused; as theiragent Mr. Clarkson sought patiently for evidence inLiverpool and Bristol; they raised contributions todefray the general expenses of the cause, and becamea central body, from which emanated many similarsocieties in the chief provincial towns. " At thisplace," writes a correspondent from Manchester,large subscriptions have been raised for the slavebusiness, and ' te duce Teucro' we are warm andstrenuous." 9 Their great work, and that in whichthis year they actively engaged, was to rouse theslumbering indignation of the country against thecruelty and bloodshed of the traffic. And here wasseen at once the exceeding importance of their leader'scharacter. In the year 1780, the slave trade hadattracted Mr. Burke's attention, and he had evenproceeded to sketch out a code of regulations whichprovided for its immediate mitigation and ultimatesuppression. But after mature consideration he hadabandoned the attempt, from the conviction that thestrength of the West Indian body would defeat the8 Vide MS. transactions of the Abolition Society.9 Letter from T. B. Bailey, Esq. to W. Wilberforce, EsqDec 15, 1787.1787. HIS FITNESS FOR HIS TASK. 153utmost efforts of his powerful party, and cover themwith ruinous unpopularity. Nor could any merepolitical alliance have been ever more likely to succeed.The great interests with which the battle mustbe fought could be resisted only by the general moralfeeling of the nation. There was then no exampleupon record of any such achievement, and in enteringupon the struggle it was of the utmost moment thatits leader should be one who could combine, and sorender irresistible, the scattered sympathies of thereligious classes. Granville Sharpe, the chairman ofthe London committee, did not fail to point out thisadvantage. " Mr. W." he writes, " is to introduce thebusiness to the House. The respectability of hisposition as member for the largest county, the greatinfluence of his personal connexions, added to anamiable and unblemished character, secure everyadvantage to the cause." Its first supporters accordinglywere not found amongst the partisans of politicalcommotion, but amongst the educated and religious.Many of the clergy," writes Granville Sharpe, " arefirm and cordial friends to the undertaking:" and soonafter he rejoices " in their continual support." If anythingwere wanted to complete this proof, it would befound in the grievous injury the cause sustained inlater years from the character of its chief politicalsupporters.This then was the position Mr. Wilberforcesurveyed when musing on his character and dutiesin the autumn of 1787. Soon afterward he 3154 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1787.turned to London, and engaging in a correspondencewith Mr. Clark son, he rendered him frequentassistance, 10 and received from him detailed accountsof his progress in collecting evidence. Hehimself also at this time examined some who werewilling to appear as witnesses, and arranged the plan ofaction on which he determined to proceed. 11 " If Imentioned the circumstances," says Mr. Clarkson inan answer to a hint that he had divulged prematurelysome of these arrangements, " they must have beenextorted from me. I was requested to attend Mr.Beaufoy, Whitehead, Grigby, and others, who are wellwishersto the cause, but on account of the injunctionslaid on me by you, I hastened out of town, that Imight neither give offence by a refusal, nor yet revealthe intended plan."Even in this early stage of deliberation, Mr. Wilberforceperceived the importance of procuring the concurrenceof our foreign neighbours ; and from thefriendly relations which at this time subsisted withthe court of Versailles, he was led to entertain thehope that France might be induced to join with Eng-10 Au extract from a letter of Mr. Rose, of Sept. 27, 1787, highlyhonourable to the writer, illustrates one mode in which Mr. W. oftenhelped forward these inquiries.My dear Wilberforce,It is quite unprecedented to allow any one to rummage the CustomHouse papers for information, who has no employment in the revenue.I will however without delay obtain for Mr. Clarkson all the informationwhich he wants : though I am a West Indian planter, would I werenot.">' Letter from Sir C. Middleton to W. Wilberforce, Dec. 19, 1787.1787. REASONS FOR NOT GOING TO PARIS. 155land in the abolition of the slave trade. In order toavail himself of every opening for promoting thisarrangement he had almost determined to repair toParis, and on the 16th of December, proposed to Mr.(afterwards Lord) Grenville to join him in the undertaking.Lord Grenville replies :TO W. WILBERFORCE, ESQ.Whitehall, Dec. 18, 1787.My dear Wilberforce,I would have answered your letter yesterday,but that I waited for an opportunity of speaking toPitt upon the subject. I have seen him to-day, andtalked with him upon it, and he entirely agrees withme in the opinion that no advantage could be derivedfrom any person's undertaking a journey to Paris, forthe purpose of pressing the business there. It is, Ihope, unnecessary for me to say that I have the successof this matter most sincerely at heart, and am so farimpressed with its importance that I most certainlywould neither myself decline, nor advise you to decline,any trouble which could at all tend to promote theobject. My own business would make it very inconvenientfor me to undertake such an expedition at thisperiod; but that would not be felt by me as anymaterial obstacle, if I saw any prospect of its doinggood. I think there might be some impropriety ingiving rise to the many speculations which my goingto Paris must occasion, without an adequate motive.156 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1787.If I was there I could do no more than Eden is doing,and has in part already done. Perhaps even theappearance of our being over-solicitous upon the subjectwould not forward the attainment of our point,as it might give rise to a suspicion, that what we areproposing is not so perfectly fair and equal as wewould wish it to be believed. These reasons applywith equal force to yourself, you could not go therewithout much observation, nor without running therisk of occasioning suspicions in the mind of theFrench ministers. And surely even if you had nothingelse of any sort whatever to consult but the success ofthis work, you would more effectually promote it byremaining where you are attending to your own health,than if you were to endanger that, and with it thebusiness itself, by undertaking at this season of theyear a troublesome and fruitless journey to Paris.Believe me,my dear Wilberforce,most truly and sincerely yours,W. W. GRENVILLE."Sir W m Eden's correspondence shows that all wasthen attempted which the circumstances renderedpossible, and exhibits in a very striking light theinterest Mr. Pitt already took in all that concernedthe abolition of the trade.1787. FRENCH NEGOTIATIONS. 157TO W. WILBERFORCE, ESQ.Rue Neuve des Maturing, 19th. Dec.My dear Sir,You will see what I write to Mr. Pitt, by thisconveyance, respecting the African enterprise. It isin a more hopeful way than I expected ; but I amnever sanguine as to the success of any proposition,however just and right, which must militate against alarge host of private interests. We have made someministerial inquiries here as to its practicability, andthe answers are not encouraging. We do not, nevertheless,despair of an entire success, and are satisfiedat all events that much good may be done by usingthe present favourable moment to push the discussionand the attempt as far as we can.Query also, if we cannot entirely carry thewhole point, (which we may as well try,) whether itwould not be essentially useful to make a sort ofprovisional convention with France and Spain, reprobatingthe commerce in question in the strongestterms, and continuing it solely on a ground of necessity,under a mutual stipulation to prepare measuresfor abolishing it, without any convulsion to commerceand private property ? Pray discuss this paragraphwith Mr. Pitt and suggest any thing further thatmay occur.I am,my dear Sir,ever very sincerely yours,W M EDEN."158 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1787.A following letter held still more hopeless language,and implied too clearly the uselessness of further efforts.I send the answer which Mons. de Montmorin gaveto me yesterday respecting the negro business. Hesaid that there were great doubts here, respecting thepossibility of stopping the slave trade, without utterand sudden ruin to the French Islands. He said thatit was one of those subjects upon which the interestsof men and their sentiments were so much at variancethat it was difficult to learn what is practicable."His intended journey to Paris being thus laid aside,he was now established at his house in Palace Yardfor the ensuing season. Though the alterations in hisprinciples had led him to devote to higher objects thetime which had of old been wasted in the frivolitiesof fashionable life, yet he by no means withdrew fromthe common intercourse of society. He began atthis time a habit which he long maintained, ofcalling upon his different friends, on those eveningsin which he was not occupied by the House of Commonsbusiness or regular engagements. Thus hekept his hold upon society, while he reserved themorning hours for severer occupations. His intimacywith Mr. Pitt had been in no degree impaired by hisadoption of a higher standard of religious practice.They were," says one who often witnessed theirfamiliar intercourse, " exactly like brothers. "Dined at Pitt's," says the Diary of this date.Called in at Pitt's at 7, for a short time ; andstaid supper Apsley, Pitt, and I. Too late, .BURKE. 159circularly for Saturday will not again." " Pitt,Bancroft, Graham, &c. &c. dined with me." :< Pitt'sbefore House dined." "After House to Pitt'ssupped." " Jan. 29th. Burke, Sir G. Elliot, St.Andrew St. John dined with me. First not in spirits,yet a great man." To these entertainments givenonce each session to Mr. Burke he has often referredwith satisfaction. " Parr ill-naturedly endeavoured torevive a difference which had existed between Burkeand myself, in 1787. It was during the period of hisviolent attacks on Pitt. He had delivered a most intemperateinvective against the French NavigationTreaty ; a measure which was particularly welcometo many of my Yorkshire constituents. In reply tohim I said, ' We can make allowance for the hon.gentleman, because we remember him in betterdays.' The sarcasm, though not unkindly meant, andcalled for, as Pitt declared in the debate, by Burke'soutrageous violence, yet so exactly described thetruth, that it greatly nettled him. But it soon passedover, and I had peculiar pleasure in his dinners withme, as an evidence of our perfect harmony. He wasa great man I never could understand how hegrew to be at one time so entirely neglected. In partundoubtedly it was, that, like Mackintosh afterwards,he was above his audience. He had come late intoparliament, and had had time to lay in vast storesof knowledge. The field from which he drew hisillustrations was magnificent. Like the fabledobject of the fairy's favours, whenever he opened160 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1788his mouth pearls and diamonds dropped fromhim."Mr. Wilberforce's general intercourse with societywas now made subservient to the interests of the Abolitioncause. " Mr. Hartley, African, &c. breakfastedwith me." " Dined Sir C. Middleton's Ramsay andCollins." " Dined Braithwaite's Sir P. GibbsArchduchess James Grenville Slave TradeArchduke. warm." " Collins, Ramsay, Edwards,Gordon, supped Slave Trade discussed:" are someof his daily entries at this time. . He had now givennotice in the House of Commons of his intended motionon the subject for the 2nd of February, nor had theprospect of immediate success as yet been clouded over.Do I communicate," he writes on the 25th of Januaryto Mr. Wyvill, " or do you read with more satisfaction,that the cause of our poor Africans goes on most prosperously.I trust there is little reason to doubt of themotion for the abolition of this horrid traffic in fleshand blood being carried in parliament. But yet,for many reasons which I have not now either leisureor eyesight to state, and which therefore I mustdesire you, pro solito more tuo, to give me credit for,it is highly desirable that the public voice should beexerted in our support as loudly and as universally aspossible. Many places and some counties have alreadydetermined on petitions to parliament, and I shouldbe sorry that our little kingdom should be backwardin its endeavours to rescue our fellow-creatures frommisery, and retrieve our national character from the1788. CONFERENCES WITH PITT. 161foulest dishonour. I am persuaded that if a beginningis once made, the work will go on with spirit. Thereis no need of a county meeting, which it might beinexpedient to call at this season of the year; butdistrict meetings might be held in different partsof the county, and the rest be effected by publicadvertisements. If you concur with me in opinion, rememberonly that no time is to be lost. I am, in haste,ever most affectionately and faithfully yours,W. Wilberforce."It would delight you to hear Pitt talk on this(Slave) question, but this entre nous. I mean to write afew lines to the Dean of Middleham, to acquaint himwith the flourishing state of our cause : I believe hewas against us in the county, but united as we arein this work, he must have forgot it I am sure Ihave."His counsels were all shared with Mr. Pitt, and longand frequent were their conferences upon the conductof the business. " Unwell and so did not dine atPitt's, but met Ramsay there in the evening and discussed;" and again, " Called at Pitt's at night hefirm about African trade, though we begin to perceivemore difficulties in the way than we had hopedthere would be." Into these expected obstaclesMr. Pitt enters more fully in a letter of the 29th ofJanuary.162 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1788.My dear Wilberforce,In thinking over the difficulty respecting theAfrican business, it has occurred to me to he verymaterial to ascertain, whether a large proportion ofthe slaves now annually imported into the West Indiesmay not he for the purpose of bringing each year newlands into cultivation. I believe this has been a gooddeal the case, particularly in Dominica, St. Vincent's,and Grenada. You will see immediately the use ofthis proposition, if it can be made out. As far as thesupply of labour which we shall put a stop to wasapplied to this object, we shall only prevent fartherimprovements which would have taken place, andnot break in upon the advantages at present subsisting.At all events this can apply only to a part ofthe importation, but it is worth knowing what proportionthat is of the whole.The most obvious way of estimating this seems tobe to get an account of the produce of each island forseveral years back, and also to learn from personsacquainted with the subject, what number of acres offresh ground have been brought into cultivation, andwhat variations have taken place in the whole numberof slaves in each island for the same period.I have a notion too that I have seen in some ofthe papers on this subject, that when our Africantrade was more flourishing than at present, the commodities,besides slaves, which we took from thatcountry were in much larger quantities than at press.SLAVE TRADE. 163sent, particularly gold dust. That is a medium ofremittance which may be carried to any extent towhich the countries in Africa can supply it. It istherefore worth inquiring very particularly how thisstands.I have treated you with a long essay,Nil mihi describes, attain ipse veni.In other words, I find there is not a levy tomorrow.If you could contrive to come here to-night or tomorrow,I would stay another day quietly in thecountry, and should like extremely to have a fullprose on all this business. Remember you owe meatleast a week.Ever yours,Holwood, JTuesday, Jan. 29." W. P.Pray write one line to let me know whetheryou can come, and send it to Downing Street, thatthe messenger may bring it to-night."With such interest and care had Mr. Pitt alreadyentered upon this subject, yet (the effect perhaps ofconstitutional reserve) to Mr. Clarkson when admittedto a personal interview 12 on Mr. W.'s introductiona month after this time, he appeared ignorant of thefacts if not doubtful of the merits of the case.The day of the promised motion was now approaching; but though his zealous partisans throughout the12 " In this interview," says Mr. C. " I had given birth in the ministerto an interest in our cause."164 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1788.country, who had formed themselves into local associationsin almost all the great provincial towns,and had sent already above thirty petitions to theHouse of Commons, were anxious for immediateaction, it became evident to the leader in the contest,that he could succeed only by more cautious tactics.TO THE REVEREND CHRISTOPHER WYVILL.Feb. 8, 1788.My dear Sir,The object of my delaying to reply to yourletter sooner is not completely answered, for I cannoteven yet inform you with precision when my motionrespecting the Slave Trade will be made : there aresome reasons which, according to the present appearancesof things, seem to make it eligible to defer thebusiness as long as is decent, but I do not think it canbe held off for more than a fortnight or three weeks.However as my opponents will be heard by counselgoing into a long examination of evidence, if ever theBill gets into the House of Lords, . . on which headI am not altogether so void of alarm as when I lastwrote to you, . . its progress will be very slow j andtherefore I conceive your petition arriving iu five orsix weeks would come up in time to be of essentialservice. Would it be amiss to publish in the Londonas well as the provincial papers, that it is intendedto take the sense of the county at the assizes ? Othercounties may be induced to follow the example, towhom without such a suggestion this particular mode1788. MR. PITT'S SINCERITY. 1G5of collecting the public opinion in an easy mannermight not occur.I am always with the truest regard,my dear Sir, yours affectionately,W. Wilberforce."Symptoms of determined opposition were beginningto appear. The trade had struck its roots too deeplyamongst the commercial interests of the country to fallbefore a single blow. In spite too of Mr. Pitt's support,the administration, as a body, were not in favourof the cause. " This," says Mr. Wilberforce,has afforded to his enemies a plausible, though certainlyno just, ground for doubting his sincerity. Thecharge springs in part from ignorance of the practicesof parliament. It is undoubtedly the established rule,that all official men are to vote with their principal ;but notwithstanding the systematic support of a ministrywhich has resulted from systematic opposition, theminister is not considered as entitled to require thevotes of the inferior members of government except onpolitical questions. What shall, and what shall not beagovernment question, is not an arbitrary arrangementdependent on the part of the minister it turnsupon the question, Is the credit or stability of theministry at stake ? In the instance therefore of mymotion, as on Pitt's own motion for the improvementof the Poor Laws, every one was perfectly at libertyto vote as he saw fit. It was in no sense a partyquestion."166 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1788.To meet such an opposition as was now threatened,it was absolutely necessary to possess a greatbody of distinct facts, upon which to ground the firstattack upon the trade. To procure this evidenceMr. Pitt consented to issue a summons to the PrivyCouncil, to examine as a board of trade the state ofour commercial intercourse with Africa. " I havebeen blamed," says Mr. Wilberforce, " for this decision; as if I had suffered the first favourablefeelings to our cause, which existed in the country, todie away, and given time for self-interest to exert itspowers. But it must be borne in mind, that thoughI might have carried a general resolution which condemnedthe slave trade, Abolition could be obtainedonly by an act of parliament. Now the slow andcautious policy of our legislative system gives theopponent of every measure nine or ten, and, in the caseof a warm and dexterous partisan, many more stationsfor drawing up his troops and resisting its advance.Of these opportunities our opponents would haveavailed themselves; and the inquiry into this complicatedsubject would have been just as long, howeverwe had met the petitions of the West India body."The first witnesses who were heard by the PrivyCouncil were those whom the African merchants haddeputed. They undertook to establish not only thenecessity, but the absolute humanity of the trade.Meanwhile, at Mr. Wilberforce's 13 suggestion, thefriends of Abolition prepared their evidence and martsVide Minutes of Abolition Committee, Feb. 16, 1788.1788. HIS SEVERE ILLNESS. 167shelled their witnesses. In producing these, it hadbeen previously determined that the London committeeshould alone appear, whilst the leaders of thecause should direct their movements for awhileunseen. 14At this important moment, it seemed but too probablethat Mr. Wilberforce would be withdrawn foreverfrom the conduct of the cause. It was in spiteof the hindrances of a delicate constitution that all hislabours were performed ; but in the course of thisspring his health appeared entirely to fail, from anabsolute decay of the digestive organs. On the lastday of January he says in his Diary, after manyprevious records of indifferent health, " Very unwell,so did not dine at Pitt's, but met Ramsay there in theevening and discussed did not go to House. Feb.1st. Still indifferent did not go to the House."This attack passed off after a few days, and he renewedhis attendance in the House, and dischargedhis ordinary amount of labour. But within threeweeks his illness returned. " Feb. 19th. Very indifferent,great languor, total loss of appetite, flushing,&c.22nd. Very indifferent feverishness very troublesomeall last night no sleep constant thirst andheat.23rd. Called at Pitcairnee's worse and uncertainkind of treatment. Never stirred out after this morninguntil March 1st, when Milner came by breakfastM Letter from Sir C. Middleton.168 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1788.time, having put off his lectures, &c. out of solicitudeto see how I was going on. Appetite had entirelyleft me.March 3rd. Head utterly unfit for business allthis time, and eyes indifferent. Milner left me afterdinner. All my friends very kind, and Lancasteranxiety itself.4th. At P.'s request went to Clapham, but returnednext day.5th. I thank God I mend get out an airingmiddle of the day when fine."On the 8th of March he writes to Mr. Wyvill, " Ihave been a good deal indisposed for the last fortnight,and have been kept a close prisoner, and obliged to giveup even the most trifling business. Thank God, I amnow recovering, and I trust a little relaxation, on whichmy physician peremptorily insists, and Bath waters,will restore me again to the duties of my station ; myeyes have been all along, and are still, very indifferent.I approve of all you attempted to do in the slavebusiness, but we must be satisfied with what we canobtain. I trust that question is in a prosperous state."On the very day of writing this letter his complaintreturned with increased violence.March 27th. On the 8th had a relapse. Friendsadvised and forced me to call in Warren with Pitcairnee.My mother and sister wrote word that they wouldcome up, and arrived in a day or two. Confined to thehouse until within three or four days. Lancaster andMontagu most tenderly assiduous in watching me1788. MR. PITT'S PROMISE. 169during the course of my illness, and the rest of myfriends universally kind."His disorder had now assumed the character ofan entire decay of all the vital functions. " Thereis Wilberforce," said one college friend directingthe attention of another to his wasted frame, " hecannot last for three weeks." A consultation of thechief physicians of the day, ended in the declarationto his family, " That he had not stamina to last afortnight." Judging the case to be beyond theskill of the masters of human art, they decentlydismissed their patient on a journey to the Bathwaters. He complied with their desire, but soberlyforecasting the doubtful issue of his sickness, he firstsummoned Mr. Pitt, and obtained from him a promisethat he would charge himself with the interestsof the Abolition cause. Satisfied with this pledgehe set out for Bath, which he reached upon the 5th ofApril in a state of extreme weakness and exhaustion.Behold me," he wrote from Bath to Mr. Villabanished man from London and business. It isno more than I can expect if my constituents vote myseat abdicated, and proceed to the election of anotherrepresentative : however, I trust I shall yet be enabledby God's blessing to do the public and them someservice. As to the Slave question, I do not like totouch on it, it is so big a one it frightens me in mypresent weak state. Suffice it to say, and I know thepleasure it will afford you to hear it, that I trustVOL. I. I170 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1788.matters are in a very good train. To you in strictconfidence I will intrust, that Pitt, with a warmth ofprinciple and friendship that have made me love himbetter than I ever did before, has taken on himselfthe management of the business, and promises to doall for me if I desire it, that, if I were an efficientman, it would be proper for me to do myself. Thisis all I can now say ; I might add more were we sideby side on my sofa."Upon this promise Mr. Pitt at once acted so far asto superintend, with the help of Bishop Porteus, thePrivy Council inquiries which were now in progress.Meanwhile the session of parliament was advancing,and the country adherents of the Abolition, who hadsent no less than one hundred petitions to the Houseof Commons, began to grow impatient of delay. Someof them even wrote to suggest the propriety of immediateaction under another leader. The London committeeendeavoured to restrain their eagerness bysuggesting to them the loss which the cause mustsustain from any alteration in its conduct ; and distinctlydeclared that " if Mr. Wilberforce was at lastunable to resume his post they should leave to himthe selection of his substitute." At the same time(April llth) they wrote to Mr. Wilberforce for hisdirections as to their conduct " in this emergency."This communication followed him to Bath, and reachedhim when reduced to such a state that he could notread any letter upon business. His friends therefore1788. RESOLUTION AGAINST SLAVE TRADE. 171judging for him that the proper time was come, wrotein his name to Mr. Pitt, 15 and committed the causeinto his hands. Upon this summons Mr. Pitt immediatelyacted. Upon the 22nd of April, Mr. GranvilleSharpe reported to the committee that he hadbeen sent for by the minister, and officially informedof the pledge which he had given to his friend.Upon the 9th of May accordingly Mr. Pitt moveda resolution binding the House to consider the circumstancesof the slave trade early in the followingsession. In spite of his endeavours to prevent anunseasonable discussion, Mr. Pitt's resolution gaverise to a very warm debate ; and the expressed opinionof the House seemed strongly in support of Abolition.Mr. Burke was its declared advocate ; Mr. Fox hadalmost made up his mind to immediate abolition."Twelve members avowed themselves its earnest supporters; and the representatives of slave-trading Liverpoolwere alone found bold enough to intimate dissent ;yet even then were heard whispers of that commercialruin which was soon afterwards predicted in so confidenta tone. The danger of such discussions wasprophetically announced, and " Mr. Wilberforce fornegro" affirmed to be already in the island of Grenadathe secret watch-word of servile insurrection. All thefriends of Abolition were warm in their expressions ofsympathy in Mr. Wilberforce's illness, and in lamentationfor his absence. " It is better," said Mr. Fox,14 The letter was written by Mrs. Wilberforce, Miss Bird, and Mr.Hawkins Brown.i 2172 LIFE OP Wilberforce. 1788.that the cause should be in his hands than in mine;from him I honestly believe that it will come withmore weight, more authority, and more probability ofsuccess." But though the general question was postponed,yet an important measure of practical reliefwas carried during this session. " Some of our principalsupporters," says Mr. Wilberforce, " one ofwhom was the venerable Sir. W. Dolben, were led bycuriosity to inspect with their own eyes the actualstate of a slave ship then fitting out in the riverThames. This was when the spring was so far advancedthat the inquiry and discussion had been putoff by mutual consent until the following year. ButSir W. Dolben and his friends came back to theHouse of Commons with a description which producedone universal feeling of pity, shame, and indignation.In particular, they found, in spite of the confidencewith which it had been maintained, that self-interestalone would suffice for securing kind treatment tothese wretched victims of avarice, that they werecrowded into a space so miserably small, as exceedinglyto aggravate their sufferings, and cause, fromthe spread of infectious sickness, a prodigious mortality.At once it was resolved, that such enormitiesshould not exist unchecked even for another session,and a bill, limiting the number of slaves and providingsome precautions against their sufferings, was proposedand carried by a large majority."Sir William Dolben's Bill was introduced upon the1st of May. The slave merchants opposed it fiercely.1788. MIDDLE-PASSAGE BILL. 173The delegates of Liverpool were heard against itsregulations by counsel at the bar of the House.Though within a few years they were compelled togrant that this sacrifice to humanity had actually increasedtheir profits, they now produced witnesses toprove that the limitations of the Bill (one slave to eachton of the vessel's burden) would totally suppress thetrade. After practising every manoeuvre known inHouse of Commons tactics, and endeavouring vainlyfor their present purpose to raise the cry of vestedinterests and commercial injury, they were defeatedby a large majority, and on the 10th of June the Billwas carried to the House of Lords. There it metwith more threatening opposition. The Lord ChancellorThurlow exhausted in assailing it all that fertilityin objections which marked his rugged character,and the honoured name of Rodney may be foundamongst its most vehement opposers. It passed theUpper House by a decided though reduced majority,and received the royal assent upon the llth of July.The whole course of this contest Mr. Wilberforcewatched patiently at a distance. Beyond all calculationhe was visibly gaining strength at Bath. Hisreturning health was in great measure the effect of aproper use of opium, a remedy to which even Dr.Pitcairnee's judgment could scarcely make him haverecourse ; yet it was to this medicine that he nowowed his life, as well as the comparative vigour of hislater years. So sparing was he always in its use, thatas a stimulant he never knew its power, and as a174 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1788.remedy for his specific weakness he had not to increaseits quantity during the last twenty years he lived. " IfI take," he would often say, "but a single glass of wine,I can feel its effect, but I never know when I have takenmy dose of opium by my feelings." Its intermissionwas too soon perceived by the recurrence of disorder.Just before he quitted Bath he has entered in hisJournal, " My head was much weakened during myillness. I mended exceedingly during my stay. Muchout airing. Never visited, but saw a good deal of companyat home. Too dissipated a place, except thewaters are necessary. Habits of idleness almost inseparablefrom it, and one grows insensibly fond ofthem ; at least I find it so, and Warren and Pitcairneenot thinking the waters wanted by me at present, Igladly in judgment, yet rather reluctantly in feeling,take my departure. The people with whom we werechiefly acquainted Martins, Dean of Middleham,Harcourt, Miners, Mr. Chigwell, (sensible, cool,well-informed man,) Fortescue, Gamblers, &c. M.B. variable in health, excellently inclined: instancesof jealousy of temper in respect of ridicule, &c.This may in part arise from her situation of dependenceon her friends. Read little or nothing someof Sully looked into M'Laurin when in my roomgoing to bed. Heard from Milner often while atBath. The Leeds affair 16 partly operated towards Mr. Hey, as mayor of Leeds, had endeavoured to put in executionthe recommendations of the Proclamation Society : an attemptin which he had met with great opposition. Vid. Pearson's Life of Hey.1788. HIS RETURNING HEALTH. 175ing me to Cambridge, intending to stay a month orthree weeks at St. John's to keep early hours, temperateliving, and as much reading as head, air, andexercise will allow." This intended visit is thus playfullyannounced to a friend at Cambridge, in a letterof the 4th of May, in the handwriting of one of hiscompanions. " It is possible, though not very probable,that I shall be at Cambridge upon Wednesday night.Do not say so at the fire-place in the Hall, but havemy quarters ready for me if you can. Beware, however,of a damp bed, and rather let me have one thathas been slept in, sheets and all, for a month together.If you see Milner give him a hint of the chance of myappearance.Yours ever,W. Wilberforce."P. S. (In his own hand.) Miss Bird honours youwith her handwriting. They are talking nonsense atthe table ; and the above is to create a laugh."On the 5th of May he left Bath upon his road toCambridge, performing the journey leisurely, sometimesupon horseback and sometimes in his carriagewith his own horses. " May 7th. Through Aylesburyto Dunstable. After Thing, road extremelybad. Mounted on horseback for the first time theseI know not how many months. Got a carter's horseto help the chaise up the hill. Dined at Dunstable176 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1788.determined to indict the road. Landlord at Hitchwould have had me turn a passenger out of his roomI would not consent but by a deception he got meinto it and the passenger coming in unwittingly,proved to be T. I asked him to supper and afterwardsa young man of Trinity Hall asked himself intoour company a forward, vulgar, and ignorant youth."Upon the 8th of May he reached Cambridge, andafter dining with Isaac Milner proceeded to St. John'sColl. where he was hospitably received by Dr. Chevalierat the Lodge. Upon the 7th of June he reviewsthe month which he had spent at the University.Lived more regularly and quietly than I had donefor a long time. Chiefly with Milner in the evenings.Dined commonly in Hall Frewen G. who Ihope grows serious Outburst Bishop of Llandaffdined twice. In health mended. Quartered at theLodge, where very comfortable. I always passedmy Sundays pleasantly."Though during this return to academic life, heexperienced much gratification from the company ofMilner, and some few others amongst his ordinarycompanions, yet his judgment of the general tone ofthe society he met with in his college, marks theimproved standard of intellect and morals which wasnow before his mind. " They were not what I hadexpected, they had neither the solidity of judgmentpossessed by ordinary men of business, nor the refinedfeelings and elevated principles which become a1788. WESTMORELAND. 177studious and sequestered life." Of himself he complains," I am too easily contented with a generalimpression of religion, and do not labour to perfectfaith by habituating myself to act upon a principle oflove. I scarcely dare resolve, after so many defeats ;but I trust I shall do better, relying entirely for successupon the assistance of that Holy Spirit which we arepromised."Leaving Cambridge he set out for Westmoreland,calling upon the road for his mother and sister. Oneday was spent in again examining the curiosities ofBirmingham. " Saw Clays in the afternoon. Calledon Dr. Priestley Storey there a creature of vastsimplicity. Went to Soho with young Watt. (CurtisLloyd and Watt breakfasted, who very civil andpleasing in manners.) Battle, a strong man, can raise900 Ribs. in weight." On the 17th of June he reachedKendal, and after a short tour amongst the lakes, wassettled in the house he had for some years rented atRayrigg. " My dear Frewen," he wrote fromKendal, " I have been about to write to you everydaysince I quitted Cambridge, and have foolishlydeferred it till it is almost too late to answer the mainpurpose of my letter, which was to desire you to putmy apologies to the Bishop of Llandaff and Dr.Beacon, into the mouth of some eloquent friend.I went off on the sudden.' e I was very indifferentthe last day,' (which is strictly true,) &c. Therescarce seems to be a necessity for employing the publicorator, but if you think otherwise you will act accord3178 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1788.ingle, &c. Come and try if Westmoreland will notbear a second visit.I am ever yours affectionately,W. WILBERFORCE."One of his objects in this visit to the lakes, was tomake Mr. Pitt acquainted with his favourite scenes.Pitt," he says, " promises to steal down to me for afew days." This excursion, which had been plannedand interrupted in the former year, was this summeralso prevented by the pressure of public business.Mr. Pitt in his way into Scotland, will takeFenwick, Castle Howard, and other principal places,but he will not make any stay except with Mr.Wilberforce." 17 " I doubt," says Mr. Smith, " yourseeing Pitt in Westmoreland this year ; thoughWindermere would be a fine relief to him after theWestminster election, and your company the bestconsolation after this defeat."But though disappointed of this visit, his house wasthronged, the whole summer through, with a successionof guests. His mother, whose strength and spirits werenow fast declining, had joined him on his road toWestmoreland, and she was not a little disconcerted asthey passed through Bowness, on their first arrival,at being shown a carriage which bore the Gordonarms, and hearing that she must prepare for a visitfrom the Duchess. " July 3rd. Passing throughBowness see Duchess of Gordon's carriage, and>7 Public Advertiser, June 20, 1787.1788. DUCHESS OF GORDON. 179she and Lady Charlotte at the window before we couldfinish dinner." " Their tapping at our low windowannounced that they had discovered our retreat, andwould take no denial. I went to them and told theDuchess, I cannot see you here, I have with me myold mother, who being too infirm to make newacquaintances, is no more in your way than youare in hers." 18 " Milner and I went and suppedwith them at Low Wood excused not making roomfor them. 4th. Morning Duchess of Gordonwalked to Rydale. Curious conversation respectingDundas." At this time, as appears from some singularletters, which she put into Mr. Wilberforce'shands, there was a misunderstanding between theDuchess and Mr. Dundas, through whom " the raysof regal bounty" then shone in the north. Thisbreach she wished to heal through Mr. Wilberforce'sinfluence with Mr. Pitt. " She pressed us to gowith her to Keswick, but I expect Lord Camden,who accordingly (Sat. the 5th) comes to dinnerPalmer our religious discussion evening in airing.Sunday, 6th. Camden off early. 7th. Balgoniescame. 10th. Lancaster came. llth. Milneroff. Monday morning, 14th. Balgonies and Lancasteroff. All the past days rainy. Lancaster and Idebated about trees Balgonies' rowing Lancastera most warm-hearted and affectionate creature.16th. Cooksonon came. 22nd. Bishop Llandaff dinedand slept. 24th. Bishop off about twelve. 25th.19 Con. Mem.180 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1788.Gen. Smith and Rickets came going to Scotchmoors. 31st. Scott, Law, and other lawyers came.Aug. 4th. Duncombe and Mason came. LionizedWatered, Ulster, &c." 19This constant stream of company continued untilhis leaving Westmoreland about the middle ofSeptember. Though diverted by its interruptionsfrom severer studies, he turned the intercourse ofsocial life into occasions of intellectual profit.Here I am," says Mr. Canning in a letter ofSept. 4th, 1814, "on Windermere lake, not far fromthe inn at Bowness, where in old time, I am told,you used to read aloud all night, to the great disturbanceof the then landlady and her family." Hisdeeper principles gave him too a keener relish forthe natural beauties around him. " I never enjoyedthe country more than during this visit, when in theearly morning I used to row out alone, and find anoratory under one of the woody islands in the middleof the lake." Attempts at active usefulness alsowere not wholly neglected. " Sadly taken up,"he says, " on Sundays with company in the house.Flemings, and Grantly, and Norton, and LordLonsdale called. Sunday-school first meeting."Yet upon the whole, his plans of study and retirementwere materially disturbed.The life I am now leading," he enters in hisprivate Journal at the end of July, " is unfavourablein all respects, both to mind and body, as little suit-diary.1788. LIFE AT RAYR1GG. 181able to me considered as an invalid, under all thepeculiar circumstances of my situation, as it is becomingmy character and profession as a Christian.Indolence and intemperance are its capital features.It is true, the incessant intrusion of fresh visitors, andthe constant temptations to which I am liable, frombeing always in company, render it extremely difficultto adhere to any plan of study, or any resolutions ofabstemiousness, which last too it is the harder for meto observe, because my health requires throughout anindulgent regimen. Nothing however can excuse orpalliate such conduct, and with the sincerest convictionof its guilt, I pray to that gracious God whoseways are not as our ways, to have mercy upon me, toturn the current of my affections, to impress my mindwith an awful and abiding sense of that eternity whichawaits me, and finally to guide my feet into the way ofpeace. And though I have so often resolved andbroken my resolutions, that I am almost ready toacquiesce in the headlong course which I am following ;yet as thus to acquiesce would be to consign myself toirreversible misery, I must still strive to loose myselffrom this bondage of sin and Satan, calling on thename of the Lord, who alone can make my endeavourseffectual.I am this week entering on a scene of great temptation,a perpetual round of dissipation and my houseoverflowing with guests ; it is the more necessary formeto live by the faith of the Son of God. Do Thouthen, Thou blessed Saviour and Friend of sinners, hear182 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1788.and have mercy on me. Let Thy strength be magnifiedin my weakness. But whatever be the issue ofthis residence at Rayrigg, may it be a useful lesson toteach me to form my plans hereafter with greatercaution and circumspection, and not to run myselfinto temptations, from the evil of which he who voluntarilyexposes himself to them cannot reasonablyexpect to be delivered.I will now form and note in my pocket-book suchresolutions for this week's regulation, as are bestadapted to my present circumstances ; and do Thou,O God, enable me to keep them. My general object,during my stay at this place, should be to guardagainst habits of idleness, luxury, selfishness, and forgetfulnessof God, by interlacing as much as I can ofreading, and meditation, and religious retirement, andself-examination. Let me constantly view myself inall my various relationsas one who professes to be a Christian,as a member of parliament,as gifted by nature and fortune, as a son, brother,paterfamilias, friend, with influence and powerfulconnexions.1. To be for the ensuing week moderate at table.2. Hours as early as can contrive. Redeemingthe time."As he was not now contented with empty resolutionsof amendment, he determined upon having morecommand over the disposal of his time, by giving upthis favourite residence. " Milner and I had much1788. PROCEEDINGS OF THE SLAVE COMMITTEE. 183talk about this being a most improper place for me,and resolved upon not continuing the house."This place," he wrote to Mr. Newton, just beforehe quitted Westmoreland, " wherein I looked thissummer for much solitude and quiet, has proved verydifferent from retirement. The tour to the lakes hasbecome so fashionable, that the banks of the Thamesare scarcely more public than those of Windermere.You little knew what you were doing when you wishedyourself with me in Westmoreland. My experiencewill not, I hope, be wasted on me, and I shall lay myplans in future with more foresight and circumspection.At this moment my cottage overflows withguests." He gave up the house, when his lease determined,in the following spring.Throughout this time, the operations of the LondonCommittee for procuring the Abolition of the SlaveTrade were directed by his advice. At the close of thesession, the inquiries of the Privy Council were suspendedfor the summer, and the friends of Abolitionwere employed in keeping alive the general interestof the country, and gaining a larger mass of evidencefor future use. To effect these purposes they resolvedto institute corresponding committees, and to hold apublic meeting in the metropolis. Of these resolutions,they were persuaded by Mr. Wilberforce's argumentsto modify the first, and rescind the second. 20He desired to appeal to the moral feelings of the nation,and approved therefore of promoting petitions to parts.Proceedings of the Committee.184 LIFE OP WILBERFORCE. 1788.lament ; but he distrusted and disowned the questionablestrength which might be gained by systematicagitation. He concurred in their despatching Mr.Clarkson on a journey through the provinces, to seekwitnesses who, with some that he had found himself,might be examined by the Privy Council. It was ofgreat moment to gain as much support as possible inthe following session ; and to secure the influence ofLord Lonsdale (the exact number of whose subjectvotes is recorded in his homely soubriquet of the Premier'sCat-o'-nine-tails) was of the first importance.With a view to this object, he himself resolvedto visit Other castle before he quitted Westmoreland." I cannot but too well remember," writesLord Lancaster two years afterwards, " the stolenexpedition when you were last at Rayrigg, in which,no doubt, you had a thousand frights and apprehensions,besides those of conscience ; and a few qualmsperhaps personally with regard to myself, when youcrept over the hills to plead the cause of freedom beforethe hardened despot of the north." " Resolved,"says the Diary of Sept. llth, " to go to Lord Lons-dale's (Slave Trade business) Sir J. Graham, Gar-forth,Saul, Fielding, Jno. Other, and two or threemore we all commend the terrace John LordLonsdale. " The success of this embassy he has notrecorded; but it brought at least before him, inthe despot of the north," surrounded by his dependentsenators, a singular and now extinguishedphase of social life. It is difficult to regard without1788. EFFECT OF SOLITUDE. 185a smile the visible amazement of the domestic bandat the unwonted courtesy which was extended to theindependent guest. 21 Nor less unfeigned was his ownastonishment when, upon leaving his room for an earlydeparture, he discovered that the footsteps he hadlong heard pacing the corridor were those of a brothersenator, who (commanded by their host) had thus prematurelyrisen to persuade him to a longer stay.After paying Hull a short visit, and spending a dayat Burden, he set off for Bath. " Sat. 4th Oct. Offearly ; spring broke near Burden ; walked forward,called in at Job William's cottage, a brick-maker, fourchildren, seems a very sober, industrious, well-disposedman. Dr. Cleaver's living, of whom he spoke well.Arrived late at Bedford where I spent the Sunday,Oct. 5 ; sermon on the Nature of Angels, a most unprofitablediscourse. A Sunday spent in solitudespreads and extends its fragrance; may I long findthe good effects of this." There had been a time whento be thrown thus upon his own resources had been asevere trial to his spirits. " I scarce ever felt," he hassaid, " such wretchedness as during those days whichI spent by myself before my reader joined me at Ray-ring,in 1784. My eyes were so bad that I could notread ; the rain would not let me leave the house, andI had not a creature with whom to converse, : I stoodresting my forehead on the chimney-piece in a state ofweariness not to be described." But now he had*' By Lord Lonsdale's ordinary rule cold tea was good enough forlate comers.186 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1788.learned to " commune with his own heart and to bestill ;" he had drunk into that " free spirit " by whichalone such self-converse can be happily maintained.Monday, Oct. 6th. Breakfasted at Lord Bathurst's,and drove with him through his woods. Bath evening,no lodgings provided, so housed at the Bear.Lord Maitland and Todd the latter talked of aparalytic stroke ; alas ! with how little true seriousness; nor did I express any deeper sense of theawfulness of the warning. Poor C.'s unhappy end.Milner's excellent advice at Hull, in addition to hislecture at Rayrigg, de levitate ' Nihil enim per seamplum est, nisi in quo judicii ratio extant' of beinga man of business, &c. May God enable me to profitfrom his hint, and make me properly grateful to himfor this true proof of friendship. Resolved not to dineout, with a view to obtaining more leisure. Tuesday,7th. Began the waters."He was not able to continue long at Bath. " Ihave for some time deferred," writes Mr. Wyvill, 22mentioning to you the intended jubilee at York uponthe 5th of November. But it is now so near, that Ican no longer delay to communicate my opinion thatyour appearance at so great a meeting of your friendsas will then be held at York is absolutely necessary,so that nothing short of inability to move withoutendangering your health ought to prevent it.Your absence from this meeting would be peculiarlyprejudicial, because many would be apt to consider itOct. 4.1788. JUBILEE AT YORK. 187a proof of excessive scrupulosity. On this topic yourantagonists have not been wanting in their endeavoursto hurt you ; but if you embrace this opportunity ofmeeting your constituents, and show them you areexactly the same person whose cause they latelyespoused with so much zeal, these hostile attemptswill be unsuccessful. It is surely possible to mix insuch assemblies with innocence and decency."Were I to attempt," he answers, " to show myconstituents this, it would be an attempt to imposeupon them which nothing should induce me topractise, and which I am sure you would be the lastman in the world to recommend. Except in the personalregard and gratitude to my friends, which werethen so strong that I dare not say they are increased,I cannot, (I speak to you what addressed to anotherwould be arrogant, but what in speaking to you itwould be worse than affectation to withhold,) I cannotsay that I am by any means the same person. I canassert with truth that I have a higher sense of theduties of my station, and a firmer resolution to dischargethem with fidelity and zeal ; but it is also truethat I am under many restraints as to my conduct towhich I was not then subject, and that my religiousopinions are very different. Not that I would shutmyself up from mankind and immure myself in acloister. My walk I am sensible is a public one ; mybusiness is in the world ; and I must mix in assembliesof men, or quit the post which Providence seems tohave assigned me. I entirely agree with you, * one188 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1788.may mix in these assemblies with decency and innocence.'But the point is, whether by confining myselfwithin these limits I should be likely to advance myinterests with my constituents. They certainly, Itrust, will not believe that I am so over-rigid as to condemnthe cheerfulness of the social board, when keptwithin the bounds of sobriety and decency, howeverdiligently my enemies may circulate reports to my disadvantage; but this would not be enough to removethe impression in question, if it were acting honestlyto endeavour to remove it. No ! for this purposewould it not be requisite for me to drink, and sing, &c.as I used to do ? You being a clergyman cannot drawany inferences from your own case to mine ; nothingof the sort I object to is expected from you."He deemed it however right to obey the summons.27th of October. Left Bath for London on myway to York to attend the jubilee Whilst at Bathgrew much better."28th. Arrived in town, and dined at Pitt's Bedat Sir C. Middleton's not a wink of sleep all night.""29th. Saw my aunt in a truly happy state ofmind."30th. Went to Holwood Pitt and Grenvillediscussed slave trade."The examination by the Lords of Trade was nowabout to recommence ; and it continued, with theexception of a short interruption in November, causedby the illness of the King, till the month of April 1789."31st. To town, and in afternoon on to Stevenage."1788. KING'S ILLNESS. 189Nov. 3rd. On to Dick Milnes' where dinedand slept she a pleasing woman, had long thoughtof slaves.""4th. On to York dined Morris's DuncombeMason Burgh.""5th. Jubilee day dined Tavern and ball atnight, our enemy grandees there."6th. Off in the evening to Lancaster."8th. Travelled on, aiming at Gisborne's, butobliged to stop short."Monday, 10th. On to Gisborne's, where staidall day."llth. On to Lichfield, where first heard a confusedaccount of the King's illness. On to Birmingham,where stopped all day for intelligence. Off nextafternoon after much debating. Sir John Smith'saccount. Wednesday, to Worcester. Thursday, toPetty France heard all along that the King dying.Friday, 14th. To Bath found letters obliged to gototown to parliament, which on account of King'sillness cannot be prorogued." " My dear Wilberforce,"wrote Mr. Steele from Downing Street, " the accountsof this day are prodigiously favourable. . . The Kingslept a good deal in the course of yesterday, and wasmuch more composed and calm when he was awake.The physicians do not hesitate to say that there is avisible alteration for the better, and his recoveryseems to be now much more probable than any bodyventured to suppose it to be some days ago. I am atall times sanguine, and seldom give way to despondentLIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1788.once till the case is desperate ; but on the presentoccasion I cannot persuade myself to doubt but thatthere is a protecting hand stretched forth over himand his country, and that every thing will still be aswe wish it.Yours ever most sincerely.P. S. It is very desirable that you should be intown on Thursday, unless it materially interfereswith your health."Left Bath, Monday, 17th, and reached London18th. Parliament met on Thursday, 20th, and adjournedfor a fortnight ; resolved to return to BathSet off 21st, and reached my sister and Miss Morewith her, Sat. 22nd staid there till Tuesday, Dec.2nd. Miss More a most excellent woman. ReachedLondon, Wednesday, Dec. 3rd, and attended cock-pitat night. Dec. 4th. Parliament met, and adjournedto Monday, Dec . 8th, when physicians' committeeappointed." His health was now so far re-establishedthat he was able to attend steadily to business, andrender Mr. Pitt the hearty assistance which thetrying situation of affairs needed. " Dec. 9th and 10th.Attended committee and made our report, llth. Precedentcommittee, and reported."All independent men throughout the countrylooked forward with alarm to the issue of the presentcrisis. " I very much fear," wrote Major Cartwrightto Mr. Wilberforce, (Dec. 1st,) "that the King's1788. MR. PITT'S MAGNANIMITY. 191present derangement is likely to produce other derangementsnot for the public benefit. I hope wearenot to be sold to the coalition faction." " Mr.Fox," writes Mr. Wyvill, "is I see arrived, andcabal I doubt not is labouring with redoubled zealunder his direction to overturn the present government,while you and the other firm friends of MrPitt are making equal exertions to prevent a changeof men and measures. I think the general opinion is,that the Prince has acted like a rash young man,that he is capable of being led into dangerous measures,and that men whom the nation greatly distrusts,have all his confidence and esteem."Throughout this trying time, Mr. Wilberforce'ssentiments exactly coincided with those of that greatman whose promptitude and courage were thensubjected to so severe a trial. "In the midst ofall these disquieting circumstances," he wrote, " myfriend is every day matter of fresh and growingadmiration. I wish you were as constantly as I amwitness to that simple and earnest regard for thepublic welfare, by which he is so uniformly actuated ;great as I know is your attachment to him, you wouldlove him more and more." 23To the Rev. C. WyvilLCHAPTER VII.DECEMBER 1788 TO JULY 1790.Serious resolutions Increased diligence Wilberforce preparesto move for the Abolition Pitt's co-operationStephen Retirement at Teston Motion lost Hope offurthering the cause at Paris Mr. Clarkson sent there, butwithout success Visit to H. More Chedder Schoolscommenced Buxton Country visits Return to townLife in Palace Yard during the session of Parliament TestAct Examinations before Slave Trade committee Crovr-ther General election.THE year 1788 closed upon Mr. Wilberforce withthe death of that aunt, under whose roof had beenpassed so large a portion of his early years.Tuesday, Dec. 23rd. Dined at Montagu's, Shooter'sHill tete-astute with him and his sweet wifeexcellently disposed people. Wednesday. Called atBlockhead saw my aunt, whispered that she wascomfortable. Oh that I may die the death of therighteous ! Returned to Montagu's, and there allday. M. took me to task for peculiarities sayinggrace, &c.25th, Christmas day. Not being well, and honestlythinking I might do them good, and that therefore itwas my duty, staid at Shooter's Hill all day. Church1788. HIS AUNT'S DEATH. 193at Etiam and sudden opportunity of receivingthe sacrament serious conversation in the evening.Both Mr. and Mrs. M. excellently disposed. MayGod bless them, and make them happy here andhereafter.Friday, 26th. Called at Blockhead, and saw myaunt for the last time she sensible too weak totalk, but expressed her inward satisfaction andcomposure. Oh may God enable me to have asfirm grounds of confidence in those awful moments !Came on to town and dined at Pitt's.Saturday, 27th. My aunt died at ten o'clock."The scene which he had now been witnessingtended no doubt to deepen those serious impressionswhich mark the first entries of the new year.' Received the sacrament. Thought over my futureplan of conduct and resolutions. I resolve to endeavourhenceforth to live more to the glory of God,and the good of my fellow-creatures to live more byrule, as in the presence of him by whom I shallfinally be judged. For the ensuing week I resolveto begin the day with meditation or reading Scriptureto pray thrice constant self-examination tablerules Horne's rules and my other rules anaccount of time also." 1To one whose past habits and present occupationswere of a desultory character, few things would bemore useful, or more difficult, than to note downaccurately the mode in which his time was spent.1 Journal.VOL. 1. KLIFE OF Wilberforce.1788.Such an account he now commenced, and continuedresolutely until his studious habits were matured;and if in after-life he perceived any relaxation in hisdiligence he immediately resumed the practice. Hismode of keeping this reckoning with himself is shownin the following weekly tables copied from his Diary ;the one during his attendance upon the House ofCommons, the other at a season of retirement in thecountry. It was his continual complaint, " that myinfirm health makes so much sleep absolutely essentialto me."Major application(Study.Minor applicationStudy.AUnaccounted for,Dressing.Relaxation sua ca</>>ccpDO.Serious reading,meditation.IHouse of Commons,business,&c.rpO.Left outof plan.Jan. 26th.5fitk27th.iaI28th.5.129th.23 J30th.|n31st.w3jSunday Feb. 1st.ii8|2nd.IT24|3rd.i23|4th.8!This should be 231, ^ u * ^e numbers are retained which stand inthe Diary. Another error occurs below.1788.TIME-ACCOUNT.April.Thursday 9th.1J4|324|Good Friday, 10th.4|llth.9|5jjEaster Sunday, 12th.4|5|22i13th.Ili7^14th.8i5in- 15th.6i26|gg>^cc"5|t o'-e 5*Osoc%ppg-scgP&H1-.To'9 sgo'sBlSLP-Tip3'fp.s.jq|pPV!Some notes inserted in his Diary when entering onthe plan illustrate these tables. " How long, alas,have I been a cumbered of the ground ! how littlehave I availed myself of the opportunities of usefulness,which have been so abundantly afforded me ! Bemore diligent and watchful for the future the nightcometh when no man can work. Let this considerationquicken my exertions. I am about to enter uponkeeping a regular account of my time, from which itwill be in my power to derive many advantages.My health requires me to live indulgently in allrespects; my station and sphere of action call memuch into company. Let me deal faithfully withmyself, and not give way further or more frequentlythan really shall be necessary, but strive to redeemthe time as one who works for eternity. Blessthis work, O God, I beseech thee. Gross accountK 2196 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1788.of time . . N. B. Never to harass myself or spend thepresent time, in considering needlessly under whathead to enter any portion of what is past. . . Squanderedwaste or misappropriation all unnecessarymeals, or bed time. House of Commons, business,&c. : into this is brought all time spent in going toand from public offices letters of business readingfor business consulting, &c. Relaxation sua causahere meal times when alone or quite at liberty,&c. : the more this head can be reduced the better.Dressing, &c. all that is frittered away all whichI forget how to account for. Requisite companygoing from place to place waiting for people.Minor application study reading for entertainment,or with no great attention familiar commonletters, &c. Major application study reading foruse composing getting by heart. Serious privateand family devotions, &c. Remember my rules andhints respecting the employment of odd half hours,and of thoughts in company or alone, riding, walking,providing store of thoughts, &c. &c.Thus careful was he at this period of his life, to usethe lively emotions of religious feeling with which itnaturally abounded, in forming settled habits ofobedience. To " live by rule," was now his object ;nor was it only over the employment of his time thathe thus diligently watched. To those who knew theclear serenity of his later life, it may be matter ofsurprise to hear that his sky was ever overcast bystorms. It is a most encouraging reflection that this1788. RULES FOR Self-improvement. 197peace was the result of previous contests. For thoughat this time most strictly temperate, and inclined inthe judgment of his fellows to abstemiousness ratherthan excess, he was himself sensible of many strugglesbefore his body was brought under that " sobergovernment" which renders it the meekest instrumentof the renewed spirit. He was not labouringto reduce intemperate habits within the limits ofthat self-indulgent propriety which contents the generalityof men. From this point he started, but aimingat a higher standard, he sought to live a life ofmortification in the midst of luxury. It was hisobject to gain such control over his lower nature, thatit should never impede his usefulness in social intercourse,or clog the freedom of his communing withGod. His Diary affords many instances of thesecontentions with himself, upon which he entered notwithout some indignation 2 at discovering their necessity." Surely these are not little things, health dependsupon them, and duty on health." " They arenot little things if my health and power of servingGod be a great one." Perceiving that his difficultiesarose from carelessness as much as self-indulgence,he sought to counteract it by laying down a set ofrules too minutely practical to bear insertion here,while not content with recording against himselfevery infraction of these severe regulations, he had4 " Itaque freni gutters temperate relation et constrictions tenenssunt. Et quis est, Domine, qui non rapiatur aliquando extra metalnecessitates ? Quisquis est magnus est. Magnified nomen tuum Egoautem non sum quia spectator homo sum." S. Aug. Confess, lib. x. c. 31.198 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1788.recourse to another expedient to keep his vigilanceawake. " M. and I made an agreement to pay aguinea forfeit when we broke our rules, and not to tellparticulars to each other. I hope this will be an instrumentunder divine grace to keep me from excess.When once a settled habit is formed less rigid rules willbe necessary." " Exceeded, and determined to payforfeit. Went on rather better, yet by no means up tothe strictness of my plan." " I have lately been ill,and by the mercy of God have recovered ; yet insteadof devoting my renewed strength to him, I am wastingit, particularly by exceeding my rules. I re-resolve,humbly imploring pardon for Christ's sake. Consideringmy constitution, resolutions, and opinions,how far am I from perfect temperance. This bringson unfitness for communion with God ; aversenessfrom him ; alienated affections ; a body unequal tobusiness ; an antinomian and self-righteous spirit, tooeasily forgiving myself for the past, and looking forcomfort to better performances in future. I am hurtand ashamed at myself; yet looking to God forstrength, I resolve through him to amend ; and, asthe only way of being safe, (limits primus,) to adhereto my strict rules. May this have an effectin other things." " Nothing is to be resistedmore than the disposition which we feel when wehave been long striving unsuccessfully for any particulargrace or against any habitual infirmity, toacquiesce in our low measure of that grace, or in thepresence of that infirmity, so as not to feel shame,1789. JANUARY 1ST. 199humiliation, and compunction. We are not to cast offthe hope of getting better of the one and attaining tothe other. This is the very state in which we are towork out our own salvation with fear and trembling.The promise is sure in the end. Therefore though ittarry wait for it ; it will surely come, it will not tarry."With these resolutions and in this frame of mind heentered upon the year 1789.Jan. 1st, Thursday. I hope to spend this yearbetter than the preceding. Eliot breakfasted withme, and I went with him to the Lock received thesacrament. Dined at home. Thought over futureplan of conduct. Called at Pitt's. Last night theSpeaker put off the House by a note in Warren'shand-writing, after he had sent word he had passeda good night we suspect a trick.Jan. 2nd. My aunt's funeral. Intensely cold.Staid in the carriage on account of the frost andsnow whilst the service was performed. Dined atLord Chatham's Lady C. and B. the latter opensin private. Lord Grantly died yesterday ; andCornwall the Speaker, after a very short illness, thismorning. We had laughed at his indisposition theday before, deeming it political, and thinking himbe-warned.' How much more likely for life washe than I ! yet am I spared and allowed further timefor repentance.5th. House chose Grenville Speaker, Sir GilbertElliot being opposed, 215 to 144. Dined Lord Camden'sBashan and Lady B. there. Afterwards200 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1789.called at Duchess of Gordon's : where an assemblygrew on me.6th. Very much shattered. Committee named forexamining physicians thought of going to business. restrictions . . but at Vince's motion committeechosen. Evening made calls.7th. Committee morning sat till half-past five.Dined Pitt's : then friends at home till late.8th. Committee till after five. Dined at homeScott, Lancaster, &c. : then committee till past one.Pitt and Dundas till three.9th and 10th. Committee as before.Sunday, 1 th. Very indifferent from late sittingdreadfully severe weather all this time. Dined atAddington's serious talk with him.15th. A charming morning. Yesterday the frostbroke up. The river had been frozen over below thebridge booths. Had an idea of going into thecountry to Montagu's. Would not go to Dundas'swith Pitt because a large party, and I thought I mightinfringe my rules and be kept up late and next daya great day in the House ; so resolved to dine at homewith Lancaster for the sake of reading the Reporttogether immediately after dinner.17th. Dined Bishop of Salisbury's then calledDuchess of Gordon's, and Pitt's, where staid too late ;but could not well get away discussing with Dundasand Rose the Household business.18th. Sunday. Weak in the morning. Called atPitt's and advised him to reconsider the Household1789. DEBATES ON THE KING'S HOUSEHOLD. 201business. Went to Cripplegate church to hearGregory the Bishop of London's protege for theAsylum elegant, serious, and devotional, but sadlyobscure in his views. Then obliged to disturb myhead with politics. Called on Pitt he gone out,and the conference over. They say they have decidedto stand their ground respecting the HouseholdI am much hurt at the intelligence. Late hoursbring many evils with them. If I dine out I canseldom do any material business after dinner. Earlierhours therefore from this time.19th. Wasted part of the morning at Pitt's.Spoke at night-household Restrictions. Agreeablydisappointed in the division, and general impression.Lancaster, Montagu, Scott, Villiers, Bashan, homewith me."I was rejoiced," writes Sir R. Hill, on the followingday, " to hear you speak in so animated a mannerin your reply to Mr. Fox. The unreasonable conductof opposition in the late resolutions outdoes ifpossible all their former effrontery. They wouldmake two kings, instead of a regent and a king."21st. At dinner, and all night, till very late Pitt,Margrave, Ryder, &c. too dissipated.22nd. At Shooter's Hill. Resolved to go withMargrave in the morning. Montagu and his wifegave me excellent advice. God bless them.24th. Called Duchess of Gordon's, and longdiscussion about Prince of Wales, &c.25th, Sunday. Heard Mr. Wood with Eliot.K 3202 LIFE OF wilberforce. 1789.Blessed be God, who hath appointed these solemnreturns of the day of rest to remind us of those mostimportant realities, of which we grow forgetfulamidst the hurry of business and the vanities of theworld."It was not merely the ordinary occupations ofsociety and the House of Commons by which hisattention was now engaged. His thoughts were moreand more engrossed by his great object. " House,"he says on the 26th of January, " till near six slavebusiness all the evening, with only biscuit and wineand water nervous in the night, and dreamed aboutslavery, without referring it to blacks." From thistime it occupies a leading place amongst the entriesof his Diary. " 28th. Slave business, HawkinsBrown's. 31st. Mr. Stephen breakfasted slave business."He was still actively engaged in obtainingauthentic information as to all the particulars of thetrade, and the general state of West Indian manners.From no one did he receive more important information,than from the last-mentioned friend, the lateJames Stephen. Mr. Stephen was just returned froma long residence in the West Indies ; and added to anardent zeal in support of abolition, a minute acquaintancewith the whole subject. Intending shortly toreturn to the West Indian bar, and with a large familyentirely dependent upon his professional exertions,Mr. Stephen, as bold a man as ever faced danger,thought himself obliged by duty to withhold thepublic avowal of his sentiments. But his generous1789. JAMES STEPHEN. 203spirit burned indignantly within him at the misery hedaily witnessed ; and throughout an eleven years' residencein those colonies he maintained the resolution,which a dread of the debasing influence of the systemhad at first suggested, and would never be the ownerof a slave. During this visit to England, and by letterfrom St. Kitt's until he came forward amongst theablest advocates for abolition, he communicated freelywith Mr. Wilberforce. Official intercourse betweenthem soon ripened into personal attachment, cementedafterwards by a family alliance, and never interrupteduntil Mr. Stephen's death at Bath almost in thepresence of his friend, a few months before his owndecease. " Animus vero non ilium desires, sedrespecting, in ea protect local discessit quo ill ipsecernebat esse veniendum."Mr. Wilberforce's time was now continually occupied." Feb. 3rd. Tuesday. Morning Dr. Glasse andsab-committee (of Reformation of Manners Society)to breakfast then all went to Montagu house, wherea full meeting did business calls. Wednesday.Indifferent. Ramsay came to breakfast, and with meall morning. Dined Bishop of Lincoln's. Pitt's business.Thursday. Wood breakfasted with me onbusiness. Then Magdalen admission day. Dined atMrs. Montagu's. How humiliating it is to attendthe Magdalen! Sunday. Eliot and Henry Thornton.Lock Scott excellent on St. James v. 7, 8. Muchaffected with the discourse. Oh blessed be God whohath appointed the sabbath, and interposes these204 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1789.seasons of serious recollection. May they be effectualto their purpose ; may my errors be corrected, mydesires sanctified, and my whole soul quickened andanimated in the Christian course. The last week hasbeen spent little, if at all, better than the preceding ;but I trust God will enable me to turn to Him inrighteousness. Write, I beseech Thee, Thy law in myheart, that I may not sin against Thee. I often wastemy precious hours for want of having settled beforehandto what studies to betake myself, what books toread. Let me attend to this for the time to come,and may my slave business, and my society business,be duly attended to.Feb. 9th. Went to Pitt's to talk on slave trade.King much better thank God.10th. Meeting of sub-committee at Bishop ofSalisbury's, till two. Calls. Dined at Pitt's beforethe House.13th. Strange talk with the Bishop of Llandaffthis morning about infinite, &c. All this time veryindifferent in health.14th. Opposition sadly embarrassed whether toaccept or not. Sixty-eight Major Generals fourField-Marshals vacant. Bishoprics Justice in Eyre,&c. Dined Pitt's and sat with him. Morning atKew. Willis's much talk. King greatly better.15th. Sunday. Morning Lock Scott Eliotmuch affected. Called Gordon's, who ill in pain,&c. Much affected all day with a sense of heavenlythings. Westminster Abbey in the afternoon. Once1789. KING'S RECOVERY. 205more I thank God for the intervention of the sabbath,and I pray that I may be enabled to make a due useof it.17th. Morning Eliot, slave business. Kingdeclared by report to be convalescent. Pitt doubtfulwhat to do. Called Lord Camden's and Pitt's.Evening kept late.18th. Stephen and Eliot breakfasted. Dittoevening slave business till near bed, and slept ill, asI commonly do when my mind is occupied before bedtimenervous, and tossing, haunted by thoughtsabout trifles.19th. Dined at Thellusson's large party howfrivolous and foolish the conversation ! But how littlewas I spiritually-minded, or faithful in endeavouringto improve it or my time 1 I am conformed to thisworld I must change. After Thellusson's, calledPitt's and Duchess of Gordon's. Home early,20th. Lords had stopped the Regency Bill thenight before, and Thurlow with the King for two hoursthis morning. Pepper Arden's christening Bishopof London Pitt, &c. Christening indecent afterdinner in such a circle kept late there off to Pitt's.How vain and foolish all the conversation of greatdinners ! nothing worth remembering.21st. Morning slave business Eliot. Dined athome large party.23rd. Off to Kew with Milner on his business.Prince of Wales and Duke of York saw the King forthe first time King bore it well. Dined at Smelt's206 Life OP WILBERFORCE. 1789.with the Montague and old Willis : then calledat the House again. Tom Willis about Pitt's goingto see the King betimes. Sent to Pitt to be early.24th. I called on John Wesley a fine old fellow.The bustle and hurry of life sadly distract anddestroy me. Alas, alas, I must mend ; may Godenable me.** 25th. Sub-committee Bishop of Salisbury's.Dined at Lord Salisbury's large party nothing inconversation worth remembering. Pitt showed me theKing's excellent letter long conversation, in which heinquired after every body. On full conviction fromexperience that it is impossible for me to makemyself master of the slave subject, and to go throughmy other various occupations, except I live more distractedly,I determine scarce ever to dine out inparties, and in all respects to live with a view to thesegreat matters, till the slave business is brought to someconclusion. May God bless the work and my endeavours.My health very indifferent. Milner at Kewhe comes in and gives me the extraordinaryaccount all surprise and astonishment. Bulletin,Free from complaint.' Walked to the Observatoryand back. There Milner saw him and at night inthe circle.26th. Slave committee breakfasted with methen out calls, &c. House business went off, noquestions asked. Dined at home Milner and I hadsome serious talk.March 1st. Sunday. Eliot breakfasted and Lock1789. SUNDAY, MARCH IgT. 207Scott. Called Lord Chatham's about politics (awork of real necessity). Strongly and deeply affectedby an examination of myself, I would hope to goodpurpose, and resolved to change my habits of life.This perpetual hurry of business and company ruinsme in soul if not in body. I must make a thoroughreform. More solitude and earlier hours diligenceproper distribution and husbandry of time associatingwith religious friends ; this will strengthen my weaknessby the blessing of God." " On an impartialexamination of my state, I see that the world is mysnare ; business and company distract my mind, anddissipate those serious reflections which alone canpreserve us from infection in such a situation of life asmine, where these antidotes are ever wanted to preventour falling victims to this mortal contagion. My errorhitherto has been, I think, endeavouring to amend thisand the other failing, instead of striking at the root ofthe evil. Let me therefore make a spirited effort, nottrusting in myself, but in the strength of the LordGod. Let me labour to live a life of faith, and prayer,and humility, and self-denial, and heavenly-mindedness,and sobriety, and diligence. Let me labour thisweek in particular, and lay down for myself a courseof conduct. Yet let not this be mainly on my mind,but the fear and love of my Maker and Redeemer.Oh that the blessed day may come, when in the wordsof St. Paul, I may assert of myself that my conversationis in heaven ; that the life I now lead in theflesh, I live by faith in the Son of God, who loved me208 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1789.and gave Himself for me ! " "I trust I can say inthe presence of God that I do right in going into company,keeping up my connexions, &c. Yet as it isclear from a thorough examination of myself that Irequire more solitude than I have had of late, let mehenceforth enter upon a new system throughout.Rules As much solitude and sequestration as arecompatible with duty. Early hours night and morning.Abstinence as far as health will permit. Regulationof employments for particular times. Prayerthree times a day at least, and begin with seriousreading or contemplation. Self-denial in little things.Slave trade my main business now. 3Monday, March 2nd. Evening Eliot, slavesasked four or five friends to dine before House, meaningit to be an hour's dinner ; when House up andthey staid with me till half past eight. Eliot staidand we looked at slave business.3rd. Montagu by gentle compulsion forced me todine with him Pitt and Mrs. Montagu.4th. Very unwell kept the house all dayslave business, Eliot.5th. Kept the house all day. Pitt gave notice inthe House for message.6th. Frewen and Clarkson at dinner JonasBrown, Lancaster, and Eliot at night slave business,but interrupted often and much by people on othermatters, which sadly obstruct my progress.8th, Sunday. I did not think it prudent to go to3 Diary.1789. DIARY. 209church, so within all day Bates and Frewen. I madeit too little of a Lord's day ; it is better to spend itchiefly alone, for one at least so much in company asmyself; yet I resolve to amend. Alas, my sluggishspirit grovels in the carnal enjoyments, and my deceitfulheart loses itself in the vain pursuits, of the world.Do Thou, O God, quicken me by Thy blessed Spirit.Bring home the wanderer. Fix my misplaced affectionson Thee. Oh strive to enter in at the straitgate.9th. I set out" with a languid mind but serious.Reilly asked himself to dine with me. Ramsay andAnstey. I too much set upon earthly things. Ramsaycame to stay with me. How active and diligenthe is !10th. Forced out to breakfast at Bishop of London's.Eliot, slaves. Message and address on King'sresumption. Returned home. Trifled with LordStanhope, Thurlow, &c. Then slave business. Illuminations.12th. Morning to Pitt's on business. Then slavetrade. Dined Bashan's. Slave business evening.Lord C. condemned slave business.14th. Slave business at home. Dined GeneralHarcourt's Pitt Mrs. Johnson, &c. Frewen arrived.Express to inform him of the master's death.I went about to canvass for him ; Gisborne's, &c. Ahasty word between us about Frewen. Kept up lateby this business.15th. Called Bishop of Gloucester's about Frewen.210 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1789.16th. Very busy all this morning one way or other.Dined at Pitt's. Called at Bishop of Gloucester'sabout Fre wen's business.17th. A very hurrying morning. Evening, havingmade a thoughtless engagement to do so, went withPitt, Eliot, and Addington, to Holwood. Groundscovered with snow.18th. Serious discussion with Pitt. Wintry faceof things. Much hurried after coming to town withFrewen^s and other business, so declined going toDuchess of Gordon's.19th. Very busy all morning. Ramsay andClarkson.20th. Went to Holwood with Pitt, and there exceededrules Web-vee, yet will I struggle and not giveup the combat.23rd. Morning out on Frewen's business. Fisherycommittee. Noticed a day for slave motion. Dinedat R. Smith's, with Burgh, Pitt, &c. Called LordChatham's about slave trade.24th. Very indifferent. Frewen's business andthat of other * fellows.'25th. Dined London Tavern. Fishery society'sanniversary. Burgh with me. This is Lady-day anatural aera and henceforth a reform. To try if Ican get into the country, both for health's sake and todosome slave business. For this last week I have notbeen able to look at the papers.26th. So feeble and indifferent that I would notgo to court. Queen's drawing-room of congratulation.1789. MASTERSHIP OF ST. JOHN'S. 211Obliged to dine at the Speaker's. Found Clarksonand Ramsay at home, so kept up."Throughout this time the privy council examinationswere advancing, and in such interviews as thatlast recorded, gained often from the time demandedby a feeble body for its necessary rest, Mr. Wilberforcecontinued to direct the movements of his party.It was a marked feature of his character, that in themidst of a life of hurry and public business, he maintained,unimpaired, the freshness of his natural affections,and was peculiarly alive to the claims of privatefriendship. Thus, at this very season he espousedmost warmly the cause of his old college tutor ; andwas ready too to enter with the voice of sympathy themourning habitation of another friend.27th. Morning discussed with Pitt and Bishop ofLincoln about Johnson mastership. Proposed to meetCooksonon at Alcock with Bishop of Lincoln, and senthim notice. The Bishop flew off in the afternoon.Spoke (in the House of Commons) to prove an alibi.Set off with Burgh about nine at night. Fell in withCooksonon between Alcock and Boston about four inthe morning. Sent him back with a proposition. Onhis informing us that they had forced Frewen toresign in favour of Carr, Burgh and I returned withoutgoing to bed, because not safe to stop lest weshould be discovered. Reached London about twelvevery faint. Ramsay and Clarkson.29th. Resolved to go to hear Mr. Wood. Whenjust going off heard from R. Smith that Mrs. LIFE OF WILBERFORCE, 1789.king was very ill. Drove (meaning to go to the ChapelRoyal) with the Bishop of London, calling first in St.James's Place. Heard that poor Mrs. 4 Manning haddied an hour before. Dr. Pitcairnee behaved withgreat humanity. Called immediately. All in deepdistress. Saw poor Bessyy's corpse could scarce helptreading softly. Staid with them."31st. Called R. Smith's to see, and sat withthem. I am too easy and unconcerned at these awfulevents. Poor Bessyy.April 1st. Indifferent. Called at Smith's onManning. Then with Burgh to Shooter's Hill declininggreat ball at the Pantheon. Heard Cravenchosen master. Frewen bore his defeat well. Totown to dine with Cambridge deputation at Pitt'sgreat party. Gisborne explained Cambridge election.E.'s offer of a bribe prevented his success. Gotvery late to great dinner. Dr. Jowett and I spoke ofpoor William Key's son's death.** April 3rd. Pitt consented to the repeal of theshop tax. Being more than ever plagued with ' fellows;' my health worn and no time for slave business,I resolve to go into the country and decree forTeston. Dined at Hampstead to see poor Smithsand Manning. T. too little impressed . . L. deeply so. Poor Bessyy's little children look delicate. Walkedwith , not careful enough to impress him duly."Preparation for the approaching debate upon theslave trade now occupied his thoughts. And he not4 A favourite cousin, and one of the party in the expedition to Nice.1789. PREPARATION FOR ABOLITION DEBATE. 213only retired for this season to seek in the country theleisure which he could not find in town, but introducedalso into the details of social life a system ofrigorous self-government, that no temptations to indulgencemight relax his diligence or tarnish thebrightness of his spirit. " For the next fortnight,"he enters on the 6th of April, " to prepare for Slavediscussion. Moderation in all things. This is theanniversary of Milnes' election, and of the night whenWeddell and Foljambe resigned an aera." He staidin London till the following day to be present at ameeting of the Society for Reforming Manners. " 7th.Morning, at Pitt's, and Montagu House ; therevarious fellows set on me. Heard from Milner, thatill of a fever ; but after a short debate found that Imust give up the Slave business if I went to him, soresolved against it. Off after dinner to TestonMilner much on my mind Burgh with me had expectedpoor Milner arrived at ten at night." Thisadherence to his plan in spite of Isaac Milner's illness,was not the slight sacrifice of one in whom personalattachment had been superseded by a general andfantastic benevolence. " Teston," 5 he writes, " acharming place very comfortable here, but forthoughts of poor Milner." And now that he wasquietly settled in the country, he entered upon acourse of severer study. " I resolve," he says uponthe 8th, " to live with a view to health Slave businessattention to my rules no waste of eye-sight;5 The seat of his friend Mrs. Bouverie, now Barham Court.214 LIFE OF Wilberforce. 1789.and may God bless the work : may my religion bemore vital from this retirement." A plan for theemployment of time, and an accurate register of itsfulfilment, strikingly attest his diligence. Fromeight to nine hours were devoted daily to his mainbusiness ; and the Diary of a week's duration, in whichevery minute is summed up, records but one quarter ofan hour as squandered time. Here closeted all dayover " Middle Passage Report and other papers," withDr. Burgh, Mr. Ramsay, and Mr. Clarkson, he entersin his Journal on Good Friday, " I am obliged towork too much and have too little leisure for seriousthoughts, and yet, as it is my duty 1 hope it mayplease God to make up the want to me." And onthe following Easter Sunday, " I am going to renewthe dedication of myself to thee at thy table, O Lord.Be thou made unto me, O Jesus, wisdom and sanctification.Enlighten my understanding, renew myheart, purify my affections; guide and guard methrough this vain world, and conduct me to thoseheavenly mansions where faith shall be lost in sight,and where secure from change thy people shall livefor ever in thy presence." 6 " Thursday, Friday,Saturday. Applied eight or nine hours daily toSlave business. Clarkson and Ramsay dined andsupped Ramsay's diligence. Sunday. Clarksonpreached."Whilst he was thus preparing for the approachingcontest in the House, Mr. Pitt watched over the6 Diary.1789. MR. PITT'S COOPERATION. 215daily progress of the cause in London. " My dearWilberforce," he wrote upon the 10th of April, " Ithink you cannot do so wisely as to stay some timelonger quietly in your present quarters, and we caneasily manage to have the day for the Slave Tradepostponed. I think the best way will be to speak toDuncombe, or Lancaster, or Addington, or any otherman out of office, to put it off as by your desire tillThursday se'nnight, and unless I hear from you to thecontrary, I will take care to have this done on Monday.If any later day should on further considerationbe thought preferable, you may easily put it off again.Grenville and I have formed a project of reducingthe case, as it appears from the Report, into a stringof resolutions, which we will send you as soon as theyare complete. Our idea is, that by bringing into oneview all the leading points of the case, we shall bringon the discussion to great advantage and insuremaking a strong impression on the public. Many ofthem would be such as the opposers could hardly controvert,and would serve as the best foundation forthe general motion either for a bill or an address.The parts of the Report which have yet been printedare the least material, but the whole will I believebe ready before Monday. The more we consider thecase, the more irresistible it is in all its parts.Ever yours,W. PITT."216 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1789.Upon the following Wednesday he heard againfrom Mr. Pitt.TO W. WILBERFORCE, ESQ.April 22, 1789.My dear Wilberforce,We have settled to-day to adjourn over Friday;I will therefore certainly be at Holwood on that day,and shall be exceedingly glad if you can come over.I hope to be there some considerable time beforedinner. The Report was not corrected in time to bepresented to-day. Nothing can be done tomorrowbut going to St. Paul's ; we therefore shall not beable to present it till Saturday ; but this will do noharm, as the copies will be distributed, though somewhatirregularly, at the door of the House before it isformally presented ; and we shall not be obliged to fixthe day for the committee till after I have seen you.I discover some strange contradictions in thedifferent accounts of the numbers imported into Jamaica,which it will be necessary to clear up if possiblebefore any precise result can be stated respectingthe course of population there ; and I am afraid thiswill be a point of some difficulty, which I regretthe more, as I see enough to satisfy my own mindthat if it could be ascertained it would turn out veryfavourably.Yours most sincerely,W. PITT."1789. ABOLITION WARMLY OPPOSED. 217"Went on Friday," he says on his return to Teston, 7to meet Pitt at Holwood. Would not go to Londonto the thanksgiving-day that I might apply close tobusiness. Pitt very earnest about the Slave Trade.Returned on Saturday to Teston. The Report to bepresented to-day." " I staid at Teston attending tomy Slave business till Monday, May 4th. Then witha view to attending at the Duke of Montagu's, I wentto Clapham Root. Thornton's ; but found that theSociety Meeting had been on Monday morning.Tuesday, Clapham all day. Thursday, to HolwoodPitt's with Burgh to do business together. Friday,Pitt went to town about dissenters. Resolved to stay,my mind not being made up, and needing time tosettle it, and my main business requiring all my moments.Saturday, Pitt came again and Eliot."The time which he was thus employing had notbeen wasted by his opponents. Meeting followedmeeting ; resolutions, newspapers, and pamphlets dailyassailed the public with clamours of injury and threatsof ruin: not merely colonial prosperity, but the commercialexistence of the nation, it was boldly assertedwere at hazard ; and it was but too evident that thetimidity and selfishness of interest were growing intoa powerful opposition. In the midst of this risingstorm a pleasant letter from Mr. Gisborne came withalmost comic force. " I have been as busy in town asamember of parliament, preparing himself to maintainthe Abolition of the Slave Trade, and no doubt much7 Diary.VOL. I. L218 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1789.more usefully employed. I shall expect to read inthe newspapers of your being carbonate by WestIndian planters, barbecued by African merchants,and eaten by Guinea captains ; but do not be daunted,for I will write your epitaph."At length on the 12th of May the question camebefore the House. "Monday, May llth," says hisDiary, " went to Montagu's with Burgh ; where alsoRamsay and John Clarkson. Tuesday very indifferent.Came to town, sadly unfit for work, but byDivine grace was enabled to make my motion so as togive satisfaction three hours and a half I had notprepared my language, or even gone over all my matter,but being well acquainted with the whole subject Igot on. My breast sore, but de ceteris pretty well.How ought I to labour, if it pleases God to make meable to impress people with a persuasion that I amserious, and to incline them to agree with me ! "The speech with which he opened the debate arguedforcibly the whole question. After attempting to disarmthe peculiar hostility of West Indian oppositionby describing the trade as a national iniquity, he surveyedthe various evidence of conflicting testimony,and traced the destructive effects of the trade onAfrica, its victims, and the colonies. These argumentswere invested throughout with the glow ofgenuine humanity, and enforced by the power of asingular eloquence. Although the principal record ofits excellence must be found in its effect upon thataudience of orators to whom it was addressed; yet1789. SPEECH ON THE SLAVE TRADE. 219there are portions which even in the barrenness ofextract from " a most inaccurate Report" 8 retain muchof their original beauty. Knowing " that mankind aregoverned by their sympathies," 9 he addressed himselfto the feelings as well as the reason of the House ;and we can even yet perceive the vigour of descriptionwhich records the sufferings of the middle passage,so much misery crowded into so little room wherethe aggregate of suffering must be multiplied by everyindividual tale of woe ; " I0 and the force of that appealwhich, after disproving the alleged comforts of themiserable victims, summoned Death as his " last witness,whose infallible testimony to their unutterablewrongs can neither be purchased nor repelled."The effect of this speech both upon his friends andtheir opponents, almost warrants the declaration ofMr. Burke, when warmed by its present influence,that the House, the nation, and Europe, were undergreat and serious obligations to the hon. gentleman forhaving brought forward the subject in a manner themost masterly, impressive, and eloquent. The principles,"he said, " were so well laid down, and supportedwith so much force and order, that it equalled any thinghe had heard in modern times, and was not perhaps tobe surpassed in the remains of Grecian eloquence."Mr. Pitt and Mr. Fox were no less loud in theireulogies ; and the following character of the speechfrom a witness of a different order, is an interestingtestimony to its effect. Bishop Porteus writes on the8 Private Mem. 9 Speech. 10 Ib,L 2220 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1789.13th of May to the Rev. W. Mason," It is withheart-felt satisfaction I acquaint you that Mr. Wilberforceyesterday opened the important subject ofthe Slave Trade in the House of Commons, in one ofthe ablest and most eloquent speeches that was everheard in that or any other place. It continuedupwards of three hours, and made a sensible andpowerful impression upon the House. He was supportedin the noblest manner by Mr. Pitt, Mr.Burke, and Mr. Fox, who all agreed in declaringthat the Slave Trade was the disgrace and opprobriumof this country, and that nothing but entireabolition could cure so monstrous an evil. It was aglorious night for this country. I was in the Housefrom five to eleven." " I congratulate you," writes Mr.Gisborne, " not merely on account of your speech, butof the effect which it seems to have produced, and ofthe manner in which it was supported by others, evenby the inconsistent and incomprehensible Burke." " Ihave heard," wrote Mr. Mason on the 16th of May toone of Mr. Wilberforce's household, " both from theBishop of London, and from Mr. H. Buncombe, howeloquently and how successfully your excellent masteracquitted himself in the House of Commons. But ashespoke so many hours, I cannot help being extremelysolicitous about his health, which I fear may be injuredby so great an exertion. I therefore take theliberty of begging a line from you on this subject,which I firmly believe is equally interesting to us both ;to you as a faithful servant, to me as a sincere friend.1789. PROGRESS OF THE CAUSE. 221I might, you may perhaps think, have with as muchpropriety addressed this letter to Mr. Burgh; butthere give me leave to say you are mistaken, and forthis reason, because when I write to you I have somechance of an answer.I am, Sir,Your very humble servant,W. MASON.To Mr. Amos Dickson."My dear friend," writes I. Milner, " I am sensiblywarmed by your letter this morning, in findingthat you got through the great trial so much to yoursatisfaction." "I congratulate you sincerely," saysMr. (afterwards Lord) Erskine, " on the auspicious appearanceswhich have followed from the exertions ofvery great talents in a very great cause."The twelve resolutions which Mr. Wilberforce hadmoved, recorded the case of the friends of Abolitionupon the Journals of the House. On the 2lst of Maythe discussion was resumed, and after a debate of unusualwarmth, the planters succeeded in deferring thedecision of the House until counsel had been heardand evidence tendered at the bar. The firstwitness was summoned on the following Tuesday,and the examinations lasted until the 23rd ofJune ; when the lateness of the season postponed toanother session the decision of the question. Violentand irritating language was employed by the advocatesof the trade in these concluding debates ; and222 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1789,one member in particular, emboldened apparently bythe moderation and self-restraint of its especial object,reiterated his personal invective till he smarted underthe merited rebuke of Mr. Pitt. " Dined," says theDiary of May 26th, " before House, then examinationof African evidence. After Le Blanc had opened,John Barnes, by counsel, and some debate antecedent.Molineux's letter Ramsay M'Namara. Metho-deistical,&c. Sat till half-past eleven." Throughoutthis period his personal attendance in parliament wasincessant, and " House Slave Trade extremely exhausted,"is no unfrequent entry amongst his privatememoranda. The session closed with the resentmentof the Middle Passage Bill of the preceding year,amended by Sir C. Middleton and himself. Nordid he confine his attention to parliamentary exertion.His house in Palace Yard was open to all the supportersof abolition ; and " friends to supper," ordined before House," is almost daily in his Diary.He was always on the watch to turn to good accountthe resources of his personal influence. He engagedhis private friends in the search of necessary information." I will employ," writes Mr. Gisborne, " two orthree hours a day in the service of the Africans andyourself." He persuaded Dr. Pecked, the originaladvocate of the cause at Cambridge, to mount againin its behalf the pulpit of St. Mary's. He enticed areluctant witness through the resistless influence ofthe Duchess of Gordon; and the following extractfrom one of Dr. Burgh's letters shows how carefully he1789. PROGRESS OF THE CAUSE. 223endeavoured to gather strength from every possibleassistant. " I remember that one day at Teston youexpressed a wish that you had engaged the pens ofRobertson, Smith, and some such established writerson your side. The opportunity at that time appearedto have lapsed, but surely now it has recurred ; thefavourable dispositions of such men are not a matterof indifference. If Gibbon were wanted, a fee wouldbe a sufficient motive. I know not whether he canargue, but if supplied with the argument he certainlycan put it in a manner with which some people arepleased. A man to whom the public have ever listenedis of weight."Throughout this period the tenor of Mr. Wilberforce'slife differed little from that which has beendescribed in the earlier part of the year.Friday, May 29th. Set off for Cambridge to seepoor Milner found him much weakened in a verypious state of mind : his brother and Tillotson arrivedabout eleven.Sat. 30th. Went to poor Milner's bed-side.Dined St. John's Hall. Drank wine at P.'s. Howvain and foolish is the general run of conversationhere! more so than in London.31st. Received the sacrament much affected.May this day be the beginning of a new life with methe great rule, * Set your affections on things above.'June 2nd. Left Cambridge. Did not go to Montagu's,but with Burgh and H. Thornton to Clapham.3rd. Breakfasted with the Bishop of London, and224 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1789.had some serious talk with him. Miss More there.Returned to Clapham writing letters. Talked topoor Dupont, which brought me to my recollection.4th. King's birth-day. Went to St. James's. Ifelt how indispensable it is for me to take my line andkeep it. What doest thou here, Elijah? Dined Pitt'safterwards ; great party sad waste of time.5th. To town to meet sub-committee at my houseafterwards Grenville's appointment to Secretary ofStateship declared chair vacant.8th. General meeting of the Society for ReformingManners. Went to House unfit for work, tochoose a Speaker, which prevented my speaking, andshowing my friendship for Addington. Addingtonchosen 215 to 143. I will form some specific plan,or resolves, to secure my better attention in theHouse.17th. Put off Slave business, because other thingsin the House. Dined Bankes's with Burgh largeparty Jekyll, &c. Evening, after seeing Milnerwent to Hampstead ; Pitt, Grenville, Bashan, Eliotsaw children in bed. Dreadful fire at the OperaHouse. How unsuited are all these companies to oneof my objects and aims !23rd. Slave business put off till next year. DinedLord Chatham's Duchess of Gordon, Lady Charlotte,Duke of Rutland, Graham, Pitt, Dundas, &c. Howill suited is all this to me ! how unnatural for one whoprofesses himself a stranger and a pilgrim !24th. Sat to Rising for Lancaster. Evening1789. INTENDED VISIT TO PARIS. 225almost determined to go abroad about Slavebusiness."Panting," he writes to Mr. Cooksonon, " after alittle solitude and quiet, as you must perceive me to befrom what I have been just throwing out, does it notseem a most preposterous determination to which Iam come, of spending some time in and about Paris.Yet such is my plan, and I purpose to cross the waterin a very few days. You will readily conceive thatthough the present state of politics in that quarter isjustly interesting to the highest degree, I am notattracted solely, or indeed chiefly, by this consideration.This is professed to the million, but the Slavebusiness is mainly in my view; and I do not feel myselfat liberty to decline any path wherein I see a probability,however faint, of forwarding this greatobject. I need scarcely suggest to you, however, thatyou must be secret as the grave. My errand will besuspected of course, and the least hint from you willbe caught at and circulated with avidity."The opponents of the Abolition had appealed withno small success to that jealousy with which thiscountry has ever regarded the commercial rivalry ofFrance. She, it was alleged, would take up the tradewhich we abandoned, and our romantic sacrifices wouldtend only to increase her profits, and the sufferingsof the negro race. Such an objection could alone befully answered by the promise of a coincident abolitionon the part of France. The force of the objectionwas widely felt. In replying to a letter in which Mr.L 3226 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1789.Wilberforce had endeavoured to gain his support,Mr. (now Earl) Grey avows that it formed his principaldifficulty, and would probably induce him in spite ofhis feelings to give a silent vote against the Abolition.If France alone' he continues, " would consent toabolish this detestable and inhuman traffic, the proposedplan would not have a more zealous supporterthan myself." The same argument was continuallyadvanced in the speeches and pamphlets of the WestIndian body. French co-operation became thereforea most important step towards success at home ; norwas the effort to obtain it at this time beyond thewarrant of a reasonable hope. In the unquiet leavingswhich preceded the outbreak of the revolution, Mr.Wilberforce perceived many indications favourable tothe cause of Abolition ; and it was in the hope that hispresence might bring them to a prosperous issue, thathe meditated this excursion : with this view also hetook an active part in endeavouring to obtain the supplyof English corn which was soon after requested bythe French government.25th June. Serious morning thoughts may Godmake them permanent and productive. Old Mr. E.called by appointment, and made the strongest representationsto me of my unkindness to his son. It is notwonderful. He knows nothing of the state of the case,and is anxious for the interests of one he loves. Hesaid ( because C. loved me so well I ought to serve him.'I have done more for him than for any other person.July 1 st. Dined up stairs with Addington, because1789. SCARCITY IN FRANCE. 227Duke of Gordon's dinner likely to be delayed till lateby the House. Went at night to D. of Gordon'sLenox, Pitt, Bankes, Dundas, &c. there. Phipps inand out about what appeared afterwards to havebeen Lenox's challenge to Swift. Staid till 12, andonce more experienced how little these meetings aresuited to me.Thursday, 2nd. Called up Pitt at 11. Wastedmorning sadly. French application for corn. Wroteto Montagu about French expedition. 3rd. Montagucame to breakfast. We talked about French scheme ;he acceded, and wrote to Mrs. Montagu, as also I didunknown to him. Came to town to Pitt's. Pitt foundon inquiry at the council that we could send no cornto the French. Dined Pitt's before House. Lenox'sduel with Swift, whom he wounded in the body."4th. Dined at Bishop of London's Pitt, &c. Calledon Rose in my way down. Rose suggested the movingof the corn business in the House. I mentioned it toPitt at Fulham, and he not averse. He went off afterdinner for Cambridge we to town and with Eliotlooked over corn committee. Privy Council Report.5th. Burgh and I had some most serious conversationhe read his book against Lindsey. Then to Newton'schurch rambling, but fervently devout. Calledat H. Thornton's, and then Newton for an hour.6th. Montagu talked of going abroad. HouseFrench supply of corn Hawkins Browne came inlate, and mentioned Lord Elgin's being just comefrom France. Montagu will go abroad.228 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1789.7th. Called on Lord Elgin before breakfast.French supply committee could not give it them.Addington doubts if it would not be highly improperfor me to go to Paris just at the present moment.12th. Obliged to put off French journey for Houseof Commons business, and doubtful if eligible to go toFrance in its present state of confusion and supposedwant of stores. To inquire about all this."13th. Morning very serious thoughts. To town;hurried to House, no business, Pitt having got thegout saw him. At night determined not to go abroad.14th. The news came of Necker's being out, andof insurrections, firing, &c."At such a season of excited feeling there was toomuch reason to apprehend that his intended visitwould be viewed with great suspicion ; and thinking,therefore, that he could effect his object better byan agent whose presence could excite no remark, helaid aside his projected journey. " The reasons,"writes Mr. Gisborne, to whom he had before announcedhis plan, " which you allege for refraining from apresent visit to France, are abundantly strong. Indeed,if you had shown your face in Paris the populacemight very probably have chaired you round thecity, as a patriotic and liberty-loving Englishman ;and exposed you on their shoulders to the frowns ofthe monarch and the bullets of his Swiss guards."Settled," he says soon after, " with Clarkson aboutgoing to France."On the 7th of August, having received from Mr.1780. MR. Carson SENT TO PARIS. 229Wilberforce a written copy of directions, and been providedwith a French companion to act as secretary andinterpreter, Mr. Clarkson set out for Paris. During thefive months which he spent in that city, Mr. C. communicatedby letter his daily proceedings, and receivedin return the directions and supplies which the causerequired. " Money," writes Mr. C. 11 "becomes nowabsolutely necessary. I should have explained thisto our committee, but that you in your letter of instructionsdesired me to apply to you, should it bewanting." " In my last letter to you, I said it had beendetermined to draw on your account for 120, to advancethe business here, &c. &c. More will not bewanted at present. The greatest part of the 56 hasbeen spent, and I hope and believe very judiciously."Mr. Clarkson was employed in stirring up theslumbering energies of the " amis des noirs," in circulatingintelligence, refuting objections, and communicatingevery opening for useful exertion. Hiscorrespondence held the highest tone of promise. " LaFayette had undertaken to propose the Abolition inthe National Assembly, which would probably, assoon as he ceased speaking, carry the question by acclamation."" In eight or ten days the subject will bebrought into the National Assembly. Evidence willnot be necessary : and I should not be surprised if theFrench were to do themselves the honour of votingaway this diabolical traffic in a night." " I entreatyou to write to Mons. La Fayette ; he has absolutelyDec. 7230 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1789.a greater respect for you than for any other person inthe English nation. Urge him to act directly. Aspeech from him will make the difference of four hundredvotes."Repeated disappointments did not subdue Mr. Clark-son'shopes. On the 21st of June, he wrote, " I amconvinced in my own mind that the Slave Trade will, inthe course of a couple of months, fall in France." Norwas it unnatural that a man of sanguine temper shouldaugur favourably to the cause from the first promise ofthose troubled times. He saw a great nation rousingitself from the long lethargy of despotism with a loudprofession of universal liberty the most powerful interestsand the most hallowed associations vanishedat once before its breath. All the early chiefs of therevolution, the workers of those moral wonders, werestrenuous advocates of the Abolition. The financialdexterity of Necker, the eloquence and policy ofMirabeau, the popularity of La Fayette, the characterof La Rochefoucault, were engaged with Bristol, Villeneuve,Contorted, and Glaciers distinctly in its behalf.The votes of the revolution club were counted on itsside, Mirabeau withstood a bribe in his zeal for Abolition,and the amiable Louis gave a no less emphaticpledge of favour, in his unwearied perusal of one ofMr. Clarkson's volumes. Confident in such support,Mr. C. could not believe that the cause of virtue andhumanity would be defeated by the planters of St.Domingo, or the slave merchants of Havre and Bordeaux.And yet there were not wanting intimations1789. AMIS DES NOIRS. 231which led to a less hopeful conclusion those who weremore removed from the eddy of passing incidents, andlooked with a calmer eye upon the aspect of events.Although there appeared to him sufficient " probabilityof good " to warrant the attempt, yet Mr. Wilberforcecould by no means enter into these exultinghopes. His own view is well expressed by one of hiscorrespondents, in a letter of the 24th of September.I have seen," says Mr. S. Hoare, " too much of thesilent and powerful operations of self-interest, eitherreal or imaginary, which pursues its object e with astep steady as time, and an appetite keen as death,'to believe that the first impulse of patriotism andjustice will counterbalance its influence. No, myfriend, our work will be more gradual, but I look tothe end with hope."One of these intimations of failure requires especialnotice, because it indicates the careful foresight withwhich this mission had been planned. In the instructionswhich he had prepared for Mr. Clarkson, Mr.Wilberforce writes, " Resist every tendency to theidea of the two countries entering into a treaty for theAbolition of the Slave Trade." This he plainly foresawwould suspend all measures of relief upon theissue of impracticable negociation.Yet in this very difficulty the question became toa degree entangled. " The Comte de Mirabeau,"says Mr. C. " is about to write to request your personalassurance of Mr. Pitt's sentiments upon the subject."This assurance he desired to produce in the National232 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1789.Assembly, to prove that " the English would not takeadvantage, but follow France in the completion ofsuch a measure." And upon this condition, " havingcalculated his own strength and the sentiments of theHouse, he undertakes to abolish the Slave Tradewithin three weeks." The required assurance was ofcourse impossible. In spite of hopes, and promises,and intentions, delay followed delay ; and Mr. Clark-sonat length returned to England before one actualstep had been taken in the business. No such healingwaters flowed from this tumultuous and unholysource. In spite of all its early promise, the onlyeffect of the French Revolution upon colonial slaverywas to impart a suspicious character to the efforts ofBritish humanity, and reproduce in St. Domingo herown bloody and ferocious features.The close of the session of parliament just when hehad determined not to visit Paris, released Mr. Wilberforcefrom the necessity of a further stay in London.July 15th. This day our last parliamentarybusiness : henceforth a reform to be attempted.Earlier hours. Attention to health bodily, mental,intellectual."It was with these resolutions that he closed thisseason of London life. Charged as he perceivedhimself to be with a mission to his countrymen, whichcould be fulfilled only by his mingling much in sociallife, he was yet possessed by a growing conviction,that the habits which he was thus compelled to formwere injurious to his own mind.1789. Table-talk. 233July 16th. Went to town and dined at LordCamden's, who very chatty and good humoured. Exceededrules, and will forfeit to M. Called to seePitt and lounged too long."Dined with 1 ; 12 he very chatty and pleasant.Abused 2 for his duplicity and mystery. Said 3 hadsaid to him occasionally he had wished them, i. e. 2and 4, to agree ; for that both necessary to him, onein the Lords, the other in the Commons. 2 willnever do any thing to oblige 1, because he is a friendof 4. 1 himself, though he speaks of 4 with evidentaffection, seems ;rather to complain of his being toomuch under the influence of any one who is abouthim, particularly of 5, who prefers his countrymenwhenever he can. 1 is sure that 6 got money by thepeace of Paris. He can account for his sinking near300,000 in land and houses ; and his paternalestate in the island which bears his name was notabove 1500 a year ; and he is a life tenant only ofWorsley, which may be 8000 or 10,000. 1 doesnot believe 6 has any the least connexion with 3 now,whatever he may have had. 1 believes 7 got moneyby the last peace. 3 has told 1 that he dislikes 8 forhaving deserted 9. 2 is giving constant dinners tothe judges to gain 4 them over to his party. 10 wasA sheet of " Private Table Talk," dated July 16, 1789, foundamong Mr. W.'s papers. The numbers seem to indicate1 Lord Camden. 6 Lord Bute. 112 Lord Thurlow. 7 12 Prince of Wales.3 The King. 8 13 Duke of York.4 Mr. Pitt. 9 14 Duke of Clarence.5 Mr. Dundas. 10234 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1789.applied to by 11, a wretched sort of dependent of 12,to know if he would lend money on the joint bond of12, 13, 14, to receive double the sum lent, whenever3 should die, and either 12, 13, or 14 come intothe inheritance. The sum intended to be raised is200,000."'Tis only a hollow truce, not a peace, that is madebetween 2 and 4. They can have no confidence ineach other." 1317th. Obliged to dine with S. to meet Duchessof Gordon Chatham and P. Arden. How ill thesemeetings suit my state of mind, and how much dothey incapacitate me for the exercises of religion, andwhat wrong notions do they lead to of my real character! " " I must abstract more, and live more by myself.I am too much conformed to this world. Iought not to aim at this, it is too dangerous for oneso weak in the faith as I am. Let me endeavour towithdraw myself, and find my pleasure in the testimonyof my conscience."18th. Came off to Teston, to see the Middle tonsand Mrs. Bouverie. How much better is this society!I will endeavour to confine myself more to those whofear God.19th. At Teston all day. Bad account of poorRamsay." The Rev. James Ramsay, who by hiswork upon the treatment of the West Indian negroescommenced in the year 1784 that public controversywhich was closed only by the abolition of the trade,Jan. 16, 1790.1789. MR. RAMSAY'S DEATH. 235had been once stationed in the island of St. Kitt's, andwas now vicar of Teston in Kent. Forewarned byBishop Porteus to expect a merciless revenge, hecalmly engaged in the holy strife. He was soonassailed with every species of malignant accusation.I have long," he wrote to Mr. Wilberforce in 1787,'' been considered as a marked man, of whom it waslawful to suggest any thing disadvantageous, howeverfalse ; to whom it was good manners to say any thingdisagreeable, however insulting." His wounded spiritat length bowed before the storm ; and the malignantcalumnies of Mr. Molyneux, in the debate of May21st, seemed evidently to hasten his deliverance froma world of cruelty and falsehood. The hatred whichhad imbittered a shortened life, triumphed withoutdisguise over his grave. " Mr. Molyneux," writesMr. Stephen, " announced the decease of the publicenemy to his natural son in this island, in these terms,Ramsay is dead I have killed him.' ' ; From suchan exhibition of hardened malignity, it is a reliefto turn to the thoughts suggested by Mr. Wilberforce'sJournal of July 21st : " Heard that poorRamsay died yesterday, at ten o'clock. A smile onhis face now." 14July 22nd. A note from Pitt, desiring me to dine14 Mr. Ramsay had requested Mr. Stephen upon his return to theWest Indies, to examine and report upon the charges of his enemies.I have not heard," is his testimony in a letter to Mr. Wilberforce, " acrime or a blemish imputed to Mr. Ramsay which has not been refutedafterwards in my presence, by some of his most inveterate enemies,better acquainted with the facts."236 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1789.and go to Holwood with him, and stay two or threedays. Would not do the latter, that I might get outof town, and while in it might he quiet and reform.25th. Resolved to go to Bath, and would not gotoHolwood, or to the Middleton at Betchworth, thatI might be quiet at home.27th. Set off for Bath and reached Sandford.The old lady wonderfully spirited, and all very kind intheir reception.28th. Almost compelled to stay with the montagueall day. Mrs. Montagu senior has manyfine, and great, and amiable qualities. Young Montaguall gratitude, and respect, and affection to her,and of most upright and pure intentions. 29th. Offfor Bath, which I reached at night. 30th. Began thewaters. Resolved to lead a new life, adhering more stedfastlyto my resolutions. Do Thou, O God, renew myheart fill me with that love of Thee which extinguishesall other affections, and enable me to give Theemy heart, and to serve Thee in spirit and in truth. Inthe evening my sister arrived; at twelve o'clock atnight H. Thornton came."Read Barrow's sermon on love of God, and muchaffected by it yet I get insensibly into a sluggishstate of mind. I must amend a continual sense ofGod's presence is the best preservative."He continued a fortnight more at Bath with MissWilberforce and Mr. Henry Thornton, "a most excellent,upright, pure, and generous young man ; mayit please God long to continue him a blessing to the1789. HANNAH MORE. 237public, and to amend his health." They had agreedto spend the day so as to afford the hope that theymight live together most rationally." From Bathhe made an excursion to Bridgewater, in the hopes ofmeeting there his friend Edward Eliot. In this journeyhe fell in with Lord Kenyon on his circuit, andheard him pass sentence upon five convicts who areall to die sad but necessary severity. Engaged myselfhastily to meet him. next day at Wells. His condemningsentence serious and pathetic, but not oneword of our Saviour or the repentance not to be repentedof. 19th. To Wells. Dined to meet Kenyon.Glad to find him favourable to penitentiary housesand a less sanguinary system of penal law. Got off inthe afternoon and to Miss More's at night."One day had been already spent in visiting theplace to which Mrs. H. More had now retired fromthe flattery and bustle of the literary world " CowslipGreen, a sweet place. Miss More's sister aworthy, pleasant-seeming woman." This was afriendship which his increasing desire of intercoursewith those who feared God led him at this timeespecially to cultivate. There was no part of Mrs.H. More's character which he regarded with greateradmiration than her active usefulness in the retirementof the country. " I was once," he said, " appliedto by a Yorkshire clergyman, who desired meto assist him in obtaining a dispensation for nonresidenceupon his cure. He had been used, he said,to live in London with the first literary circles, and238 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1789.now he was banished into the country far from allintellectual society. I told him that I really couldnot in conscience use any influence I possessed to helphim; and then I mentioned to him the case of Mrs. H.More, who in like manner had lived with Johnson,Garrick, Burke, Sir J. Reynolds, &c. and was socourted by them all, and who had a great taste forsuch society ; and yet had broken away from itsattractions, and shut up herself in the country to devoteher talents to the instruction of a set of wretched peoplesunk in heathen darkness, amongst whom she wasspending her time and fortune in schools and institutionsfor their benefit, going in all weathers a considerabledistance to watch over them, until at last shehad many villages and some thousands of childrenunder her care. This is truly magnificent, the reallysublime in character. I delight to think of it, andof the estimation in which the sacrifice she made willbe held in another world." " There is no class of persons,"he would add, "whose condition has been moreimproved within my recollection than that of unmarriedwomen. Formerly there seemed to be nothinguseful in which they could be naturally busy, but nowthey may always find an object in attending to thepoor."Thursday, Aug. 20th. At Cowslip Green all day.21st. After breakfast to see Chedder. Intended toread, dine, &c. amongst the rocks, but could not getrid of the people ; so determined to go back again.The rocks very fine. Had some talk with the people,1789. ORIGIN OF HANNAH MORE's SCHOOLS. 239and gave them something grateful beyond measurewretchedly poor and deficient in spiritual help. Ihope to amend their state." It was this visit toChedder, thus simply related in Mr. Wilberforce'sDiary, which gave rise to Mrs. More's great exertionsfor her neglected neighbours. The vicar of Chedderat that time was non-resident, and his curate, wholived nine miles off at Wells, visited the parish onSundays only. The spiritual destitution of such aparish, seen with his own eyes, greatly affected Mr.Wilberforce. The effects which followed from hisvisit are thus recorded in an unpublished Journal ofMrs. Martha More.In the month of Aug. 1789, Providence directedMr. Wilberforce and his sister to spend a few days atCowslip Green. The cliffs of Chedder are esteemedthe greatest curiosity in those parts. We recommendedMr. W. not to quit the country till he hadspent a day in surveying these tremendous works ofnature. We easily prevailed upon him, and the daywas fixed ', but after a little reflection he changed hismind, appeared deeply engaged in some particularstudy, fancied time would scarcely permit, and thewhole was given up. The subject of the cliffs wasrenewed at breakfast ; we again extolled their beauties,and urged the pleasure he would receive by going.He was prevailed on and went. I was in the parlourwhen he returned ; with the eagerness of vanity(having recommended the pleasure) I inquired, howhe liked the cliffs ? He replied, they were very fine,240 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1789.but the poverty and distress of the people was dreadful.This was all that passed. He retired to hisapartment and dismissed even his reader. I said tohis sister and mine, I feared Mr. W. was not well.The cold chicken and wine put into the carriage forhis dinner were returned untouched. Mr. W.appeared at supper, seemingly refreshed with a higherfeast than we had sent with him. The servant at hisdesire was dismissed, when immediately he began,Miss Hannah More, something must be done forChedder.' He then proceeded to a particular accountof his day, of the inquiries he had made respecting thepoor ; there was no resident minister, no manufactory,nor did there appear any dawn of comfort, eithertemporal or spiritual. The method or possibility ofassisting them was discussed till a late hour ; it wasat length decided in a few words, by Mr. W.'s exclaiming,' If you will be at the trouble, I will be at theexpense.' Something, commonly called an impulse,crossed my heart, that told me it was God's work, andit would do ; and though I never have, nor probablyshall recover the same emotion, yet it is my businessto water it with watchfulness, and to act up to itsthen dictates. Mr. Wilberforce and his sister left usin a day or two afterwards. We turned many schemesin our head, every possible way ; at length thosemeasures were adopted which led to the foundation ofthe different schools."Resolved," he says upon the 23rd of August, " tothink seriously to-day for tomorrow, my birth-day,1789. BIRTH-DAY. 241on which I shall be much more disturbed." Hismore private Journal thus records the thoughts towhich he turned his mind. " Cowslip Green, birthdayeve. To-morrow I complete my thirtieth year.What shame ought to cover me when I review mypast life in all its circumstances ! With full knowledgeof my Master's will, how little have I practised it !How little have I executed the purposes I formed lastsummer at Rayrigg ! Wherein am I improved evenin my intellectual powers ? My business I pursue butas an amusement, and poor Ramsay (now no more)shames me in the comparison. Yet is there hope inGod's mercy through Christ. May He give constancyand vigour to my resolutions. May I look everforward to that day of account to which I am hastening; may I act as in His sight, and preserving thedeepest self-abasement, may my light so shine beforemen, that they may see my good works, and glorifymy Father which is in heaven." Though his ownestimate of his exertions was thus humble, it was thesurprise of others that he did so much. All hislabours were performed in spite of the enfeeblingpresence of bodily debility. In the course of thismonth he wrote to Mr. Hey a full account of hispresent state of health. " Though by dint ofmedicine I have kept the enemy under, he stillremains on the watch, ready to come forward in forceon any favourable juncture. I am still so weak thatthe least irregularity disorders me ; and I cannot, Idare say, possess you with an adequate sense of theVOL. I. M242 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1789.lassitude and internal bearing down which thenoppresses me. I have still the same inability to walkany distance, much more to ride, without sufferingfrom the exertion. During the winter I used but littleexercise positively so called, though a London dayalways bringing its toils along with it is never a seasonof idleness and sloth ; I went out chiefly in mycarriage, and kept tolerable hours."Mr. Hey, in replying to this letter, pressed uponhim strongly the advantage he might probably derivefrom a course of Buxton water ; and after a shorttime he most reluctantly followed his advice. " Whathave you to say," he writes in answer, " why judgmentshould not be pronounced against you ? Thus arecriminals addressed before they are consigned to theirfate ; and as I deem a sentence to Buxton to be in ahigh degree penal, the same allowance to speak in myown defence ought to be granted me in this instance.If on reconsideration the court adheres to its originalopinion, I shall acquiesce, and suffer myself to bepeaceably conveyed to the place of execution.Seriously speaking, after being in town for near eightmonths, I pant for retirement and the country, andfeel most unwilling to plunge into the hurry of avery crowded watering-place. Yet if you believethere is a reasonable probability of my receivingbenefit, I shall not hesitate to comply. I feel it to beanindispensable duty to do all I can for the perfectrestoration of my health, leaving the matter withcheerful resignation in His hands, who best knows1789. JOURNEY TO BUXTON. 243what is good for us. If I do recover strength, mayHe enable me to use it for his glory."Monday, Aug. 24th. Left Cowslip Green forBristol. Spent half an hour with Sir James Storehouseseventy-four; under many bodily tortures, yet patientand cheerful much pleased with him. He recommended12th of Hebrews, and 3rd of Lamentations.Spoke in the highest terms of Dr. Doddridge, andrelated the circumstances of his own conversion, whenhe belonged to a deistical club.25th. Over the water old passage with mysister, and Miss Hannah and Patty More. Dined atChepstow beautiful drive. 26th. By water toWinter. 27th. We all separated Miss Mores re-returnedto Bristol I and my sister on our way.29th. Reached Hawkstone. Lady Montagu Bryantmagnetizes Sir Richard, &c.31st. Went to dine at Lord Kenyon's, Arlingtona party of his relations and friends glad to see usLord Thurlow coming. Bryant Hill a devotedmagnetizer, but seems a very worthy man. I thoughtit right to come here, but I am sadly idle of necessity,and unless I take care shall lose the power ofapplication. Be this evening the beginning of a newera. May I trust in the Lord, and in the help of hisgrace.Sept, 3rd. Walked with Sir R. Hill over hisbeautiful place. Dined at Sandford, meeting LordKenyon and his three sons. Raining, but got out tosee the castle. (Leon, Lord Gilmore's ancestor, turnedM 2244 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1789.hermit, &c.) Evening wasted my time. Let me behumble and fearful, but diligent."4th. Left Sir R. Hill's most kindly sorry topart with us. More solitude suits me, though it ispleasing to see this family of love and peace. Arrivedat Buxton at night.5th. Found that I had few acquaintance hereArchbishop of Canterbury and family, &c." " Forthe last week at Sir R. Hill's. He is indeed agood man : but how much time does one waste even insuch a house. Let me as often as possible retire up intothe mountain, and come down only on errands of usefulnessand love. Oh may God enable me to fix myaffections mainly on Him, and to desire to glorify Him,whether in life or death ; looking unto Jesus, andcontinuing constant in prayer."6th. Heard prayers at the grand hotel. Tuesday,dined at the public table uncomfortable Archbishopcivil. I live at home, and see few people am readingBlackstone, and Goldsmith, and Spencer, and thinkingserious reading, Hopkins, llth. Condemnedmy going on, (read } read, read,) and resolve to endeavourat a new plan of thought, &c. and to keepthe account plus and minus. To get much by heartand recapitulate. Long walk with the Archbishop.12th. Henry Thornton came in the afternoon.15th. W m Hey came. With him all the afternoonand evening much useful conversation." " If to you,"he wrote to Mr. Hey, after this hasty visit, " it wasan exertion to break from me, I assure you it was1789. BUXTON. 245painful to me to lose you so soon. Several topics havesince recurred to my mind, upon which I had intendedto converse with you. I am glad to hear of your safereturn into harbour, begging only that in any futureexpedition, you will contrive to be able to keep the seasrather longer, or at least that we may not part companyalmost as soon as we have fallen in with eachother."On his return from a short expedition to YoxallLodge, he says, " Had two or three narrow escapesdrunken postilion nearly driving into Ashorewater carriage spring broken, &c. Through God'smercy, got safe to Buxton. Oct. 14th. Gisborne andI dined at the great hotel Lady Liddell HeldHutchinson, &c. Dean of Middleham at night.15th. Long and rational discussion with Gisborneafter breakfast Dean of Middleham at night accountof America. 16th. Long discussion with Gisborneabout Test Acts. 23rd. Major Cartwrightentered the room whilst discussing dissenters' rightswarm argument about Gisborne's and Paley's systemsCartwright said that he had been of thirtyreligions, and should be perhaps of thirty more.25th, Sunday. Saw a poor and very religious manmuch affected by his meek piety. Oh may Godenable me to turn to him henceforth. Buxton is inasadly neglected state."From Buxton he wrote to Mrs. Hannah More246 LIFE OF Wilberforce. 1789.TO MRS. H. MORE.My dear Madam,A letter from Cowslip Green brings with itin some sort the portraiture of its own scenery, andgreatly mends the prospect to one shut up amidstbleak, rugged hills, and barren, unprotected valleys.But it is not on this account only that yours is acceptable,but as it excites various other pleasing and refreshingimages, which having once found a place inmy mind, will continue there, I trust, during the remainderof my life. May they be of still longer duration,and the benefits and the comforts of our friendshipbe experienced by both of us when time shall beno more. For my dear sister I must claim the sameprivilege, and, from what I have seen of yours, (thoughas this is not a case wherein one ought either to pronouncehastily, or to pay compliments, I would not absolutelydecide,) I wish her also to be admitted into theconfederacy. Thus much for discussion ; now to business.Your plan is a very good one, and I think youwill find no difficulty so great as that of discoveringa proper couple to carry it into execution. If youcan meet with any such, by all means secure them.I will desire a friend of mine to make inquiry aftera double-headed shot fitted for doing execution in thesame way, and, if successful, I shall be at no loss foran object elsewhere, against which to direct my battery.As for the expense, the best proof you can giveme that you believe me hearty in the cause, or sincerein the wishes expressed in the former part of this1789. TO MRS. H. MORE. 247letter, is to call on me for money without reserve.Every one should contribute out of his own properfund. I have more money than time, and if you, orrather your sister, on whom I foresee must be devolvedthe superintendence of our infant establishment, willcondescend to be my almoner, you will enable me toemploy some of the superfluity it has pleased God togive me to good purpose. Sure I am, that they whosubscribe attention and industry, &c. furnish articlesof more sterling and intrinsic value. Besides, I havea rich banker in London, Mr. H. Thornton, whom Icannot oblige so much as by drawing on him for purposeslike these. I shall take the liberty of enclosinga draft for 40 ; but this is only meant for beginningwith.Now for the mission . . . indeed, I fear with younothing can be done in the regular way. But thesepoor people must not, therefore, be suffered to continuein their present lamentable state of darkness.You know you told me they never saw the sun but oneday in the year, and even the moon appeared but oncea week for an hour or two. The gravitation to Wellswas too strong to be resisted. My advice then is,send for a comet Whiston had them at command,and John Wesley is not unprovided. Take care,however, that eccentricity is not his only recommendation,and, if possible, see and converse with the manbefore he is determined on.Very much yours,W. Wilberforce."248 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1789.With the Wesley family Mr. Wilberforce had formeda personal acquaintance at the house of Mrs. More.I went I think in 1786 to see her, and when I cameinto the room Charles Wesley rose from the table,around which a numerous party sat at tea, and comingforwards to me, gave me solemnly his blessing. Iwas scarcely ever more affected. Such was the effectof his manner and appearance, that it altogether oversetme, and I burst into tears, unable to restrain myself."15 In recommending one of "Wesley's comets"Mr. Wilberforce had no thoughts of encouraging dissent;for John Wesley was no dissenter from thechurch of England, nor were any of his preacherssuffered during his life-time to attempt to administerthe sacraments of the church. Had he not consideredthem as churchmen Mr. Wilberforce would not havesuggested their employment, for in the same year hedissuaded a relation, who complained that in herplace of residence she could find no religious instructionin the church, from attending at the meetinghouse."Its individual benefits," he wrote in answerto her letter of inquiry, " are no compensation for thegeneral evils of dissent. The increase of dissenters,which always follows from the institution of unsettledplaces of worship, is highly injurious to the interestsof religion in the long run."The moral desolation which he found in Chedderwas a striking illustration of his common maxim, that1S His respect for Charles Wesley was shown in a yearly pensionwhich he allowed to his widow until her death in 1822.1789. JUDGMENT CONCERNING DISSENT. 249the dissenters could do nothing if it were not for theestablished church;" for the absence of a residentclergyman had brought the village into a state ofuniversal ignorance. " I have taken measures," hewrote again to Mrs. More upon the 2nd of October,to send a competent supply of the books which youdesired. Your labours can only be equalled by Spencer'slady knights, and they seem to be much of thesame kind too, I mean, you have all sorts of monstersto cope withal." The monsters were, however, allsubdued by this intrepid lady knight, supported byher generous champion, (the "Red Cross knight" washis familiar name with Mrs. Montagu,) without theeccentric succour of a " comet." " Your accounts," hewrites somewhat later, " have afforded me the utmostpleasure, and I would persuade myself that they willbe as comfortable next year. I trust you will speakfreely when the money is exhausted . . indeed I conceiveit must be all spent already . . not to do sowould be to give way either to pride, or to falsedelicacy."Upon the 26th of October he left Buxton, andset off for Yorkshire. Got to Sheffield where foundRiver-Dee Company going to dinner, so dined withthem."27th. Off after breakfast for R. where a largeparty at dinner B. the philosopher, &c. Playedat cards evening and supped. S. how little of St.Paul. F. an old man. Alas ! alas ! sat up too late,and strong compunctions." After retiring to his roomM 3250 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1789.he wrote upon a sheet of paper, 16 " I have been acting apart this whole evening ; and whilst I have appearedeasy and cheerful, my heart has been deeply troubled.That, if it should please God to call me away beforetomorrow morning's light, I may not have contributedto encourage this fatal carelessness concerning theinterests of futurity in never-dying souls, let me hererecord my sense of it, and warn all who shall readthese lines, to remember that awful declaration, ' Forall these things God shall call thee into judgment'"Before leaving Yorkshire he, " 29th Oct. calledat Lord Effingham's, and at Tooker's, where talkedabout dissenters. Then off for Wilford, where arrivedat eight. 30th. At Wilford seven little children;two of them poor Mrs. Manning's." Here he beganimmediately a course of regular employment. " Toaim at eight hours minor business, business, andserious, added together, and keep an accurate account.May God enable me to live more to hisglory." " Oh how difficult it is to keep alive in thesoul any spark of the true spirit of religion ! * Quickenme, O Lord.' Form in me daily that new creaturewhich is made after thy likeness. May I be endeavouringin all things to walk in wisdom to them thatare without, redeeming the time ; labouring for thespiritual improvement of others ; mortifying the flesh,and living soberly, righteously, and godly in this presentworld. For the ensuing week let it be my maincare to exterminate a sensual spirit rather by subsoilMemorandum found amongst his papers.1789. FORNCETT. 251tuning better regards in its place, than by attacking itdirectly ; yet being moderate in all enjoyments, andlooking through them to the gracious Author of all good.Sober-mindedness, good-nature, plan for time, &c.Topics for conversation and study. Looking untoJesus." " November 14th. Reading Blair and otherworks for oratory, criticism, &c. ; and Arts and Sciencesin Chambers ; and beginning Poetry. 17th. Resolvedwith difficulty to start for Cooksonon's, and then to mymany and great matters in town. Miss L. Smith veryseriously disposed. Had I looked for them, doubtlessI had found many opportunities of serious conversationand mutual edification. May God forgive my neglectedoccasions, and enable me to profit more from themin future. 21st. Arrived safely at Forncett. I ought tobe most thankful that I thus go out and come in safely."On an inquiry I think it right to stay here for a while,God willing, rather than to remove as yet. To formmy plan and keep to it by God's blessing. Try ateight hours at least of all sorts. Topics ready for discussionand conversation. Moderation early hoursrelaxation regulated, and as I stay here may I employmy leisure well, and try to walk as remembering God'seye is ever over me. Books reading commonplaces,&c." 17Sunday, 6th. Had some very serious thoughtsand strong compunctions, from which I hope good willresult. Remember, O my soul, that if thou availed notthyself of these warnings, the greater will be thy conNov. 29. Diary.252 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1789.damnation. May I be enabled to place my happinessin communion with God, and may I be found in thespotless robe of Christ's righteousness, covering myiniquities from the pure eyes of a holy God. When B.dined here I was too vain and talkative (humilityshould be joined to cheerfulness). At night a longand earnest conversation with my host upon religion.May God bless it to both of us. 7th. Unwell, perhapsfrom being too studious. I must not read anythingrequiring thought just before bed-time I sleepill. But oh how thankful ought I to be for the merciesI enjoy. 13th. I have been too sedentary for my healththis last week. I must take more air, and be satisfiedwith eight hours' reading, if I find more too much.This last week Letters, Lear, Othello, Hamlet,Macbeth, Twelfth Night Ferguson, Bible, Johnson'sLives, Doddridge's Sermons a topic dailyhenceforth Recapitulation."I shall ponder," he tells Mr. Hey, " the contentsof your letter with the attention due to a subject soimportant. I wish to know in what state are the fundsof your West Riding Charity 18 for catching the coltsrunning wild on Halifax Moor, and cutting theirmanes and tails, and sending them to college. If acontributor would be acceptable, I would most cheerfullygive something towards an institution I sohighly approve, but my name must not be mentioned."To Mrs. Hannah More he writes the day before heleft Forncett, " I have been for some time staying inThe Elland Society.1790. JANUARY 1ST. 253a lurking-hole, more secret than even Cowslip Green,but tomorrow I mean to sally forth upon the Londonroad, and shall flutter about town until the meeting ofparliament.""Dec. 24th. Got to H. Thornton's, in King'sArms yard, and staid there all night. 25th.Christmas-day. With H. Thornton to the Lock,morning and sacrament. Returned with him, dinedand slept."28th. Dined Grenville's Pitt PakenhamLord Lieutenant Westmoreland P. Arden MorningtonBelgrade. 29th. Pitt disappointing meabout Holwood, drove to Montagu's."Though his character had evidently risen in thelast twelve months, yet the new year opened withstrong expressions of dissatisfaction with himselfa sure consequence of aiming at an elevated standard.Jan. 1st. Lock Scott with Henry ThorntonThese forty years in the Wilderness' received thesacrament. Most deeply impressed with seriousthings, shame from past life, and desire of futureamendment'* " I have been receiving the sacramentafter an excellent sermon of Scott's, and with thedeepest humiliation I look up for mercy, throughChrist, to that God whose past mercies I have so oftenabused. I resolve by God's help to mortify the fleshwith the affections and lusts, so far as my very infirmhealth will permit me, and to labour more and more tolive the life I now live in the flesh, in the faith of theSon of God. How should T be humbled by seeing254 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1790.the little progress I have made since 1786 ! PoorNewton dines with me to-day, on whom I then called.He has not dined from home on new-year's day forthirty years. I shall now form a set of rules, and byGod's help adhere to them. My health is very bad, alittle thing disorders me, at thirty and a half I am inconstitution sixty. ' The night cometh when no mancan work.' " " Oh may divine grace protect andsupport me throughout the ensuing campaign, preservem from the world's mistaken estimate of things, andenable me to be a Christian indeed, and to glorify Godby my life and conduct."Though his state of health was so great a hinderanceto exertion, this year was one of intense andincessant occupation. " Business first and grand,"says his plan, " for this winter, 1. Slave Trade.2. General preparation for parliamentary business.3. General topics. 4 Historical and political, &c.axioms. 5. Ferguson's History and Society, Shakespeare,Cowper, Adam Smith, (Swift, Pope, Addison,Johnson, &c. for relaxation,) English History, Barrow,South, &c. 6. Finances. 7. ReformationSociety and its plans Sunday-travelling Bill winelicenses, &c."His intercourse with general society, " from whichI dare not more withdraw," and into which he endeavouredto carry his high principles of action, occupiedmuch time. His great cause alone furnishedmatter for unremitting toil. But besides this, heapplied himself with diligence to all the important1790. WHITE NEGROES. 255questions which were brought forward in parliament ;and was most assiduous in his attention to the privatebusiness of the great county which he represented.When you appear on this stage," writes Mr. JamesGrenville, " you must always expect to be scrambledfor. The land-owner, the manufacturer, the canalman, the turnpike man, and the iron man will eachhave a pull in his turn."His house was continually open to an influx of menof all conditions. Pitt and his other parliamentaryfriends might be found there at " dinner before theHouse." So constant was their resort, that it wasasserted, not a little to his disadvantage in Yorkshire,that he received a pension for entertaining the partisansof the minister. Once every week the " SlaveCommittee " dined with him. Messrs. Clarkson,Dickson, &c. jocosely named by Mr. Pitt, his " whitenegroes," were his constant inmates; and were employedin classing, revising, and abridging evidence underhis own eye. " I cannot invite you here," he writesto a friend who was about to visit London for advice,11 for, during the sitting of Parliament, my house is amere hotel." His breakfast table was thronged bythose who came to him on business ; or with whom,for any of his many plans of usefulness, he wished tobecome personally acquainted. He took a lively interestin the Elland Society ; and besides subscribingto its funds 100 per annum, (under four anonymousentries to avoid notice,) he invited to his house theyoung men under education, that he might be able to256 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1790.distribute them in proper situations. No one ever enteredmore readily into sterling merit, though concealedunder a rough exterior. " We have differentforms," he has said, " assigned to us in the schoolof life different gifts imparted. All is not attractivethat is good. Iron is useful, though it does notsparkle like the diamond. Gold has not the fragranceof a flower. So different persons have variousmodes of excellence, and we must have an eye toall." Yet no one had a keener or more humorousperception of the shades of character. " Mention,when you write next," says the postscript of a letterto Mr. Hey on the announcement of a new candidatefor education, " the length of his mane andtail ;" and he would repeat, with a full appreciation ofits humour, the answer of his Lincolnshire footman, toan inquiry as to the appearance of a recruit who presentedhimself in Palace Yard, " What sort of aperson is he?" " Oh, sir, he is a rough one." Thecircumstances of his life brought him into contact withthe greatest varieties of character. His anti-roomwas thronged from an early hour ; its first occupantsbeing generally invited to his breakfast table ; and itslater tenants only quitting it when he himself went outon business. Like every other room in his house itwas well stored with books ; and the experience of itsnecessity had led to the exchange of the smaller volumes,with which it was originally furnished, for cumbrousfolios, " which could not be carried off byaccident in the pocket of a coat." Its groupe was1790. THE ANTI-ROOM. 257often most amusing ; and provoked the wit of Mrs. H.More to liken it to "Noah's ark, full of beasts clean andunclean." On one chair sat a Yorkshire constituent,manufacturing or agricultural ; on another a petitionerfor charity, or a House of Commons client ; on anothera Wesleyan preacher : while side by side with an African,a foreign missionary, or a Hadrian professor, satperhaps some man of rank who sought a privateinterview, and whose name had accidentally escapedannouncement. To these mornings succeeded commonlyan afternoon of business, and an evening in theHouse of Commons. Yet in this constant bustle heendeavoured still to live by rule. " Alas," he writesupon the 31st of January, " with how little profit hasmy time passed away since I came to town ! I havebeen almost always in company, and they think melike them rather than become like me. I have livedtoo little like one of God's peculiar people." " Hencecome waste of time, forgetfulness of God, neglect ofopportunities of usefulness, mistaken impressions ofmy character. Oh may I be more restrained by myrules for the future ; and in the trying week upon whichI am now entering, when I shall be so much in company,and give so many entertainments, may I labourdoubly by a greater cultivation of a religious frame,by prayer, and by all due temperance, to get it wellover."He was much occupied in the early part of thissession by the fresh application made by the dissentersfor the repeal of the Test and Corporation Acts. " I258 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1790.am glad," writes Mr. Gisborne, " that you are aboutto consider this subject thoroughly before your attentionis pre-occupied and divided by the Slave Tradediscussion in the House of Commons." Thoughhe disliked the peculiar form of a sacramental test,yet he thought some such restriction so needful thathe had voted against his friend Mr. Beaufoy when in1787 the repeal of these enactments was demanded.In the spring of 1789, he would not leave Holwoodto vote upon the question, his " mind not being madeup." Since that time he had maturely weighed thesubject, and to secure its full consideration he hadengaged three of his friends, who took different sidesupon the question, (Mr. Gisborne being for and Mr.Hey and Mr. Mason adverse to the repeal,) to stateto him in writing the grounds of their opinions. Bythem the case was well argued; Mr. Hey showingmost forcibly the necessity of an established churchfor the welfare of the nation, and the need of suchenactments for the safety of the church, while Mr.Gisborne's letter embodied all that could be saidupon the opposite side. " He suffers, I suspect," saysMr. Mason, " his liberality of spirit to carry him beyondwhat prudence would suggest at the presenttime, when Socinianism is so very prevalent. I shouldsay, smilingly, that after having argued so well againstexpediency, he thinks himself now bound to set hisface against every thing that may seem to be expedient."" Were you a man possessed merely of aneveryday kind of conscience," writes Dr. Burgh, " I1790. TEST ACT. 259should answer your letter on the Paean principle,and advise you by all means to vote with the dissenters,for it is surely very expedient that this countyshould be saved from all the evils of a contest at thenext election ; especially as it does not signify a rushon which side you vote as an individual ; for let thequestion be determined in your House for the repealof the Test Act, which I think highly improbable, theBill will undoubtedly be flung out by the House ofLords." The debate upon the question came on inthe House of Commons upon the 3rd of March, whenthe repeal of the restrictive acts was moved by Mr.Fox in a speech in which he directly alluded to theopposition of the member for Yorkshire. In a correspondencewith an active committee of dissentersamongst his constituents in the town of Leeds, " somegarbled quotations from which," says Dr. Milner, " theyhave shamefully published," Mr. Wilberforce haddeclared that his great reluctance " to oppose the repealof these laws had been overcome by his conviction oftheir present necessity." To this conviction he wasbrought by the persuasion, that to give such an increaseof influence to the dissenting party would endangerthe Liturgy and Articles of the church. Theprevalence of those loose principles of faith amongstthe body of the clergy, which had spread under theascendency of a latitudinarian party, 19 had been alarm -19 It was the settled policy of Sir Robert Walpole and some succeedingadministrations, to transfer the dignities of the church from thestrictly and uncompromisingly orthodox, to men of a more lax and liberalfaith.260 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1790.ingle displayed in the petitions from the Feathers'Tavern ; and the time was inauspicious for concessionswhich might promote the activity of dissent, orrelax the strictness of orthodoxy. " I can imaginefew things," he has since said, " more likely to callforth the bitter and, I must add, mischievous sneer ofsome future Hume or Gibbon, than that those whoare in possession of the dignities of the church shouldbe seen endeavouring to escape from the unfashionableopinions with which the acceptance of its honours andemoluments was associated in primitive times. Itreminds me invincibly of a reply of Mr. Fox to theFeathers' Tavern application for release from subscriptionto the Articles. " They have," he said withan exordium which I will not repeat, " They have themeat they shall have the sauce too." ^Not a day has passed," wrote Mr. Wilberforceupon the 13th of March to Mr. Hey, " since the nightof our memorable majority, (294 to 105,) wherein Ihave not had it in contemplation to call upon you torejoice with me on the result of the dissenters' application.Yet the satisfaction I receive from this decisionis by no means unalloyed ; but I will not enterinto particulars, the field would be too large at present.I was rising to speak immediately after Mr. Fox, anddesigned to discuss the whole subject, but Mr. Pittdesired me to give way for him ; and I was myself, aswell as the House, too much tired at one o'clock inLetter to the Rev. Francis Wrangham, Feb. 5, 1816.1790. SLAVE TRADE COMMITTEE. 261the morning (I had been in it ever since eleven o'clockon the preceding day) to do more than deliver apublic notification of my opinions."The large majority by which the motion was thisyear rejected, marks the rising dread of French principles." When I entered life," Mr. Wilberforce hassaid, " it is astonishing how general was the dispositionto seize upon church property. I mixed withvery various circles, and I could hardly go into anycompany where there was not a clergyman presentwithout hearing some such measure proposed. I amconvinced that if the public feeling had not beenaltered by our seeing how soon every other kind ofplunder followed the destruction of tithes in France,our clergy would by this time have lost their property'*But the main business of this spring was the conductof the Abolition cause. He had opened thecampaign by a motion made upon the 14th, and carriedafter much opposition upon the 27th of January,for referring to a special committee the furtherexamination of witnesses. This became now his dailywork, and with the help of the late William Smith heconducted personally all the examinations. Here hereaped the fruit of his deep acquaintance with thewhole subject, as well as of those habits of self-governmentwhich he had been at such pains to form.Nothing but his accurate knowledge of details couldhave prevented his being duped by \he misrepresentationof too many of the witnesses ; whilst theangry discussions in which he was continually involved262 LIFE OF wilberforce. 1790.rendered a practised temper no less needful than asagacious judgment.It became often necessary to sift the evidence byprivate inquiries ; and for this purpose he maintaineda constant correspondence with intelligent personsresident at the principal slave ports of the kingdom.The name of the Calabar tragedy " (he thus writesto Dr. Currie of Liverpool) " is probably familiar toyou ; it is already I think indisputably proved, yet Iwill confess to you there are some parts on which Ishould be glad to have more light. Now what I wantis to find out some persons who were present on thatbloody day, which, it being only twenty-three yearssince, cannot I conceive be very difficult ; and to fishout from them all they know of the whole transaction,particularly as to the steps that led to it, and theconsequences by which it was followed : the onlyallegation which reflects any discredit on the story,being one made by Captain Hall, that the Englishwere as well received afterwards as before. But thisinquiry must be conducted with the utmost caution,lest our opponents should discover our object of pursuit,and either counteract us directly, or at least useit as an argument to prove we are not satisfied withthe case as it stands. Captain Lace, one of thecaptains engaged, and resident at Liverpool, has givensome most irrational evidence on the subject beforethe select committee of the House of Commons.Could you not contrive to learn any thing he mayhave said on it in private conversation ; not with a1790. SLAVE TRADE COMMITTEE. 263view to contradict his public testimony, unless, whichis very unlikely, the party to whom he opened himselfshould be willing to come forward, but to suggestquestions which being asked of any other witnessmight detect Captain Lace's statements. I notedown, below, the names of the ships and masters concernedin the tragedy in question ; and I am, withrespect and esteem,Sir,Your most obedient and obliged servant,W. Wilberforce."This was a period of no ordinary labour to the leaderin the struggle. In a letter written forty two yearslater, 21 he reminds Mr. Smith of these early labours :You cannot, any more than myself, have forgotten theweeks after weeks, or rather months after months,in which our chief, though not most cherished companions,were that keen, sour S , that ponderous,coarse, Jack Fuller-like F ; a very graphicalepithet if you remember the man." His house toothroughout this time was continually full. The eveninghours were devoted to consultations on the commoncause ; and to keep so many different agents in harmoniousexertion required no little management. Afew extracts from his Diary will illustrate theseemployments."March 18th. Dined at home William Smithtete-astute (partly religious); then Clarkson came, and*' From Brighton, Isle of Wight, May 5, 1832.264 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1790.Lancaster, and looked over evidence. 20th. Clark-sonand Eliot dined, (Slave business,) then Hunterand Sansom came from the city ; a different set ofideas in their minds, and in those in our friends. 22nd.Dined at home Smith, Clarkson, and DicksonSlave business till 1 1 at night. 25th. Committee asusual. 27th. Town from Clapham to committee asusual. Dined Bishop of Salisbury's Miss More, SirJ. Bankes, Mrs. Garrick, &c. We talked of CaptainBligh's affair, and Sir Joshua (like myself) was notsurprised at it. Otaheite Calypso's island. 29th.Committee House Captain Williams's business till12 at night. Not attentive enough admired Foxand Pitt, and the lawyers. Habit will do much, Iwill practise. 31st. Slave committee wranglinggot hold of Norris then House till ^ past 10. April1st. Committee some wrangling final Report. 2nd.My plan of time this winter has been that of dininglate, and I have seldom done any business afterdinner. I doubt about this going into company somuch, yet I dare not decide against it, I am too complicatedin my plans. 3rd. Looked over the witnesses,&c. Clarkson and Dickson dined with me. 4th.Easter Sunday. Sent to Christian to go to Lock,hoping in his present state of mind, having latelyheard of his brother's conduct, an impression might,by God's blessing, be made upon him. 5th. Up 6|bed 12. Hard at work on Slave Trade evidence allday with * white negroes,' two Chansons and Dickson.6th. Hard at work again with Chansons and1790. SLAVE TRADE COMMITTEE. 265Dickson on evidence. C. dined with us; he seems tohave got over his grief too much."On the afternoon of this day he set off, after ' ' muchdoubting," to spend a single day at Holwood. " 7th.Walked about after breakfast with Pitt and Grenvillewood with bills." " We sallied forth armed with bill-hooks,cutting new walks from one large tree to another,through the thickets of the Holwood copses." Yeteven in these seasons of recreation, he kept a watchover himself, and rigidly noted down every instance inwhich he had at all neglected his task of socialreformation. " Forgot my resolutions, and too littleattended to opportunities of impressing seriously.Surely Pitt must deem of me as of any other man."15th. Dined at home Clarkson and Dickson evidenceBeaufoy and a shoal of people came in. 16th.Breakfasted Pitt's Sunday Bill, &c. 17th. Met SamuelHoare at the Shakespeare Gallery picture of DyingCardinal, and poor Tom Grosvenor's remark Hoare,Sansom, Wedgwood, Granville Sharpe, Clarkson,Henry Thornton, and Whitehead dined with me.These city people better than at our end of the town.19th. Evidence, &c. Saw multitudes of people onbusiness."The witnesses in favour of the Trade had nowbeen heard, and the friends of Abolition found withno small astonishment that they should not introducetheir own evidence without a new struggle.20th. Saw Pitt in bed, and talked with him on theenemy's impudent attempt to resist our calling evilI. N266 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1790.hence : at his suggestion went to Fox and saw him ;also called on Burke, who kept me an hour and a halftalking about W. Hastings. House then dinedat home Lancaster and ' white negroes ; ' hut I findone cannot make short work of it with a number, soI must not look for it. Felt much when I saw poorBurke. Very faint and indifferent to day. 21st. Busymorning and evening reading evidence. 22nd. Morningreading evidence ; at two o'clock went to Claphamwith * white negroes and prepared for tomorrow."TO WILLIAM WILBERFORCE, ESQ.Dear Wilberforce,Mr. Fox has just told me (hut withoutmentioning his authority) that he learns that LordPenrhyn's motion tomorrow is not to stop yourexamination ; but to fix a call of the House at aboutthree weeks hence, on the supposition that your evidencewill probably by that time be closed, and thatit is essential at all events to decide the business thissession. I told Mr. Fox that I thought your evidencewould probably last for a longer period, that when it isclosed some time must be given to consider it, andthat it therefore seemed impossible that any questionshould come on in less than six weeks from this time,before which all other business would be over ; thattherefore probably the question could not come on atall this session ; but that at all events, if the evidenceshould be closed in any reasonable time, less than afortnight would not be sufficient for considering it, and1790. Brother. 267that would allow time for a call being made then, if itshould finally be determined to bring on the question.On this ground I think the call tomorrow may be resisted,and Mr. Fox seemed to be of the same opinion.I wish however you would consider it in the meantime,and let me know what you think of it this eveningor tomorrow morning.Ever yours,House of Commons, \Y PlTT."Thursday, April 22.Yet in contradiction of this announcement made byMr. Fox, the introduction of further evidence was absolutelyopposed by Lord Penrhyn. His propositionafter some debate was negatived without a division.All morning," says the Diary of April 23rd, " atevidence, then to town and House. Our opponents,blessed be God, fairly beat. A throng at home atnight. 24th. Hard at work all day with CaptainWilson, and at night Mr. Dalrymple, Burgh, Dickson,Clarkson, and Captain Wilson dined with me. 26th.Committee morning, and after dinner went to work tilllate at slave business. 27th. Committee as usualcame over and dined, and afterwards slave business. Allthis time examining and preparing my evidences andextremely occupied, and seven or eight people livingconstantly in my house. 28th. Committee as usual.Crowther dined with us, and gave us an account ofthe shipwreck and Riou's fortitude." Mr. Crowtherowed his education to the Elland Society, and hadbeen recently selected by Mr. Wilberforce for a chap2268 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1790.laincy which he had prevailed on Mr. Pitt to foundfor New South Wales. A letter of the 17th of Aprilannounced to Mr. Wilberforce the shipwreck of thevessel in which Mr. Crowther sailed. "On the llthof December we left the Cape. On the 21st saw twoislands of ice in lat. 42. longitude 38. 30. E. distantabout three leagues. About noon on the 23rd we sawanother and bore down towards it, hoisted out thejolly boat and one of the cutters and picked up somesmall floating pieces, and then bore away N. W. inorder to get entirely clear of the ice. About half-pasteight the same evening, the officer on the forecastlecried out, ( An island of ice close a-head' (for being inthe dark and a very thick mist we could see very littlebefore us). Before the alarm was sounded through theship, she had struck one violent blow; and directlyafter she struck again, and got upon the ice, slidingalong into an immense cavern in its side. Everyeffort was made to save the ship until Friday, when itwas judged necessary to quit her. The captain wouldnot leave her, but wrote a letter to the Admiralty.Two boats besides ours were hoisted out. We weretaken up by a French ship and came in it to theCape, after being in the open boat from Dec. 25th toJan. 3rd, exposed to cold, hunger, and thirst, havingscarcely any clothes ; two gills of water per day, andat the most two pounds of bread, amongst fifteen."To this account he added in a conversation, whichwith its racy Yorkshire dialect Mr. Wilberforce delightedto preserve, "When the ship's condition1790. Riot. 269was altogether hopeless Captain Riou sent for meinto the cabin, and asked me, ' Crowther, how do youfeel ? ' ' How ? Why I thank God pretty comfortable.'' I cannot say I do. I had a pious mother, andI have not practised what she taught me ; but I mustdo my duty. The boats will not hold one third ofour crew, and if I left the vessel there would be ageneral rush into them, and every one would perish.I shall stay by the ship, but you shall have a place; andbe sure you go in the master's boat, for he knows whathe is about, and if any boat reaches the shore it willbe his.' In the bustle of embarking I got into thewrong boat, and found out my mistake too late toalter it. The boats however neared each other tomake an exchange of some of their provisions, and Iheard Riou call to me, ' If you 've a heart, Crowther,jump.' I made the attempt, and just reaching theboat fell backwards in the water, but was pulled inamongst them." No other boat than that into whichhe was thus taken ever reached the shore. " JohnClarkson alone," of those who heard this conversation,says Mr. Wilberforce, " would not despair of Riou."I have seen " said Mr. Clarkson, himself a navalman, " such wonderful escapes at sea, that so long asthe captain preserves his self-possession I can neverdespair of any ship." " Thursday, 29th," says theDiary, " waked by a note saying that the Guardian,Riou, had arrived safely at the Cape. Poor Crowthercould not believe it sent him to Thurlow for aliving." Captain Riou was preserved for a more270 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1790.distinguished end; his gallant death in the hour ofvictory at Copenhagen has linked his name with thememory of Nelson.Mr. Wilberforce's incessant occupation continuedthrough the session. " 29th April. Committee morningdined at Pitt's before the House. 30th. Morning,committee as usual and again evening busy onNorris's examination. May 1st. Morning, examiningNorris's impeachment of credibility. 3rd. CommitteeNorris, &c. Company as usual at dinner before theHouse. 5th. A day of business, but knocked up atnight. 8th. Committee, morning dined at theBishop of Salisbury's. Large party Pitt, Grenville,Montagu, Ryder, Speaker, &c. Alas, alas, howweek passes unimproved after week ! Company everydaythough the Parliament Street Coffee-house occasionsa diversion. Greatly do I doubt how far allthis answers, which so draws my mind from heavenlythings. May 10th. Committee and House. Oftennow sat in committee, and again in evening in theHouse, but found that this did not agree with me.20th. Committee, and so indeed every day. All thistime perpetual company. Milner condemns itSpeaker thinks better end H. Thornton and Eliotapprove."It is whispered to me," he writes to Mr. Hey fromthe House of Commons, on the 22nd of May, " thatC. is half affronted at my not having written to himon his business ; one reason of which is the unsettledstate of the business itself; but more than all, the full1790. GENERAL ELECTION. 271employment I have had,, and the quantity of indispensablewriting in the committee, where I could notofficiate by deputy. Every day we sit in it the wholemorning ; after it we repair to the House : and I havebesides to go through the attorney's task of talkingwith witnesses, and making out what they can say."I am almost worn out, and I pant for a little countryair, and quiet: the former I hope soon to enjoy, thelatter is more uncertain. If I don't take care minewill be ' a case' shortly."These employments were soon afterwards exchangedfor a hasty three weeks' canvass, preparatory to thegeneral election of June, 1790. "June 7th. Morningunwell. Prepared a paper on Sir W. Dolben's billfor the Lords. To town to the committee up soonfor Fox's summing up on Hastings' trial. WestminsterHall all bored and tired. Fox's speech verydull. 9th. Committee calls on grandees home,and by exertion got off and travelled to Stevenage.Lancaster's affection at parting, and Will. Smith's.10th. Travelled on all day calling at Bishop of Lincoln'stalked about Milner." During this hastyvisit, he received a cordial welcome from his constituents,and was re-elected at its close by generalacclamation. In his private Diary, he reviews thetime which had been spent in this canvass, and recordshis narrow escape from a serious accident, when his carriagewas overturned in the village of Bessingby, nearArlington. " The confusion of a canvass, and thechange of place, have led me lately to neglect my272 LIFE OF Wilberforce. 1790.resolution. But self-indulgence is the root of the evil :with idleness it is my besetting sin. I pray God toenable me to resist both of them, and serve Him innewness of life. How little have I thought of mydeliverance the other day, when the carriage wasdashed to pieces ! How many have been killed by suchaccidents, and I unhurt ! Oh let me endeavour to turnto Thee." He adds a few days later, " I have beenthinking too much of one particular failing, that ofself-indulgence, whilst I have too little aimed at generalreformation. It is when we desire to love Godwith all our hearts, and in all things to devote ourselvesto his service, that we find our continual needof his help, and such incessant proofs of our ownweakness, that we are kept watchful and sober, andmay hope by degrees to be renewed in the spirit of ourminds. Oh may I be thus changed from darkness tolight ! Whatever reason there may be for my keepingopen house in Palace Yard, certain it is, that solitudeand quiet are favourable to reflection and to sober-mindedness; let me therefore endeavour to secure tomyself frequent seasons of uninterrupted converse withGod."CHAPTER VIII.JULY 1790 TO DECEMBER 1791.Summer excursions Diligent study of Slave Trade questionJohn Thornton New Parliament Pitt's speech on Hastings'impeachment Abridgement of evidence on SlaveTrade Increased strength of West Indian party Wesley'slast words " Abolition again negatived Bath SierraLeone Company Visits to Motley Temple and YoxallLodge.THE material benefit which Mr. Wilberforce had. receivedfrom a course of Buxton waters the precedingyear, led him at Mr. Key's desire to return there thissummer. He reached it early in July, but his furtherstay was soon after interrupted by an unexpected callto town.July 19th. Felt very low on arriving in London.Saw Pitt that night and discussed. 20th. Dined atPitt's with Grenville only. Talked against love ofcharacter; on French Revolution, &c. Called at Beaufoy'shis absurd and affected religious tenets. 22nd.Saw Clarkson and other people on business. Afternoonto Spence's he says that he gets from forty tofifty guineas per day."N 3274 LIFE OF Wilberforce. 1790.My dear Cooksonon," he writes from Palace Yard,"How are you? How is Mrs. C.? How is the bantling ?Are you alive ? Are you asleep ? Are you disabledin your hands ? Learn to write with your feet, ereyou again let me be so long without hearing from you.I am not stationary here, but come up to put my slavebusiness in train. My summer destination is unfixed.My dear little fellow, I hope you go on well in yourparish. Don't waste your eye-sight and my own, inassuring me that it has not been from want of affectionthat you have omitted to write. I know you wellenough to be sure of that. The reality I am persuadedwill exist always, the appearance when I am separatedfrom you never."23rd. Off for Teston arrived there by dinnertime. ' Amici fares temporis.' " Carefulness as tohis use of time had now become so habitual that heclosely scrutinized even these seasons of friendly intercourse." 26th. Breakfast till late. Then with SirCharles to Langley to eat cold dinner, see woods, fishponds,&c. Home in the evening. Days are wastedin these parties." And after another such excursionhe says, " On looking at my expenditure of time I seeit has been much wasted in this scheme, and unlesswhen health or some real call renders it desirable, Iwill shun them in future." From Teston he returnedthrough London into Derbyshire, and upon reachingBuxton on the 7th of August, was " met by a letterfrom Mr. Rose about the Spanish settlement, whichhalf inclined" him "to set off again for London."1790. BUXTON. 275Upon reflection, however, he determined to remain, andsoon describes himself as " busily employed." " 12th .Afternoon read Romeo and Juliet with Burgh, andagreed often to meet early in the afternoon, and readShakespeare. 13th. I dined at Burgh's in order toavoid Pepper Arden, and read ; but this scheme didnot succeed. 14th. Rode with P. Arden, and hadsome serious talk. 16th. Off after breakfast forCarleton. The entrance and frontal of the cave immenselygrand." Just as he was leaving Buxton,he was joined unexpectedly by a friend, whose societyhe highly valued. " W. Hey came in and surprisedus. As my being here has brought him over, we resolveto stay a few days longer." " Went with W. Hey tosee a young man who has had his foot amputated : nomedical aid can be effectual. He seems pious andresigned. How thankful should we be for health ! "27th. Being much in company on my birth-day,and on account of Henry Thornton's illness not beingable to retire and spend it in private, that anniversarypassed over with too little recollection. Oh may I fromthis time cultivate heavenly affections by mortifyingthe flesh, and living much in the view of unseenthings, and may the Spirit of the Lord sanctify mewholly ! " "I have been spending much time latelywith W. Hey. May I profit from the example ofthat excellent man."Sunday, 29th. Service in the Long Rooms."Those two good men," writes Mr. Hey to his ownfamily, " whom I need not name, whose hearts are276 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1790.always meditating some good scheme, intend to applyto the Bishop of Lichfield for leave to build a churchhere." " Serious talk with W. Hey in the afternoon;his profitable way of spending Sunday. 31st. WithW. Hey to Ashore, to meet Mr. and Mrs. Gisborne.On the road much serious talk with Hey,told him my greatest impediments, he recommendedrules. Sat. 4th Sept. Off for a few days at YoxallLodge. Sorry to part with W. Hey; whilst withhim I have allotted more time to conversation. Heis indeed a most instructive and profitable companion.He complains of want of love to God, but his aim ishigh, his views elevated. 5th, Sunday. At breakfast,and on the way to and from church, idle talk, unfit tosolemnize the mind or kindle the affections. Yet theyare truly sincere and upright minds, all of them.6th. Notification of election to stewardship of Yorkraces." To pass even a tacit censure upon this particularamusement, required no small measure of faithin the member for the county of York. There hadbeen a time when he had recorded in his Diary, " Myhorse won at the Harrogate races," but he was nowconvinced of their immoral tendency. His line thereforewas clear, nor did he ever perceive that he hadalienated one supporter by refusing at this time to fillthe office, or by soon after exchanging the accustomedcontribution to the races for a donation to the countyhospital.His thoughts were now fully occupied with theapproaching marriage of his only surviving sister to1790. HIS SISTER'S MARRIAGE. 277the Rev. Dr. Clarke, vicar of the Trinity church atHull. This took place at Buxton upon the Th ofSeptember. So warm were the natural affections ofhis heart, that his Diary contains many records ofrestless nights," and " indifferent health," the resultof anxiety for his sister's welfare. " I am sure," hewrites to her friend Mrs. Hannah More, " you will bedeeply interested in the event; though I am serious Icannot be uneasy concerning it." After a time, heset out with Mr. Babington for a short tour throughWales, whither Mr. Clarke and his sister had repaired;and joined their party at Carnarvon. " Sept. 27th.Hard at work on Ferguson's Civil Society. 29th.With Babington and Miss Sykes to Beddgellertand Pont Aberglasslyn returned evening a grandscene. Welch Bibles and other serious books in a cottage.Oct. 1st. Off from Carnarvon breakfastedBangor called on the bishop he busy in his building,ornamenting the cathedral. Lamented the stateof the Welch clergy, arising from monopoly Bangorschool may produce competition. Dined at Conwayevening Llanrwst. Sunday, 3rd. Llangollen sorry tofind no English service. Read prayers and sermon toservants at home, and the landlord came in. God bepraised, this day was spent in the main, I trust, to hisglory and my own edification. Babington an excellentman. Miss Butler and Ponsonby sent a civil note. Wegot off, I fear rather shabbily, without seeing them."Our society," wrote Miss Sykes to her mother on the278 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1790.following day, 1 " has received a sad blow in the departureyesterday of Mr. Wilberforce and Mr. Barrington.The former you have long known and admired,and to me he appears truly angelic ; had I a spark ofenthusiasm about me, I should doubt whether he werenot a superior being."He was now upon his road to Yoxall Lodge, theseat of the Rev. T. Gisborne. Their college acquaintancehad been interrupted when they left theUniversity; but was afterwards renewed by a letterof inquiry from Mr. Gisborne, when he first sawthe name of Wilberforce connected with the causeof Abolition. At Mr. Gisborne's house he hadbecome well acquainted with his near connexionMr. Babington. Intercourse between them soongrew into friendship ; and for many years he madeYoxall Lodge, or Rothley Temple, his ordinarysummer residence. Here he enjoyed uninterruptedprivacy, combined with the domestic comforts of hisfriend's family. In these visits he fulfilled those intentionswhich constant company had defeated in hisown residence at Rayrigg ; and devoted ten or twelvehours every day to study. " I could bear testimony,"writes Mr. Gisborne, " were such attestation needful,to his laborious unabated diligence, day after day, inpursuing his investigations on the Slave Trade, and incomposing his invaluable work upon Practical Christianity."" Never," he has said, " was I in better1 Oct. 2, 1790.1790. SUMMER EMPLOYMENTS. 279spirits than when I thus passed my time in quietstudy." He sallied forth always for a walk a shorttime before dinner, amongst the holly groves of thethen unenclosed Needwood forest, whereHis grateful voiceSang its own joy, and made the woods rejoice."Often have I heard its melodious tones," says hishost, " at such times, amongst the trees from thedistance of full half a mile."His object in his present visit to Yoxall Lodge, wasto make himself completely master of the vast massof evidence which had now been collected upon thesubject of the Slave Trade. Throughout the summerhis attention had never been withdrawn from thissubject. " I shall make no apology," he wrote to Mr.Wyvill from Buxton, upon the 13th of August, " forputting into your hands the enclosed letter which Ireceived this morning and beg you will return, andfor desiring you to obtain and send me such informationas you are able respecting the writer of it, towhom I am an utter stranger. It is necessary to bethus circumspect with regard to witnesses to bebrought before our committee, because it would beinjurious to our cause to bring forward men of badcharacters : at the same time we should always recollectthat, from the nature of the case, it is not to beexpected that many persons, who have been or who arein the higher walks of life, will be either well affectedto us, or at least will venture to step forth to assist us280 LIFE OP WILBERFORCE. 1790.with their testimony ; and therefore we must contentourselves with persons, whose general conduct andestimation give us a right to contend for the veracityof their accounts."It was absolutely necessary for the effectual conductof the cause that he should he well acquaintedwith all the allegations of its advocates. To thiswork therefore he now applied himself. " Monday,4th October. Off early from Llangollen dined atShrewsbury begun to work at slave evidence withBabington." And on the following day, after enteringhis return with his accustomed " thank God,safely'* he adds, " Nov. 5th. Babington and I determinedto work hard at slave evidence. 6th. Hardat work breakfast alone, and need not come downto supper. No kind of restraint. I must for a timedefer my tract, because it is advantageous to readthe evidence rapidly to detect inconsistencies." Aletter of the 3rd to Mr. Hey of Leeds explains thereference in the preceding entry. " I have not advanceda single step since we parted at Buxton, incomposing the little tract of which I then spoke toyou. This is not owing however either to indolence,procrastination, or any alteration in my opinion ofthe utility of the work ; but after mature consideration,I thought it right to make the slave businessmy first object, and ever since I have been at allstationary I have been labouring at it with greatassiduity. Nor are my labours nearly finished ; atwhich you will not wonder when I tell you, that besides1790. INVESTIGATION OF THE SLAVE TRADE. 281a great folio volume from the Privy Council, I havealso to scrutinize with much care near 1400 folio pagesof Evidence delivered before the House of Commons.My eyes are very indifferent, otherwise pretty wellI working like a negro."The entries of his Diary show that in spite ofthe hinderance of infirm health, he rose to the necessitiesof the occasion. " Oct. 8th. Unwell. Hardworkslave evidence. 9th. Eyes bad. Hard atwork. Monday, llth. Slave evidence, and veryhard at it with Babington all this week : whereinby God's blessing enabled to preserve a bettersense of heavenly things than for some time before.18th. Hard at work again slave business. 19th.Psalms, Barrow, and slave evidence. 20th. Mr.and Mrs. Arden, and others dined here. E.profligate, or rather perhaps appeared so to me, owingto my having been with more serious people. Thisshows the effect of good company in producing tendernessof conscience ; for much shocked at E. 26th.Sent for W. Smith and Dickson, to go on with WestIndian evidence. 30th. Mrs. G. spoke to me to takecare of myself more exercise I have been applyingtoo closely too little air my health disordered myappetite fails, &c. 31st. South, Barrow, Newcome,Psalms, slave evidence. Nov. 1st. New Testament,Psalms, slave business with Dickson and Whitakerattacked evidence, &c. Continued to work veryhard at the evidence all the week. Slept ill, not beingwell, partly through working too much. 5th. Heard282 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1790.from Pitt that peace certain on our own terms. 1 th.Staid in house hard at work. This is indeed a capitalhouse for doing business. I am but moderate in health."I wish' he writes to Mr. Hey, " you would allow methe occasional use of some mild sedative. I am wakefulin bed, even when free from pain or disorder, if I havebeen reading or thinking in the evening ; and I neversustain the loss of the nourishment and refreshmentof sleep without feeling like a hunted hare all thenext day, and being very unfit for any strenuousoccupation."Mr. Wilberforce and Mr. Babington," writes afriend from Yoxall Lodge, "have never appeareddown-stairs since we came, except to take a hastydinner, and for half an hour after we have supped :the Slave Trade now occupies them nine hours daily.Mr. Babington told me last night, that he had 1400folio pages to read, to detect the contradictions, andto collect the answers which corroborate Mr. W.'sassertions in his speeches : these, with more than 2000papers to be abridged, must be done within a fortnight.They talk of sitting up one night in eachweek to accomplish it. The two friends begin to lookvery ill, but they are in excellent spirits, and at thismoment I hear them laughing at some absurd questionsin the examination, proposed by a friend of Mr.Wilberforce's. You would think Mr. W. muchaltered since we were at Rayrigg. He is now neverriotous or noisy, but very cheerful, sometimes lively,but talks a good deal more on serious subjects than1790. JOHN THORNTON. 283he used to do. Food, beyond what is absolutelynecessary for his existence, seems quite given up.He has a very slight breakfast, a plain and sparingdinner, and no more that day except some breadabout ten o'clock. I have given you this history, asyou say every thing about him must be interesting toyou, and this is all I at present see of him."Such were his occupations until his return toLondon in November. Throughout this time, withthe exception of two days each of which yieldedhim eight hours of labour, he devoted daily ninehours and a half to his main employment. Thiswas not the easy service of popular declamation onpremises supplied by others, but the real conductof affairs with all the toil and drudgery of carefulpreparation.Upon the 9th he enters in his Journal, " Heardthis evening that on Sunday morning, at Bath, diedwhat was mortal of John Thornton." " He was alliedto me by relationship and family connexion. Hischaracter is so well known that it is scarcely necessaryto attempt its delineation. It may be useful howeverto state, that it was by living with great simplicityof intention and conduct in the practice of aChristian life, more than by any superiority of understandingor of knowledge, that he rendered his nameillustrious in the view of all the more respectable partof his contemporaries. He had a counting-house inLondon, and a handsome villa at Clapham. Heanticipated the disposition and pursuits of the LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1790.feeding generation. He devoted large sums annuallyto charitable purposes, especially to the promotionof the cause of religion both in his own and othercountries. He assisted many clergymen, enablingthem to live in comfort, and to practise a useful hospitality.His personal habits were remarkably simple.His dinner hour was two o'clock. He generally attendedpublic worship at some church or episcopalianchapel several evenings in the week, and would oftensit up to a late hour, in his own study at the top of thehouse, engaged in religious exercises." - " He diedwithout a groan or a struggle, and in the full view ofglory. Oh may my last end be like his ! " 3On Thursday, the 18th of November, he left YoxallLodge, his two friends Mr. Gisborne and Mr. Barringtonbearing him company as far as Tamworth. Thenext day he reached London, and " plunging" (hewrites) " at once into a dinner circle of cabinet ministers,how did I regret the innocent and edifyinghilarity of the Lodge 1 " " Monday, 22nd. Went toWimbledon Dundas, Lord Chatham, Pitt, Grenville,Ryder. Much talk about Burke's book. 4 LordChatham, Pitt, and I seemed to agree, contra Grenvilleand Ryder. Kept up late, and unfit for prayer.23rd. To town. Obliged to dine with Pitt Robinson,Montague, Rose, Addington. Pitt told me ofGrenville's peerage and the true reasons (distrust ofLord Thurlow). Saw Thurlow's letter in answer toMS. Mem. Journal.4 Considerations on the French Revolution.1790. DIARY. 285the news. Kept up till late. Oh how I regret YoxallLodge 1 Gave Pitt a serious word or two. 25th.Morning, Archbishop about a chaplain for BotanyBay. 26th. Read Burke's book for three hoursthen to the House to be sworn. Had people to dinewith me then made calls. 27th. Called Beaufoy's.Breakfasted with Pitt, and lost time afterwards.Dined at home with Dickson. Slave work at night.28th, Sunday. For want of a plan lost the valueof this day sadly. 30th. Old Jewry, Slave Committee."Dec. 1st. Dined R. Smith's Pitt, Long, Bashan,Dundas, Bankes staid too long came home heartsick."" My heart cold in religious exercises. 2nd. Mymind is distracted I am embarrassed by too great avariety of objects. 3rd. Slave Committee. 10th. Lancasteradvised me to take a forward and leading partin the House of Commons. 1 th. Read and consideredon the Convention business. Dined Lord Grenville'swith a large mixed House of Commons party rathershowed off. 13th, Sunday. Lock Scott ' God forbidthat I should glory,' &c. Thought much on it,and I hope with benefit." " I have been lately temptedto vanity and pride. Many symptoms occur to myrecollection. Pleased with flattery. To Pitt's, wherea great circle of House of Commons chiefly on taxes,&c. Oh how foolish do they seem so to neglect heavenlythings ! 13th. Debate on Papers spokekept late. 14th. Convention. 15th. Pitt's Budget.16th. Debate on taxes, and my slave business put off286 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1790.till after Christmas by Hawthorne and Pitt. I veryangry, but too much I fear from wounded pride.17th. Hastings' impeachment question. 22nd. Housetill past two Pitt's astonishing speech." 5 "This wasalmost the finest speech Pitt ever delivered ; it wasone which you would say at once, he never could havemade if he had not been a mathematician. He putthings by as he proceeded, and then returned to thevery point from which he had started, with the mostastonishing clearness. He had all the lawyers againsthim, but carried a majority of the House mainly bythe force of this speech. It pleased Burke prodigiously' Sir,' he said, ' the right hon. gent, andI have often been opposed to one another, but hisspeech to-night has neutralized my opposition ; nay,sir, he has dulcified me.' " 625th. Christmas day. I have just been receivingthe sacrament, and I resolve by God's grace to lead anew life, walking in His ways; in His strength I must doit,for I am weak and helpless. I will try now as stricta course of temperance as my health will allow. Atthe Lock this evening much disliked De Coetlegan.28th. Dined at Duke of M.'s. Many improperthings said, which G. told me afterwards they werethemselves regretting on my account.Jan. 6th, 1791. I have been but poorly of late.My business has been letters, New Testament, GiltMaintaining that a pending impeachment is not terminated by adissolution.6 Con. Mem.1791. PREPARING SLAVE EVIDENCE. 287pin's Lives, Horae Pauline, Burke, and slave business."Ever since his return to London, he had been employedin examining and arranging the evidence onbehalf of Abolition. In the preceding summer he hadcompiled a table of questions with which Mr. Clark-sonhad set forth to collect all the evidence whichcould be procured in the northern counties. Severalwitnesses had been discovered in this journey. Mr.Wilberforce had himself obtained some others. Onepart of his present task was to select from them suchas could give the most important information. Tothis was soon added a daily attendance upon the examinationstill their close ; and then a careful studyand abridgement of the whole mass of evidence.Feb. 1st. Dined Lord C.'s poor man, he veryindifferent and feeble said, ' I am as good a Christianas you in a way which showed that his mind wasdirected to serious objects. 2nd. House met after therecess. 4th. The renewal of the Slave Committee.5th. Dined at Lambeth, with Speaker and Eliotpublic day. Drove about with Speaker, then hometo Storey and Clarkson. 7th. Began committee.10th. Slave friends' day Granville Sharpe andvarious evidences dined. 13th. Blessed be God forthe Sunday. Scott an excellent sermon veryserious thoughts. Held forth to my family as nowusual on Sunday night. 15th. Slave Committee, &c.dined with me. W. Smith and Clarkson slavebusiness then I went over to House. 16th. I went288 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1791.to Sumner's to dine, and see Captain Hall, and prevailon him to give evidence, which succeeded. 18th. Pittand a party dined with me." " 24th. Breakfastedwith Grant. Went to Holwood, where also Grenvilleand Ryder. 25th. Dundas added to the others. AtHolwood all day. 26th. Rose and Steele vice GrenvilleFinance committee Ryder. 27th. To town."March 7th. I have lived much in company forthe lass; fortnight, and kept late hours. My devotionshave been much curtailed thereby ; my businessa labour to me." " Never was I more busy ;besides the daily examinations of the Slave Tradewitnesses, there are public and private letters, countymatters, &c. Pray for me that I may preserve asober mind and a single eye amidst all my distractions."7 "I have lately heard of the deaths of manywho seemed far more likely to live than I did. Maythese events be a warning to me. May I labour todothe work of my heavenly Father whilst it is day.My parliamentary and London winter should now beginas from a new era. Let me press forward with renewedalacrity. May the love of Christ constrainme." 8March 18th. Appointed grand motion for 2nd ofApril, with a little management of Sir W. Young.I now resolve on as much diligent application to slavebusiness as my health will allow ; it must be my mainobject, although unhappily I am distracted by a varietyof matters which I cannot quite neglect. The evilLetters to W. Hey and Rev. W. Mason. 8 Journal.1791. ABRIDGEMENT OF SLAVE EVIDENCE. 289hence was now almost completed, and he thus summonsMr. Babington to give his aid in the task of itsabridgement.Without shame or remorse I call on you toassist us in epitomizing the evidence, of which anumber or two will be despatched to you to-night,together with a few sheets of Dickson's doing,for a specimen ; wherein you will be able to discernthrough the slashing and dashing, the original statein which he brought it to Eliot and Montagu, wholook over it and expunge or alter at their pleasure .You may be allowed a little more discretion thanDickson, who is strictly ordered merely to reduce thescale, not to leave out any thing ; but you must be veryreserved in the exercise of it. The sooner you canreturn your work the better. In about a month Iconceive I shall make my motion. Let me know howyour engagements stand, that I may contrive to availmyself of your help whether in town or country. It ismost likely indeed I shall myself retire to Clapham,or some such rural fastness." To Clapham he retiredupon the 23rd of March, and (e going to town as seldomas possible, and only upon very particular business tothe House or elsewhere," he set hard to work writingand digesting the evidence. So incessant was thisoccupation, that on the eve of the ensuing debate, asupon one previous occasion, he judged it right to devoteto his work of mercy that holy day upon which it isthe ordinary privilege of the busiest Christian to restfrom worldly cares. " Spent" (are his entries uponVOL. T. O290 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1791.these occasions) " Sunday as a working day did notgo to church Slave Trade. Gave up Sunday to slavebusiness did business and so ended this sabbath.I hope it was a grief to me the whole time to turn itfrom its true purposes."And now that the day approached, upon the eventof which was suspended the welfare of his many unknownclients on the shores of Africa, and the successof his own toil and privations for four years of incessantlabour, the prospect before him was by no meansencouraging. In the year 1787, when he had undertakenthe cause, its advocates looked confidently forwardto the speedy suppression of the trade. Whereverthe facts connected with its existence had been madeknown, a voice of indignation was raised against itsguilt. In the beginning of 1788. " more difficulties"met the instructed eyes of Mr. Pitt and Mr. Wilberforce,yet still they deemed the cause prospering.When these articles are properly authenticated beforethe Houses," writes Sir C. Middleton, (no sanguinecalculator of national virtue,) in Jan. 1788, " Ihave little doubt of carrying absolute Abolition in theHouse of Commons, and such restrictions in theHouse of Lords as will amount to the same thing.Lord H. himself under such evidence will be ashamedto countenance the trade." Even when first assailedin the House of Commons, its only public advocates 99 Before this time indeed Stephen Fuller, agent for Jamaica, in memorialsto Lord Hawkesbury and Sydney had indicated pretty plainlythe state of colonial feeling : but this was only a private representationof their opinions.1791. WEST INDIAN OPPOSITION. 291were the two members who directly represented theAfrican merchants. In the course however of thatvery session a more wide opposition made itself apparent.Its increasing strength was seen in the successivedebates in both Houses of Parliament on thebill for regulating the middle passage ; and when, inthe spring of 1789, Mr. Wilberforce had given notice ofhis first motion for the entire suppression of the trade,it burst at once into a flame. It arose amongst theGuinea merchants ; reinforced however before longby the great body of West Indian planters. Somefew amongst them were from the first favourable tothe suppression of the Slave Trade ; but the greatmajority, though they declared it to be an Englishand not a West Indian trade, asserted that it was absolutelyessential to the existence of their property. 10It is the nature of such a defence of established enormitiesto yield at first to the generous assault, untilgathering strength from the slow but certain succourof selfish apprehension, it retracts all its concessionsand gains its former ground. The first burst ofgenerous indignation promised nothing less than theinstant abolition of the trade : but mercantile jealousyhad taken the alarm, and the defenders of the WestIndian system soon found themselves strengthened bythe independent alliance of commercial men. Thusencouraged, they boldly assailed the public ear with10 Vid. the answers and correspondence of the agents to the islands ofJamaica, Grenada, St. Kill's, &c. at the commencement of the PrivyCouncil inquiries.o 2292- LIFE OF wilberforce. 1791.the depositions of their witnesses, who could paint as"promoted dances" 11 the enforced convulsions of thefettered negro ; the hold of a slave ship, 12 " redolentwith frankincense," as the scene of his happiest hours ;whilst his landing in the colonies was an affectingmeeting with long parted friends. 13 Seen through their11 Evidence of Mr. Norris. Ibid.13 In a pamphlet, entitled " Apology for Negro Slavery," which passedthrough repeated editions, the writer, who speaks " from a long residence,"says " it is a humane trade, preventing human sacrifices, andcivilizing the people ; neither is it very oppressive to the individuals."To begin with a Guinea negro's arrival in one of our islands Hemeets there near and dear relations. These agreeable and unexpectedmeetings are truly affecting, and excite the most tender and pleasingsensations in the by-stander," p. 22. It is singular that it should neverhave occurred to the writer, or the party by whom he was put forward,that this was at least an equivocal argument. If an improbable meetingin slavery was joyful, a certain separation in freedom must have beenintolerable.Amongst other arguments, Mr. Henniker actually revived Lamb'slong since exploded forgery of a letter from the King of Dahomey toGeorge II.It is not beside our purpose to record, as briefly as possible, some ofthe arguments employed by the opponents of Abolition. The followingis extracted from a pamphlet, named " Slavery no Oppression,"then widely circulated. After a declamatory commencement, and anassault upon Quakers, Bishops, Cambridge University, and Englishladies, as the causes and fomenters of their troubles, the writer proceedsIt is well known, that the eastern and western coasts of Africa areinhabited by stupid and unenlightened hordes : immersed in the instgross and impenetrable gloom of barbarism, dark in mind as in body,prodigiously populous, impatient of all control, untractable lazy,ferocious as their own congenial tigers, nor in any respect superior tothese rapacious beasts in intellectual advancement, but distinguishedonly by a rude and imperfect organ of speech, which is abusively employedin the utterance of dissonant and inarticulate jargon. Such apeople must be often involved in predatory battles, to obtain a cruel andprecarious subsistence by the robbery and destruction of one another.The traffic has proved a fortunate event for their miserable captives."These extracts, besides illustrating the ordinary contradiction of the evidenceoffered in behalf of the Slave Trade, (as the prodigious populationwhich subsisted by the precarious efforts of mutual destruction,) marks1791. ADVOCATES FOR THE SLAVE TRADE. 293peculiar medium, the Guinea trade 14 was a nurseryfor British seamen, whilst it delivered the gratefulAfrican from the refinement of native barbarity.These accounts were confirmed by the votes andspeeches of British officers, who were duped by inadequatepersonal observation, a most fallacious guidein such a state of society. This reproach of exaggeratedcharges justified the cautious doubts of menof business; whilst the general bias of the bar infavour of an established trade was confirmed by thedefence which burst from the boisterous Thurlow, andfor a moment trembled upon the lips of Erskine. 15Such opposition could not fail of producing greateffects. Though Mr. Pitt was a zealous abolitionist,the chancellor was not without support even in theCabinet, where Lord Hawkesbury was thought readyto support stronger measures than he avowed in parliament." Lord Hawkesbury's carriage," writes LordLancaster, " was a considerable time waiting at LordPenrhyn's upon Saturday. Whether he was givingthe ground which was assumed early in the conflict, when the Abolitionistswere compelled to establish by serious argument the equality ofthe negro species in generic organization.14 West Indian Evidence, passim. It was necessary in refuting thisevidence, to show the mode of obtaining the slaves in Africa ; the effectof the trade upon African manners ; the cruelty of the mode of transport; the waste of life which it caused in the colonies ; the possibilityof maintaining the number of slaves on the West Indian estates bybreeding; the injurious effects of the Guinea trade upon our own seamen;and the possibility of substituting for it a more advantageous aswell as humane traffic. All these points the witnesses for the Abolitioncompletely established.14 " The bar were all against us. Fox could scarcely prevent Erskine*from making a set speech in favour of the trade." Con. Mem.294 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1791.or receiving information you will be better able todecide than I." 16Mr. Fox, giant as he was, fought only with thestrength of a single arm ; while against him were arrayed,both in the House and in the provinces, hisown political adherents, from Lord John Russell inthe House of Commons to the Welch county memberof whom Mr. Gisborne reports 17 " He is a desperateFoxite ; he would not open on the Slave Trade, whichI hinted at as far as I could properly ; but I fear he istoo old, I believe I must add too covetous, to be likelyto approve of Abolition." " These Utopian schemesof liberty in the Slave Trade . . " wrote Dr. Parr, 18alarm serious men." So far had such opinions prevailed,that in the months of April and May, 1789,the most unfavourable reports were forwarded to hiscountry retreat, by Mr. Wilberforce's London correspondents." They will come tomorrow " (writes LordLancaster) " to a short question, and feel themselvesconfident of success. In truth, amongst the variouspeople to whom I have to-day spoken upon the matter,I have not found a single one at all inclined to go thelength of immediate abolition. . . Reconsider, I conjureyou, your plan. I do firmly believe if you persist, weshall find the West prove as fatal to the governingminister, and as subversive of all confidence and popularity,as the East has done formerly." " From thecomplexion of yesterday it appears to me that you willnot make any effectual progress this year. The moment6 April, 1789. n June 26. Works, i. 216.1791. EFFECTS OF THE FRENCH REVOLUTION 295they bring a single man to your bar they arrest you completelyfor this session. Immediate abolition will notgo down in our House, and gradual will be stifled inthe other."The debate of the 12th of May gave, indeed, ashort-lived promise of more successful progress. Butdelay was the secret of West Indian policy. Theytrusted to the strength with which caution, selfishness,and misrepresentation would recruit theirranks ; and they were not deceived. The evil wasdistant and disputed; the sacrifice immediate andapparent. Self-interest was ever watchful, whilst theadvocates of humanity sometimes slumbered on theirpost. " The affair goes on slowly in parliament, andwith a more pertinacious and assiduous attendance ofour adversaries in the committee than of our friends,except indeed Mr. Wilberforce, Mr. Smith, Sir. W.Dolben, and a few others ; so that we cannot yetguess at the result." 19 The long protracted examinationsof 1788, 1789, 1790, and 1791, though essentialto final success, multiplied for a while the cold andcautious defenders of the trade. The temper, moreover,of events was most favourable to their endeavours.In the repose of peaceful times it is difficult toestimate aright the extreme agitation produced in ourown political atmosphere by that hurricane of terrorwhich desolated France. Revolution, which hadmade that people the fair promise of reasonableliberty, had before this time thrown oft the comelytf Letter from Granville Sharpe, 17th March, 1790.296 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1791.mask which concealed her hated features, and openlyrevelled in infidelity and blood. A small, though soonafterwards a noisy, party watched eagerly the convulsionsof the neighbouring kingdom, and dreamed ofrenovating by French principles the English constitution; but the great bulk of the nation, exhaustedby the war with America, and wearied by the strife ofparties, viewed with horror the excesses of France,and recoiled with disgust from the abused names ofhumanity and freedom. Even the ordinary excitementof a general election could not rouse the nationfrom the political repose of 1790. Nor was it merelythis general tendency to quiet which repressed theefforts of the Abolition party. The seed of Frenchprinciples, which had been widely scattered throughouther foreign settlements, was already ripening intoa harvest of colonial insurrection. The strife of Paris,renewed amongst the free inhabitants of St. Domingo,was soon transmitted thence to Dominica ; and to theefforts of the true friends of peace were instantly attributedthe intestine discords of an English colony.Amidst such various elements of opposition Mr.Wilberforce approached the contest of April, 1791.Though none could be sanguine of immediate success,yet he was not without many cheering assurances ofsympathy. "You, sir," writes Dr. Pecked, " will standin the British parliament as did Episcopus in the infamoussynod of Dort, with the whole force of truth,with every rational argument, and with all the powersof moving eloquence upon your side, and all to no1791. WESLEY'S LAST WORDS. 297purpose." Still nearer to the actual conflict, he receivedan animating charge traced upon the bedof death by the faltering hand of the venerableWesley. 20"Feb. 24, 1791.My dear Sir,Unless the Divine power has raised you up to beas Athanasius contra nondum, I see not how you cango through your glorious enterprise, in opposing thatexecrable villany which is the scandal of religion, ofEngland, and of human nature. Unless God hasraised you up for this very thing, you will be worn outbythe opposition of men and devils ; but if God be foryou who can be against you. Are all of them togetherstronger than God ? Oh be not weary of well-doing.Go on in the name of God, and in the power of Hismight, till even American slavery, the vilest that eversaw the sun, shall vanish away before it. That Hewho has guided you from your youth up may continueto strengthen you in this and all things, is theprayer of,Dear Sir,Your affectionate servant,JOHN WESLEY."Such sympathy no doubt often cheered his spirit inthe weary hours of thoughtful preparation. But it40 It seems probable that this was amongst the very last efforts of hispen. On the 25th February he sunk into that lethargy in which he layuntil his death, upon the 2nd of March. It is dockctted by Mr. wilberforce" Wesley's last words."o 3298 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1791.was by a greater might that he was strengthened.He approached the combat strong in "truth" itself,and in " the armour of righteousness on the righthand and on the left." " May God," he writes in hisprivate memoranda a few days before the contest,enable me henceforth to live more to his glory, andbless me in this great work I have now in hand. MayI look to Him for wisdom and strength and the powerof persuasion, and may I surrender myself to Him asto the event with perfect submission, and ascribe toHim all the praise if I succeed, and if I fail say fromthe heart Thy will be done." " Motion put off," headds a few days later, " from Tuesday, April 12th,to Monday, 18th, when most sadly unprepared, yetafter trials to put it off came to House quite unmadeup as to speech. By God's blessing got throughpretty well to others' satisfaction, but very little tomy own I knowing how much omitted. Tuesday,19th. Resumed debate and sadly beat." The speechwith which he opened the debate reviewed the voluminous,and in some respects conflicting evidence, andwith a careful suppression of irritating topics provedthe trade to be as well cruel as impolitic. He alsostrongly pressed upon the House the mistake of thatpolicy which proposed to leave the work of Abolition tothe colonial legislature, showing that it was the lossof their present power of introducing new labourerswhich could alone make the improved treatment oftheir present stocks clearly profitable both to ownersand their agents. He ended with an animated appeal1791. SLAVE TRADE DEBATE. 299to the religious sympathies of the House. " But onevery view it becomes Great Britain to be forward inthe work. One half of this guilty commerce has beenconducted by her subjects, and as we have been greatin crime let us be early in repentance. There willbe a day of retribution wherein we shall have to giveaccount of all the talents, faculties, and opportunitieswhich have been intrusted to us. Let it not thenappear that our superior power has been employed tooppress our fellow-creatures, and our superior light todarken the creation of our God."In the course of the debate he was earnestly supportedby Mr. Smith and Mr. Fox ; and Mr. Pitt, inestablishing the needless injustice of the traffic,equalled any of those great efforts by which he confoundedopposition. Two members had the courageto avow openly their altered 21 or established 28 sentiments.The opposition, headed by Lord John Russelland Colonel Tarleton, and well described in a speechof one of their own body 23 as the war of the pygmiesagainst the giants of the House, consisted of little elsethan trite imputations of misrepresentation, or unsupportedassertions of injury. Their cause was moreeffectually maintained by a multitude of silent votes,and the character talents and humanity of the Housewere left in a minority of 88 to 163. With thisadverse decision all attempts to carry the question41 Mr. Stanley, member for Lancashire, who came into the House determinedto vote against, and,The Hon. D. Ryder who came undetermined to vote for Abolition.M Mr. Drake.300 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1791.further in the House of Commons ended for thissession. It had now become evidently necessary toappeal to the justice and humanity of the nation forthat redress which was denied by the policy of parliament.Mr. Clarkson and Dr. Dickson were accordinglydispatched upon provincial tours for the purposeof disseminating widely an " Abstract of the Evidence "given before the House of Commons' committee, andthe Substance of the late Debate." " Went withBurgh," says the Diary on April 22nd, " to Clapham,where I staid all the ensuing week, putting off Hoi-woodfor it dictating my speech for the report of thedebate."On the second of May parliament met againafter the recess. " I left Clapham and came tostay in London had much to do many letterssaw much company as usual in Palace Yard.3rd. Dined Duchess of Gordon's children's balltalked of oh what madness is all this ! 4th. Thequarrel between Burke and Fox, which I had endeavouredto prevent. 7th. Dined Duke of Montrosea large party of our peculiar old friends whata system are they on ! llth. Burke and Fox, furtherquarrel much company this week also in Palace Yard.22nd. I thank God that this town season is nearlyover, I hope the next will be better. I am too apt topursue general plans of usefulness without watchingover my own heart. I must aim at more meditation,prayer, Scripture reading, solitude, and concern forthe spiritual state of others (this last Milner's hint).1791. THE SESSION CLOSES. 30129th. Lancaster talked to me about going into D.'ssituation until he has almost half persuaded me.Monday, 6th June. To town from Clapham upon business.Wrote the report of our society for enforcingthe King's proclamation. 7th. General meeting ofthe society read the report which I had been pushedto get finished then to the Slave Committee.The conclusion of the session now released him froma further stay in London. " I am afraid," he wroteto Mr. Babington, 24 " that even the mildness of yournature has been sharpened to exacerbation (as Dr.Johnson would term it) by my obstinate silence. Butif so, it is rather a proof of your unreasonableness thanof my criminality. . . This is the true mode of defence,to shift the war, like Tippoo, into the quarters of theenemy. . . However behold me now upon my road toBath, with Henry Thornton for my agreeable companion.We are snug and comfortable, but we wouldwillingly increase our duet to a trio to admit yourHonour. Now do not suppose that after being halfchoked, and smoked, and roasted in town, I am aboutto finish the work in Bath. To have grass up to mydoor after so long a parching of my heels on the pavementof London is not a luxury, but necessary for me.I have therefore leased a country house within reachof the Pump-room, and so shall enjoy the comforts ofa beautiful country residence, whilst with the salubriouswaters of King Bladed I am washing away the ' sordes 'contracted in the course of a long session." It wasM June 11.302 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1791.not merely from his delight in country scenes that heavoided Bath. The leisure hours which he thus secured,were devoted to reading and reflection. He was atthis time engaged upon the " Bible, Robertson's Indiaand America, Arabian Nights, Horsey's Charge andLetters, Bishop Taylor's Sermons, Rennes, Tavernier,Aesop, Bacon's Essays, Pope's Duncan, Essay onMan, Epistles, &c. Asiatic Researches, Epictetustwice, Horace by heart." " Spent the morning," hesays, " in serious reading, and much affected."Read St. Paul's epistles attentively for two hours,I hope with profit. Christ is all ; our fulness is fromhim." " I am reading much ; thinking too little.""My dear Lancaster," he wrote from Perry Mead, 24' If to her share some female errors fall,Look on her face, and you '11 forget them all.'This was the effect of beauty ; and that of friendshipis somewhat similar. I was more than half angrywith you, (I will tell you why some other time,) andhad intended to scold ; but no sooner do I set my faceMuncasterwards than my features refuse their frown,and I can't help feeling and expressing a sensation ofgood-nature and complacency. My dear fellow, Ihope you are well, and that you enjoy your family andyour home, after having been so long separated fromthem. And where, I hear you say, where is PerryMead ? It is situated in a country which, except in thearticle of water, comes not far behind Cumberland andWestmoreland themselves ; close to Prior Park, andJune 1G.1791. PERRY MEAD. 303about three quarters of a mile from the Pump-roomThere old Henry Thornton and I are lodged, and areleading a rational kind of life, and relishing not a littlethe quiet and retirement it allows us, after the bustle towhich we have both been so long condemned. I haveheard nothing of the worthy " 6 who is the cause of yourfriendly solicitude, and I therefore begin to think that,by the prudent counsel of his advisers, he has laidaside his intentions : however I shall endeavour toplace my peace of mind where nothing earthly canassail or molest it, and then, as Shakespeare says,Come what come may.'Henry Thornton will tell you that I offered to drivewith him to Lancaster Hall, previously to ourdrenching with Bath water. Whether or not I shallbe able to look in on you this recess I know not, butif I can spare the time, I assure you very sincerely itwill give me very great pleasure to shake you by thehand in your own house, and roam over your wildhills. Independently of my regard for the inhabitants,I have an affection for the country of Westmorelandand Cumberland, which makes me alwayshail the sight of them, and quit them with reluctance.Adieu, Adieu. . . Read my books. . . I am over head andears, plunged in letters to which I owe answers, andmy eyes are bedstead and weak, but I could not deferwriting to you. Kind remembrances to Lady Lancaster.I am ever affectionately yours,W. Wilberforce."56 Captain Timber.304 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1791.Here he spent about a month, and refusing allinvitations to dine out enjoyed at home the society ofa few chosen friends, the chief amongst whom wereMr. Henry Thornton, Mr. Grant, and Mr. Eliot.To the house of Mr. Eliot at Burton Pynsent, hemade an excursion upon the 30th of June. " Set offearly for Eliot's. Dined with G.'s friend. I must bewareof this sort of old bachelor's life. G. sadlytaking God's name in vain." 27 To any of his friendswho had contracted this irreverent habit, he made apractice of addressing by letter his most seriousadmonitions ; and he has often said that by this customhe never lost, and but once endangered thecontinuance of a friendship. " I wrote to the lateSir , and mentioned to him this bad habit. Hesent me in reply an angry letter, returning a book thatI had given him ; and asking for one he had givenme. Instead of it I sent him a second letter offriendly expostulation, which so won him over, that hewrote to me in the kindest tone, and begged me tosend him back again the book he had so hastilyreturned." 28 Got to Pynsent at night old LadyChatham a noble antiquity very like Lady Harriet,and the Pitt voice. July 1st. At Burton all day.Walked and talked with Eliot, Lady Chatham askedabout Fox's speaking is much interested aboutpolitics seventy-five years old, and a very active mind.2nd. Off betimes for Cowslip Green arrived therebythe afternoon Henry Thornton came at night,*> Journal. * Cpn. Mem.1791. SIERRA LEONE COMPANY. 3053rd, Sunday. Early for Shipham ; where church, andone hundred and fifty children. On to Chedder, whereMrs. Saber's reception her sudden turning her joyinto a right channel, and calling on the children tosing ' Praise God, from whom all blessings flow,' muchaffected me. Church catechising sermon read, andMrs. Saber's moving address. The Miss Mores areindeed excellent women, and it seems as if God wouldprosper their benevolent intentions. 4th. Not feelingthat it would be right to leave them, we staid onemore day. D. consulted me about a vow I advisedstrongly against it. Oh how ashamed am I made tofeel by finding what is thought of me, and how little Ireally correspond with it ! 5th. Off betimes to breakfastwith friend Wright at Bristol, where Mr. Hartfordmet us. He says that the Slave Trade is growingdisgraceful. Saw old Dr. Storehouse, who applaudedG. Whitefield. . . Lord Chesterfield charmed with him.Home to Perry Mead by dinner time. 23rd. Heardfrom Henry Thornton, and pressed by Clarkson tocome np to town about Sierra Leone business."The Sierra Leone Company had been foundedafter the loss of the Abolition question in thecourse of this spring. It was a trading company,formed by the advocates of Abolition with no expectationof mercantile advantage, but with a view toextend our lawful commerce with Africa, to commenceher civilization, and so confute in the most convincingmanner, all those arguments for the Slave Trade, whichwere drawn from the alleged intellectual peculiarities300 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1791.of the negro race. With this view Mr. Wilberforcetook a forward part in its establishment, and consentedto act as one of its first directors. " When you firstmentioned the scheme to me," wrote long afterwardsone of its early members, " you most earnestly representedto me the uncertainty of its turning out a profitableconcern ; that possibly it might be the reverse ;and you pressed me very much not to subscribe to itwith that view. I requested you not to give yourselfany concern on that point, as I considered its principalobject to be the abolition of the Slave Trade." 29Monday, 28th July. Off betimes on Sierra Leonebusiness reached Sandford (M. Montagu's) inthe evening, where Dr. Battle was already arrived.26th. Off after breakfast dined at the Speaker's, andstaid all night. Speaker will consider of Sundaylevee's transfer to Saturday. 27th. Arrived intown. To H. Thornton's Sierra Leone meeting.Then to Dundas on business, and to Hampstead withPitt. Dined, and all night. 28th. After breakfastexplained a little to the Master of the Rolls andLady A. then to town. Dined alone, and off toClapham to see W. Smith he gone to Birminghamabout the riots. 29th. To Fulham, Bishop of London'swhere all night. Much talk with the Bishop.30th. To town Sierra Leone meeting. Then toHolwood Pitt and Grenville there. 31st, Sunday.Pitt and Grenville went to town. To Holwoodchapel, and afternoon Beckenham church. Home toLetter from G. Lloyd Esq. to W. Wilberforce Esq. Jan. 21, 1807.1791. SIERRA LEONE COMPANY. 307dinner Pitt and Grenville. Aug. 1st. Heard fromH. Thornton about Sierra Leone governor andchaplain, and came to town. 2nd. Meeting on SierraLeone business, morning and evening, till eleveno'clock at night. Dined and slept at H. Thornton'sRiou, Grant, Sir C. Middleton, dined."My dear sir," writes Mr. Wilberforce to Mr.Wyvill, 30 " one would almost think we were a coupleof Spaniards, who, each conceiving it would be a disparagementof his dignity were he to write first, shouldboth remain silent to their mutual mortification. Bethis as it may, I can hold no longer though in truthmy object is not so much to discharge the contents ofmy own budget, which is so full, and full of such activematter, that I shall keep the strings close tied, lest, if itwere to be opened ever so little, the whole might breakforth irresistibly; but to draw from yours an accounthow you and your family are going on. . . I thank GodI am myself as comfortably well as usual ; unequal toany great exertions, but in some measure able to producethe effects of them by smaller repeated efforts,and a good deal of care. I was called up to Londonon the business of the Sierra Leone Company : a newinstitution, to the nature and object of which I presumeyou are no stranger. If, as I conceive will behereafter the case, we enlarge our numbers, would youlike to become a member ? I should introduce youwith great pleasure. The design is noble, the management,at present at least, in excellent hands, and I*> Aug. 8.308 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1791.trust it will please God to bless the undertaking, andconduct it to a prosperous issue.Believe me alwaysVery affectionately yours,W. WILBERFORCE."In the discussions which he now attended the plansof the future company were formed. It was carefullyfostered by Mr. Wilberforce, and long engrossed thetime and energies of his friend Mr. Henry Thornton.And though this is not the place in which to enterupon the eventful history of the colony, 31 less must notbe said, than that ever since its foundation it has signallyadvanced the cause of Abolition, and still affordsthe fairest promise of at last removing that deadlycurse which the Slave Trade has entailed upon thewhole western coast of Africa.He was now arranging his movements for thesummer. It has been stated that he had no residenceon his landed property, and therefore wasnot summoned into Yorkshire by the ordinaryduties of a country gentleman; and though uponall great occasions, when he thought his presencemight be useful, he repaired to York, he nevervisited the county to maintain an interest. " I mustmention," he has said, " the uncommon kindness andliberality which I experienced from my constituents.In former times the county members displayed their51 This may be found at length in the Life of Granville Sharpe, byPrince Hoare, Esq.1791. LIBERALITY OF HIS CONSTITUENTS. 309equipages annually at the races, and constituted a partof the grand jury at the summer assizes ; the latter,indeed, I should have been glad to attend, but forthe unseemly festivities which commonly take placeat that period. I was not, however, wanted ; thenumber of gentlemen of larger fortune in the countywere far more than sufficient to constitute a mostrespectable grand jury, both at the spring and summerassizes. I could not consistently with my principlesfrequent the theatre and ball room, and I knew thatI should give offence by staying away were I actuallyat York ; but no discontent was ever expressed atmy not presenting myself to the county on these occasions.My friends appeared tacitly to admit myclaim to the command of my own time during therecess." 32 The requirements of his singular positiondemanded this immunity from ordinary cares. Andhe considered himself as best fulfilling his duty towardshis constituents, when he was most diligently qualifyinghimself to watch over their interests with effect.To give himself more entirely to these great objects,he devolved upon one or other of his friends themanagement of his property, which was kindly undertakenat different times by Mr. R. Smith and Mr.Henry Duncombe.My dear Wilberforce," writes Mr. Duncombe atthis time, 33 " I am sorry to interrupt your repose, toinform you that you have an estate in Yorkshire, thatthat estate is out of lease yearly, and that before youMS. Notes. M July 18.310 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE, 1791.let it again, you ought in prudence to be acquaintedwith its value and its circumstances. Send thereforeyour steward to me." " Heard," says his Diarysomewhat later, " of Dunconibe's excellent settling ofthe Warrington estate, and very thankful that all theold tenants are preserved." " Went on to lookat my land : my land just like any one else's land."Nor was it only in the saving of his time that he profitedby this unsolicitous life ; it tended also to keephis thoughts and affections free from the ordinary entanglementsof his rank and station. " When I was asingle man," he has said, " I used to find a pleasure inthe thought, that I lived only in a hired house ; for Iwas thus continually reminded, that I was not in truthat home." The country houses of many friends wereopen to him, and to some of these he repaired everysummer, until his marriage.My dear Babington," he wrote from London, 34 " Ihave written to Gisborne, and have told him I willcall at the Lodge just when it will suit them. I understandhe is rather more uncertain than you whetherhe can take me in, having taken the precaution ofunroofing his house. He has not even the merit oforiginality, for it is an old expedient for turning outan unwelcome occupier; and the transfer from thatto keeping me out is easy. I think with much pleasureoix our approaching meeting ; but I have a surmiseabout my plans whilst living with you, which I willmention without reserve. I should hold it a breach ofJuly 22.1791. AT Motley TEMPLE. 311friendship, if we were to stand ever so little uponceremony." " My mysterious annunciation," he writesto the same friend a few days later, " which appears tohave caused you some mirth, was this, that I amcogitating how far when I house myself with a manfor months together, it may not be a proper part ofmy system to consider myself as living in the samestreet, but not as in the same house ; dining with himoccasionally, but not every day. But we shall havetime enough to talk of this and other megrims. Myobject is the perusal of certain books, of which oneought not to be ignorant, but which are too slightand unsubstantial to be put to any other use thanthis of garnishing dishes.Ever yours,W. Wilberforce."Upon the 5th of August, accordingly, he reachedRothley Temple, the seat of Mr. Babington, and entershis determination " to be as diligent whilst here as Ican be, consistently with health, and to cultivate inprayer, and reading Scripture, through the help ofthe Spirit of Christ, the graces of the Christian temper."" It pleased God to give me this morning anaffecting sense of my own sinfulness, and a determinationto live henceforth, by his grace, more to his glory."Cold at first, yet moved afterwards by a sense ofheavenly things, and determined to go to the importantwork of self-examination, and to set about athorough change. Henceforth I purpose, by God's312 LIFE OF Wilberforce. 1791.grace, to employ my faculties and powers more to hisglory; to live a godly, diligent, useful, self-denyinglife. I know my own weakness, and I trust to Godalone for strength."The whole of this autumn, which was spent invisiting different friends, he devoted to diligentstudy. " Aug. 24th. I mean to apply to publicspeaking preparation. Busy in reading Englishhistory with Babington." So earnest was he now inapplication,that in their daily walks the two friendscontinued their study, one of them reading aloudwhilst his steps were guided by the other. " Delightfulweather," he says at this time, "readingRapin out of doors." The nature of his occupationsmay be gathered from his list of subjects on his firstestablishment at Rothley Temple. " Bible, EnglishHistory, Fenton's Characters : Horace, by heart.". The notes and references in his own hand, withwhich the copy he now used abound, especiallythroughout the Satires and Epistles, testify the careand diligence with which he studied. . . " Cicero deOrator, Addison's Cato, Hume, Hudibras, Pilgrim'sProgress, Doddridge's Sermons, JonathanEdwards, Owen, Letters." This last head occupieda large portion of his time. " My letters," was inlater life his declaration, "are as much my bane as conversationwas that of Mackintosh ; yet how can I preventit?" Without giving up a peculiar mode of usefulnesshe could not, for he had become early a markedman, whose advice and assistance, both in charity an1791. IMPORTANCE OF HIS CORRESPONDENCE. 313business, were eagerly sought for by the doubting andthe distressed. Add to this, that it was essential tohis usefulness that he should keep up intimate communicationswith those who in various districts couldinfluence society, or report to him the facts whichmarked its temper ; so that though his large correspondencediminished the apparent fruit of his exertions,it was itself one of his most effective modes ofusefulness.Aug. 25th. Dined," he says, " from RothleyTemple with Sir. C. no grace and people ruinedby fashion. 28th. Henry Thornton returned to usfrom Wales. Prayed this evening with some earnestness.Religious conversation with B. he is anexcellent man, and far more sober-minded than I am.29th. In pain all to-day. Thought too much of mysufferings, and am not thankful enough to God forall his mercy. My sister and friends kind and tenderin the extreme. I find when I am ill that I cannotattend to serious things : this should be a warning tometo work whilst it is day. Oh may I still pressforward ! Religion is still too much a toil to me, andnot enough of a delight. I am shortly going into ascene of great temptation : oh may I be preservedfrom infection, and so conduct myself as to glorify myFather which is in heaven. Set off, Sept. 20th, withmy mother and sister for H. My mother extremelywarm for church and state. On the road read Humeand dictated. 21st. Arrived at H. by three o'clockan interesting conversation on religion with Dr.VOL. i. p314 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1791.Oliver. I am apt to be too polemic in arguing withhim and H. on points of divinity and morals. I havetoo little serious and humble desire to serve them,and too much desire of victory in debate. Rememberthe character of the wisdom that is from above,pure, peaceable, and gentle. I must aim at less volatilityand more internal self-possession in companywith a gay exterior. 22nd. I find my mind liable tobe intoxicated with the comfort and grandeur of thisscene. Oh may God enable me to preserve a steady,heavenly-minded frame ! All here breathes a spiritof proud independence, quite different from Barrington's.23rd. Read Witherspoon's sermon upon theWorld crucified to Believers, and much affected byit. Oh may it be to some purpose. But how soondo good impressions evaporate ! How have I beenat times intoxicated by the external comforts of thescene around me, instead of feeling thankful that Iam not exposed to them ! 17th. Went to town witha view to Sierra Leone business, and for advice. 28th.At Henry Thornton's, Clapham, but so unwell thatI could not call on Pitt. Grant dined, and KingNaimbana's son. 29th. Better, though still ill.Sierra Leone meeting all morning. Dined Pitt'swith Grenville and Pybus. He very kind and gladto see me. At night returned to H. Thornton's.30th. Grant an excellent man of business. Returnedto H. to a late dinner.Oct. 1st. Since I have been here I have notmaintained sufficiently a grateful sense of God's1791. SUNDAY RETIREMENT. 315presence at meals, or watched enough for properconversation. What mercies am I continually receiving! how ought they to melt my heart and spurme on to duty ! Found much opportunity of reading; almost as much as at Gisborne's. Wentwith Miss L. Smith to Theobald's. Still unwell2nd. Morning to Dr. Law's church afternoon Thingchurch. W. Smith came to dinner, and went awayat night. Some religious talk ; but too disputatiousbut a bad Sunday. 7th. Travelling to Forncettread Hume and thought over topics pretty diligentlyseventy-six miles arrived about seven. Newmarketraces. Oh what folly, what forgetfulness of God ;Sunday, 9th. Before and this morning much serioustalk with Cooksonon. He laments the deadness of hisparish seems truly bent on his important work. Godbless and prosper him. I encourage him to perseverewith renewed alacrity, and to hope for the best inGod's good time. They attend him at church betterthan his neighbours. Spent much time in discussingwith him ; meaning to make only a short stay withhim, and coming for this very purpose. 10th. Travellingall day to H. pretty diligent. 13th. Off earlyfor London. Read all the way there then at SierraLeone business till four o'clock, and again till pasteleven at night. 14th. Sierra Leone business. 15th.Read Adam Smith. Dined Pitt's Mornington, Eliot,and Grenville. They talk much of Burke, particularlyGrenville and against La Fayette, who rather defendedby Pitt. Refused to go to Holwood that Ip 2316 LIFE OF Wilberforce. 1791.might have Sunday quiet." This occasional retirementhe found of especial service in maintaining thesimplicity of his spirit. " Often in my visits to Hoi-woods'he has said, " when I heard one or anotherspeak of this man's place, or that man's peerage, Ifelt a rising inclination to pursue the same objects ;but a Sunday in solitude never failed to restore me tomyself." 3517th, Monday. Grant dined with us at H.Thornton's, and we discussed Sierra Leone. 18th.Meeting of directors at H. Thornton's. Dinedthere together, and sat evening till late. 19th.Public meeting of directors at King's Head truespecimen of a public meeting. Washington's loquacity; but a very sensible clear man. 20th.Directors at H. Thornton's all morning. Wentto dine with Grenville Mornington, &c. Returnedto meeting at Thornton's, where only excellentGranville Sharpe. All the directors almost seemearnest, and some very worthy men. 21st. Lefttown on the road to Gisborne's, which reachedsafely next evening thank God. 24th. I resolvenow on as much business as my health will allow.Including all sorts I hope ten hours a day at leaston the average. More thinking and composingModern Europe, De Holme, Bible and Testament.To think over political and constitutional topics, anddiscuss them with Gisborne, and less time thereforefor reading. 25th. Clarkson called warned him35 Con. Mem.1791. DIARY. 317about French Revolution. My religious frame is toocold, and I do not bring these things home to myheart so readily, cheerfully, and naturally as I ought.Oh may times mend with me in this ! God is gracious.Be sober and watch unto prayer. 27th. The Deanof Lichfield called I gave up an hour or more toconversation, &c. in hopes of a church at Buxton.4th November. Going on diligently and comfortablyin mind, yet too little of the Christian spirit. Mychief employment has been thinking over and writingdown thoughts on constitutional and political topics.Reading, with view to discussion, Ward's Dialogues,De Holme, Modern Europe serious, the Bible.I talk over political and constitutional topics withGisborne. 8th. Going on as usual in business toocarelessly, yet not without many resolutions of amendment,and some warm devotional feelings. Whenshall I be able to amend thoroughly ? 10th. Dinedat 's at Lichfield, Buxton church in view. Thesemeetings are sad work we practise such hums uponone another. How little do we talk like passengerswho are hastening to a better country, and here arein. a strange one ! Oh may God enable me to preservea constant and a sober mind with a gay exterior.Sunday, 13th. I thank God that for the most partI was much impressed with a sense of seriousthings, and resolved anew; yet how weak am I inperformance !"These resolutions are of the most strictly practicalcomplexion, and are evidently the results of habitual318 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1791.watchfulness. " May God, for Christ's sake, enableme to serve Him from a genuine principle of evangelicalobedience. I will labour after a sense of God'spresence, and a remembrance that I have been redeemed,and so am not my own. More fixedness indevotion, reading Scripture, and self-examinationgreater self-restraint in lawful things, both inthought and act. Little secret self-denials, withoutmuch thought. More real gratitude to God at meals,and when enjoying other comforts kind friends, andall external conveniences. In company rational conversationand innocent mirth. Topics preparedwhat good can I do or get draw out others when Ican without feeding their vanity above all aim attheir spiritual good think for each of them. Truthto be observed strictly. General kindness and mildness,especially towards inferiors beware of vanityand evil speaking. Frequent aspirations in solitaryrelaxation recapitulate or revolve topics, or at leastavoid rambling, wandering thoughts. In every thing,according to its measure, you may please or displeaseGod. Nov. 14th. Resumed my labours according tothe same plan thinking and dictating on topicsgetting by heart history letters serious, Bible.16th. With Gisborne to Wedgwood's Etruria, gotthere to dinner three sons and three daughters, andMrs. W. a fine, sensible, spirited family, intelligentand manly in behaviour situation good house rathergrand, and all conveniences. Pictures, &c. Discussedall evening. 17th. Returned to the Lodge.1791. LETTER TO PITT. 31920th. I have been reading Sir M. Hale's life. What aman was he ! and why may not I love God as well andrender to Christ as gratefully? Monday, 21st. Resumedwork ; but a bad day with me, and heavy inspirit; though a little roused by Witherspoon. 27th,Sunday. Cold at first rising, afterwards earnest seriousthoughts and fervent prayer; and now I mostseriously resolve to turn to God with my whole heart.I have been reading Doddridge's life. What a wonderfulman ! Yet I may apply to the same Saviour. Ipropose henceforth to try at eleven hours of all sorts ofbusiness one day with another whilst in the country ;nine hours of which to be exclusive of ( serious.' 28th.Got up after too short a night, and stupid in consequencethrough the day. I was too forgetful to-day of myregulations, yet rather warm in devotions at night.29th. Not so inattentive as I often am ; yet, alas, howlittle what I ought to be ! "From Yoxall Lodge he wrote to Mr. Pitt,My dear Pitt,I shall really be greatly obliged to you if youwill relieve me from a just cause of uneasiness, bydoing something for Mr. John Hearth, the poor manI have so often plagued you about, who sold out of thearmy in order to pay his father's debts. I know theimpediments and difficulties that are even in yourway in these cases, and therefore it is a rule with menever to give hopes, except the object appears actuallyalmost in possession.320 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1791.But in this instance, the poor fellow was so modest,and he had been dangling so long, that thinking, inconsequenceof what you told me, something would soonturn up, I could not help reviving him when he seemedready to faint, and by so doing I have unintentionallykept him in suspense nine months more. I trust youwill consider his past situation, and his tedious stateof expectation, and remember also that I advisedhim to refuse a place of about 70 a year, as beingtoo degrading for a gentleman ; a man also who writeswell, &c. Excuse my boring you. I assure you Ihave long been pushing back my own reflections,before I could be brought to it.Another thing in Sir F.'s medium of connexionThe enclosed I was forced to promise to forward toyou, but I expressly guarded against any inferencesthat might be drawn from my so doing. I believethe author of the proposal is going to Sierra Leone.And now, after having transacted my businesswith the minister, a word or two to the man acharacter in which, if it is more pleasant to you to beaddressed, it is, I assure you, no less pleasant to me toaddress you. I wish you may be passing your timehalf as salubriously and comfortably as I am atGisborne's, where I am breathing good air, eatinggood mutton, keeping good hours, and enjoyingthe company of good friends. You have only two ofthe four at command, nor these always in so pure astate as in Needwood Forest ; your town mutton beingapt to be woolly, and your town friends to be interested.LETTER TO PITT. 321ed : however, I sincerely believe you are, through thegoodness of Providence, better off in the latter particular,than has been the fate of ninety-nine ministersout of a hundred ; and as for the former, the quantityyou lay in may in some degree atone for the quality ;and it is a sign that neither in friends nor mutton youhave yet lost your taste. Indeed I shall reckon it a badsymptom of your moral or corporeal state, as the casemay be, when your palate is so vitiated, that youcannot distinguish the true from the false flavour.All this is sad stuff, but you must allow us gentlemenwho live in forests to be a little figurative. I will onlyadd, however, (that I may not quite exhaust yourpatience,) that I hope you will never cease to relishme, and do me the justice to believe the ingredientsare good, though you may not altogether approve ofthe cooking.Yours ever,W. Wilberforce.P. S. Remember me to all friends. I hope youhave no more gout, &c. If you will at any time give mealine, (though it be but a mouthful,) I shall be gladof it. You will think me be-Burked like yourself."On the 7th of December he went, " with snowupon the ground," to the house of his cousin Mr.Samuel Smith, at Wilford ; where he met " at dinnerGregory the astronomer, a well-informed man, with ahigh sense of the ludicrous." On the 13th he againp 3322 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1791.returned to Yoxall Lodge, and contrasting his ownhomeless state with the welcome which awaited thereturn of his host, he describes himself as " glad tosee my friends again, and felt sadly the want of wifeand children to hail my return ; yet looked up toheaven as the true object of desire. Received a mostaffecting letter from Milner about his brother. 14th.At night Henry Thornton and Grant came in suddenly.15th. At work on Sierra Leone business most ofthe day. H. Thornton has been at it the whole day forsome months. 16th. Worked at Sierra Leone businesspreparing the Report." " It lately occurred tome,"he writes from Yoxall Lodge to Mr. Wyvill, " thatyou might probably like to be concerned in what,considering all the circumstances, I must call thesplendid plan for establishing a settlement on thecoast of Africa. I therefore directed the last Reportto the court of proprietors to be transmitted to you fromLondon : this I believe will give you ample information,added to what you must have already obtainedfrom the newspapers, concerning the general natureand intentions of our institution. I need only add,that it has been since resolved to raise the capital to150,000, and that the accounts we have receivedfrom our agent, both of the number and qualitiesof the Nova Scotia negroes, are extremely pleasing.I dare say we shall be in no want of subscriptions."P. S. When I dictated the sentence respecting theNova Scotia negroes, I thought an account of themhad been given in the Report, but as in since glancing1791. NOVA SCOTIA NEGROES. 323my eye over the pages I see no mention of it, it maybeproper to be a little more particular. The negroeshere referred to formerly inhabited the southernprovinces of the United States, and having sided withus during the war, and being consequently obnoxiousto the Americans, they were, as a reward to theirloyalty, transported to the genial climate of NovaScotia, where they have been ever since in a mostdeplorable way : besides the rigours of a climate so illadapted to their constitutions, they were very illtreated in other respects, the land promised themwas not given, &c. Sir H. Clinton spoke to mehimself concerning them, and bore testimony totheir claim on the protection and good offices of thiscountry. These poor people hearing a confusedreport of an intended settlement on the coast ofAfrica, sent one of their number about a year ago toLondon to inquire into the truth of it, and to request,if it should seem expedient to him, that governmentwould transport them thither. We took up the cause,and administration sent out orders accordingly. Weexpect about seven hundred men, women, and childrenwill come over to Sierra Leone, with ouragent this or the next month ; and there is everyreason to hope they will form a most valuable acquisition.You understand they are all free people."CHAPTER IX.DECEMBER 1791 TO DECEMBER 1792.Return to London Death of Miss Bird, and letter to ManningPetitions against Slave Trade Proposal to abstainfresh West India produce Cause of Abolition impeded byevents in St. Domingo and in France Pitt suggests postponementMotion lost Dundas's resolutions for gradualAbolition Violence of Slave Traders Kimber Stay atBath Letters from Dundas and Pitt W aimer Castle Residenceat Battersea Rise Society.MR. Wilberforce's quiet stay at Yoxall Lodge was suddenlydisturbed by a summons from his friend HenryThornton, on the evening of the 16th Dec r . " All myfriends considered my case, and at last gave it for myaccompanying Grant and Henry Thornton to town. Iscarce honest about it from my disinclination to go,yet God's providence calls me away." l On the morningof the 17th (" leaving papers and every thing atsixes and sevens, and having lost an occasion of talkingseriously to ") he set off for town, whence hewrote again to Mr. Wyvill " You will be surprised toreceive a letter from me dated London, so soon after1 Diary.1792. RETURN TO LONDON.my last from Yoxall Lodge, but on Thursday nightlast I was suddenly summoned to town on the SierraLeone business, and, though very reluctantly, I ofcourse obeyed." " All this week," he says, " at SierraLeone business, and therefore staid in the city withH. Thornton. Went one day to dine with Pittmet V. who seems rather more worldly. Grant withus always at Thornton's chosen director on Tuesday.Sunday, Jan. 1st, 1792. Came to Palace Yard today,having been at H. Thornton's, King's ArmsYard a fortnight. A better Sunday than some past Itrust that I have been sincerely affected. Cecil's inthe evening, and went over the sermon afterwards tomy family. I have been to-day receiving the sacrament,and looking back upon the last year, and I desirenow to be enabled to purpose stedfastly to lead anew life. I have been in a hurry of business since Icame to town, and short in my devotions. All myresolutions for the future must be vain without thehelp of God ; yet relying on it, and labouring tostrengthen the main principle, I will strive to keepsuch rules as seem proper in my situation." " I thankGod," he says in his private Journal of Jan. 4th,I have been in rather a more watchful, sober frameof mind, than for some time past. I pray God it maycontinue. How much room is there still for morewatchfulness ! yet I trust that I am mending."The hurry and interruptions of his London lifewere now begun. " Jan. 7th. Out in the morningemployed all day. W. Smith called in the afternoon.326 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1792I talked to him on religion, but too much as a matterof criticism. 10th. City Sierra Leone ; and afternoonslave business. Then Henry Thornton's, wherediscussed, and home late ; Grant our associate. Ifind that I can hardly keep an account of time. llth.Dined R. Smith's Pitt, Dundas, &c. I staid late.12th. Sierra Leone Company, morning. Pitt, Montrose,Grenville, Attorney-general, &c. dined with me.Day cheerful but too many trifling thoughts. 16th.Busy all the morning dined Bishop of London's.Returned home to serious reading, but too coldly.18th. Queen's birth-day at St. James's. Dined atPitt's sadly idle. What stuff such a day as this is !21st, Went tete-astute withPitt to Wimbledon financelecture on the way. A long discussion with Dundasafter dinner a most excellent man of business. Ohwhat a pity that he is not alive to what is best ! hisdiligence shames me."In entering upon this distracting scene he did notforget the resolutions of greater watchfulness withwhich he had closed his last London season. " I willwatch and pray," he says, " or God may punish mycarelessness by suffering me to fall a prey to sin."Christ says, through His apostle, ' Be not conformed tothis world.' Do Thou teach me, Lord, the true limitsof conformity. I have been hearing a most excellentsermon from Mr. Scott, on procrastination. I wasvery cold and sluggish in spiritual affections both yesterdayand this morning, but I hope this discoursehas roused me ; may I be enabled to put in practice1792. TO THE REV. W. MASON. 327these most important admonitions. I have muchcause for humiliation in the past week ; yet I think Igo on better in my own house than in Henry Thornton's,from having more quiet ; and I humbly resolveto press forward, and apply diligently to the throne ofgrace, that Christ may be made to me wisdom, andrighteousness, and sanctification, and redemption."To Mr. Mason, whom Dr. Burgh describes 2 " as entertainingpaternal feelings towards you, which havereceived an accession from your late kind attention tohim," he writes soon after his return to London " Toyou, who know Yoxall Lodge, and can by the utmoststretch of your imagination form to yourself some ideaof my London, I need hardly say how I feel thechange; yet I trust I am on my post, and in that persuasionI determine not to abandon it. I endeavouras much as I can to preserve my Needwood Forestmind in my Palace Yard habitation, and whilst I aminthe busy and the social circle, (and I will confess toyou the latter is to me the more laborious and dangerousservice of the two,) I labour, looking to abetter strength than my own, to discharge the dutiesof this life, from a regard to the happiness of the other,and from a sentiment of gratitude towards Him towhose undeserved mercy alone I can look for itsattainment. I will not be so affected as to offer anyapology for exhibiting this picture of my mind ; onthe contrary, I am persuaded you will rather thank2 Jan. 2.328 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1792.me for it, accepting it as a proof of the cordiality andaffection with which I am,Very sincerely yours,W. WILBERFORCE."But although he watched over himself thus diligently,and withdrew from all superfluous intercoursewith society, " dining from home less than in formeryears, and giving fewer dinners, either ordinary orformal, upon Milner's persuasion ; " yet his wakefuleye detected some injury to his spirit from his continualengagements. " Both my body and mindsuffer from over-occupation. My heart is now in acold and senseless state, and I have reason to adorethe goodness of God in not hardening me. I havebeen short, and cold, and wandering in private devotions.Habit and the grace of God preventing mehave kept me in a decent observance of externalduties, but all within is overgrown with weeds, andevery truly Christian grace well nigh choked. Yet,O Thou all-merciful Father, and Thou Saviour of sinners,receive me yet again, and supply me with strength.Oh let me now quicken the things that are ready todie ! My worldly connexions certainly draw me intotemptations great and innumerable, yet I dare notwithdraw from a station in which God has placed me.Still let me deal honestly with myself in this matter,and if, on further trial, I find reason to believe I oughtto lead a more sequestered life, may I not dread the1792. ENTERS ON ANOTHER LONDON SEASON. 329imputation of singularity. If from my extremeweakness this public company-keeping life cannotbe made consistent with a heavenly frame of mind, Ithink I ought to retire more. Herein and in allthings may God direct me ; but let me strive moreagainst my corruptions, and particularly not straitenprayer. I find myself confiding in my resolutions ;let me universally distrust myself, but let me throwmyself at the feet of Christ as an undone creature,distrusting yea despairing of myself, but firmly relyingupon Him. ' Him that cometh unto Me I will inno wise cast out.' ' They that wait on the Lord shallrenew their strength.' "These serious thoughts with which he mingled inthe unthinking crowd of ordinary companions, werequickened by the affecting accounts which he receivedof the last hours of a near relation. " 22nd January.Saw the astonishing letter from Miss More, containingan account, written inter momentum, of Harriet Bird'sdeath at six o'clock on Wednesday morning. Ohmay my latter end be like hers ! Strongly affected ;may it be deeply." " I have been extremely affectedby Miss More's account of Harriet's death-bed scene.how can I but be so particularly her illumination,and the following agony just before she was taken toglory. I have felt these things, I humbly hope, not invain. She prayed for me on her death-bed. Howdoes her progress shame me ! I am behind, far behindall of them. But my eyes will not allow me to write ;many tears to-day from mental struggles have injured330 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1792.them. May God, for Christ's sake, cause them notto flow in vain. I fly to Him for pardon, pleading theblood of Jesus. Though I almost despair, yet Christis mighty to save. I have been looking over letterswritten to me by Milner, Pitt, &c. when I first enteredupon a religious profession. How little have I correspondedto the outset ! Yet it is not too late. ButI am apt to take comfort after writing thus, as thoughthe business was done. Let me dismiss all vain confidence,and build upon the sure foundation."A letter detailing the events which had occurred atBath, called forth the following reply.TO WILLIAM MANNING ESQ.Palace Yard, 20th January, 1792.My dear Manning,My eyes are but indifferent to-day, and Ihave much work for them ; yet I cannot forbeartaking up my pen for a few moments, not fromform you will believe, but feeling, on the perusalof your kind letter. Such a crowd of ideas rushinto my mind, that I scarce know how to discriminateor select them. I cannot help almost envyingyou the scene you have been witnessing. O my dearfriend, never forget it ; let it still be present to yourmind, and let it force all those concerns which are soapt to engross our imaginations, and interest ourhearts, to retire to their proper distance, or rather toshrink to their true point of insignificance. Never let1792. TO WILLIAM MANNING ESQ. 331me forget it. When I seem to you at any time to beintoxicated as it were by the hurry, the business, orthe dissipation of life, spare not the best offices offriendship , recall me to that sobriety and seriousnessof mind, which become those who know not whenthey may be called away : place before me the solemntriumphs of which you have been a spectator, andanimate me to press forward in emulation of so gloriousan example. To die the death, we must indeedlive the life, of Christians. We must fix our affectionson things above, not on things on the earth. Wemust endeavour habitually to preserve that frame ofmind, and that course of conduct, with which we maybejustly said to be waiting for the appearance of theLord Jesus Christ. I know not any description of aChristian which impresses itself so forcibly as this onmy mind. Alas ! when with this which I ought to beI compare myself as I am, I am lost in unutterableshame and self-abasement. But I throw myself onthe mercies of God in Christ ; I resolve to venture allon this foundation ; arid relying on that help which ispromised to them that ask it, I determine to strugglewith all my corruptions, and to employ what is left tomeof life, and talents, and influence, in the way whichshall appear to me most pleasing to my heavenlyFather. Oh with what humiliation have I to lookback on the years wherein all these were so grosslywasted ; and what reason have I to rejoice that I wasnot then snatched away !I will not apologize for giving you this picture332 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1792.of my mind ; you will accept it I trust (suchindeed it is) as a proof of affection and confidence.In truth, I often regret that we are soseparated, as not to afford us the opportunity ofexhibiting proofs of this last to each other more frequentlyin personal communications. May the timeat length come, when, through the goodness of God,we may indulge (with those friends we have beforelost for this life) uninterrupted and ever-growing effusionsof affection. I must lay aside my pen. Adieu.Remember me most kindly to Mary. I rejoice tohear she is so supported. Assure her of my constantprayers. Remember me also kindly to the Mores andto Dr. Fraser, whose tender assiduities I have heardof with sincere pleasure, and reflect on with real gratitude.Believe me, my dear Manning, in great haste,ever affectionately yours,W. WILBERFORCE."To his other occupations, was soon added constantattendance on the parliamentary business of an importantsession. " I tremble for it," writes Dr. Burgh, 3and ardently wish to see its first fortnight wellover ; the blaze of opposition will by that time be out,and during the remainder they will smoulder on theirown ashes. Russia and India are two such topics.With regard to France, keep us out of the scrape, orif we must get into it in consequence of the universaleddy of Europe, let it not be upon the aristocraticalJan. 19.1792. APPEAL TO MORAL SENSE OF THE Country. 333side : so sure as any state embraces that part, so surely,I now predict it, that state will itself experience arevolution or a civil war within the next ten years.Let us mediate if you please, and restore to mankindsub liberate quieter.' "But though the many important questions whichthen came before parliament received a full share of hisattention, the Abolition struggle mainly occupied histhoughts. About a month before he came to Londonhe opened to Lord Lancaster the plan of action uponwhich he had at first decided. " I mean," he says,to bring on the slave business within a month afterparliament meets, that we may then, being defeated,sound the alarm throughout the land, (provoke adpopulus,) get petitions, &c. and carry somethingimportant before the session is over. I mention this,lest Clarkson, to whom I threw it out, should havefailed to tell you, and because you will regulate yourmotions accordingly." But before the session commencedthere was so fair a promise of reviving interestin the cause, that he deemed it wiser to postpone hismotion until he could propose it with the expectedsanction of a great body of petitions. " I have considered,and talked over with several friends, ourfuture plan of operations, and we are all at lengthpretty well agreed, that the best course will be toendeavour to excite the flame as much as possiblein a secret way, but not to allow it more than tosmother until after I shall have given notice of myintention of bringing the subject forward. This must334 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1792.be the signal for the fire's bursting forth. We hopeere that time to have laid all our trains, and that byproper efforts the blaze will then be universal." *The conduct of this "appeal to the people" nowoccupied his time, and he was daily rousing anddirecting the efforts of his adherents throughoutthe country. This was no appeal to the politicalimpulses of the multitude. Rendered necessary " bythat vote of the House of Commons on the SlaveTrade question, which proved above all things theextremely low ebb of real principle there," 5 it wasaddressed to the moral sympathies of the educatedand religious classes. " I wish you and all othercountry labourers," he writes to Mr. Hey, 6 " to consideryourselves not as having concluded, but as onlybeginning your work : it is on the general impressionand feeling of the nation we must rely, rather than onthe political conscience of the House of Commons.So let the flame be fanned continually, and may itplease God, in whose hands are the hearts of all men,to bless our endeavours." County meetings topetition parliament were what he chiefly wished toobtain. He could not but hope that the cause wasgaining ground fast in the country, as it becamebetter acquainted with the real nature of this horridtraffic. " Much good has been done by two littlepublications ; the one an Abstract of the Evidencedelivered on our side in the House of Commons ; the< To Rev. C. Wyvill, Dec. 19.1 To Mr. Gisborne, March 5. 6 Feb. 211792. PROPOSED COUNTY MEETINGS. 335other the report of the Debate on my motion. I wishthat you would adopt the best means that occur toyou for circulating them generally, and securing forthem a serious perusal. I own I am very desirous thatour great county should deem this, as I am sure it is,a worthy occasion for its interference. You can judgehow far a respectable county meeting could be convenedfor the purpose of petitioning parliament forthe Abolition. Were Yorkshire but to open the path,other counties I am persuaded would crowd in afterit, and gladly follow in its train. Pray turn thismatter over in your mind, and remember only thereis little room for delay." 7 " Burgh I imagine hastaken counsel with you; I think could the meetingbe well managed and creditably carried through, itmight be of great use in stimulating other county-linesto follow the example." 8I understand Lord Fitzwilliam is rather friendly,but I am not sure of it. The matter should be pushedforward if possible by those who are not my politicalfriends; the reasons are obvious." 9 "Finding myselfobliged," replies Mr. Mason, " to appear in thepulpit yesterday for the Dean, I contrived (by a sortof lyrical transition in my sermon) not only to applaudthe plan of the new colony of Sierra Leone, but alsoto exhort my audience to renew their petitions for theAbolition." " Your meeting," he directs Mr.Babington, 10 who had reported Leicester as ready to^ To Mr. Wyvill, Jan. 18. To the Rev. W. Mason, Jan. 15.9 To W. Hey Esq. Jan. 9. "> Jan. 9.336 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1792.petition, " should be called immediately, that othertowns might be more easily induced to walk in thedesired road, when it shall be plainly chalked out, andwell trodden before them." In many of these caseshe was called on to appoint all the details of the expectedmeeting, and forced into a minuteness ofarrangement, which led Mr. Gisbome, after saying,Give us precise directions," to add, " I am awarethat you are overwhelmed with business, and thattaking up your time by questions respecting minutiaein a department which you may reasonably thinkshifted to me, is as if the Christians in a pettyvillage of Asia Minor were to pester the Pope withvoluminous letters respecting the election of adoor-keeper to their chapel. But the success ofeach branch of the general plan is material, andyou can give me your instructions in less than fiveminutes."My dear Gisborne, I am sorry to tell you," hereplies, " we must abandon the hope of deriving anybenefit from Lord Narrowly, so far as a county meetingis concerned ; the best we can hope is his remainingneuter. Your visit went off far better than Iexpected. But I am persuaded that it will exceedmy powers to keep the fire at the heat you seem tohave produced ; or at most that it will be the utmost Ican do. However, you may be assured I will use myendeavours. Consult topic * Aristocratic? and youwill find that all great men hate public meetings.But yet knowing that in this instance our main subject1792. SUNDAY LEISURE. 337is a man of a better sort than the generality of suchcattle, I hope the effect of your country-bred advice,and my rus-insure suggestions, will not be done away.The terms of your petition ought to be such as to allowof a man's signing it who rather recoils from the ideaof immediate Abolition. It might not be amiss ifyou could, some way or other, make the proposal ofmoving or seconding come to Ryder through arespectable channel in the county, as well as througha private friend ; (though I really believe he will befound ready to respond to the chord of friendship ;)but if his father were to see reason to believe, that hiscoming forward would be likely to attach to himWedgwood, and all the Abolitionists in Staffordshire,it might operate wonderfully. I rather doubt whetherI can let the interval between my notice and mymotion be quite so long as I talked of. I will endeavourto stave off the day of discussion till the middleof March, by way of giving time for the fermentingmatter to work. Do not mistake my term ' stave.' Iwill keep to my day when it is once named.I thank God I keep well. But what a sad harassingplace this is, and how infinitely grateful I ought to feelfor the frequent recurrence of a day of undisturbed quiet,when it becomes a duty to retire, and which leavesme not the embarrassment of having to decide on eachparticular occasion between the comparative advantagesof continuing in the busy scene or abscondingfrom it. I wish I could sentence some of my friendsto a little solitary imprisonment. They might thenVOL. i. Q338 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1792.see things in their true dimensions . . as a painter wouldsay, in better keeping . . whereas now they think theobjects close to them really giants, whilst they are intruth no more than pygmies, and the giants in the backgrounddwindle into pygmies in their view. May youand I, my dear friend, ' live by faith and not bysight'"To such a pitch was the zeal of the friends ofAbolition at this time raised, that many had determinedto abstain from the consumption of WestIndian produce, until the measure should be carried.We use East Indian sugar entirely," writes Mr.Babington, " and so do full two-thirds of the friends ofAbolition in Leicester." " Please to take notice,"says Mr. W. Smith, " that I have left off sugar completelyand entirely for some time past, and shall certainlypersevere in my resolution, though I am not yetat all reconciled to the deprivation of the most favouritegratification of my palate." Upon this point the opinionof Mr. Wilberforce was called for in many quarters,both for the direction of individual conduct, and todetermine the line which should be held at countymeetings. " When you have leisure to favour mewith a line," wrote the venerable Newton, " I shallbe glad of your judgment respecting the associationsnow rapidly forming to stop the consumption of WestIndian produce. If you were to recommend such ameasure I should readily adopt it ; at present I thinkit premature." " What," asks Mr. Gisborne, " arewe to say at our meeting as to the use of West Indian1792. INTEMPERATE ABOLITIONISTS. 339sugar ? " Mr. Wilberforce was at first disposed to recommendthis measure, but upon a mature considerationof all its probable consequences he decided " that itshould be suspended until, if necessary, it might beadopted with effect by general concurrence." Thisdecision was evidently wise ; so harsh a remedy wouldhave disgusted numbers of moderate men who supportedthe cause of Abolition upon the highest grounds;and would have increased greatly the irritation whichalready pervaded the West Indian body ; yet it wasnot without a struggle that the more violent of hisfollowers obeyed his temperate counsels. The turbulentelements with which he had to work are thusgraphically described by Mr. Mason. 11 " I perceiveyou have heard every thing relative to the York petition.I left the place the day after I had moved it,and arrived at Rotherham time enough to second ourfriend Tooker, but here matters went not off so unanimously.One of the quakers, by name Payne, (no relationto the ' Rights of Man' Paine, though full asvehement,) had prepared a paper, not in the leastcouched in petitionary terms, which he wished eitherto supersede or to be engrafted into Tooker's. Withmuch difficulty we persuaded him that it ought tocome in the form of a resolution, and I withdrew in acommittee to arrange it in that mode. It is still tooflaming, but Payne seemed to value his own compositiontoo much to bear with greater alteration, andTooker chose to gain his signature to the petition.Feb. 20.Q 2340 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1792.I hear that at Sheffield three petitions were produced,and that dispute ran high as to which should beadopted.Whilst he was thus rallying his country forces,accounts arrived of the recent outrages in St. Domingo.They afforded the enemies of Abolition a pretextfor warmer opposition, and shook the faith of someof its adherents. Many too of those who continuedzealous supporters of the cause, were for deferring afresh appeal to parliament till a more convenientseason. " People here are all panic-struck with thetransactions in St. Domingo, and the apprehension orpretended apprehension of the like in Jamaica andother of our islands. I am pressed on all hands, exceptby W. Smith and the committee who hear little of thematter, to defer my motion till next year. I cannotyet think it right ; the effect on our division must bemore clearly established as highly injurious, eitherin the defalcation of our own numbers, or the increaseof our enemies." n To Mr. Hey he writes upon thesame subject " Your Slave Trade proceedings haveturned out far better than I had expected. Ouropponents are endeavouring to turn against us the latetransactions in St. Domingo and the apprehendedcommotions in Jamaica. Many even of our friends,too much like the American friends of whom LordCornwallis spoke in the year 1781, advise me tosuspend my motion for the year on account of theunfavourable impression that has gone forth. I ami*To T. Babington Es.1792. ALARM OF THE MINISTERIAL PARTY. 341clearly convinced it may be proved to the satisfactionof every impartial man, that the success of our effortswould tend both directly and indirectly to producequiet in the West Indian islands themselves, to saynothing of the lives it would preserve in Africa ; andI am persuaded it would be highly injurious to ourcause to recede for this session after all that has beensaid and done."Nor was it only the natural timidity of irresoluteminds which suggested this temporizing policy ; pressingarguments to the same effect from a very differentquarter tried but could not shake his resolution.Called away after dinner to Slave Committee. Pittthrew out against Slave motion on St. Domingo account.I must repose myself on God. The insincerityof my heart has been shamefully evinced to meto-day, when I could hardly bring myself to resolveto do my duty and please God at the expense (as tsuspect it will turn out) of my cordiality with Pitt, orrather his with me." 13 " Do not be afraid' he tellsMr. Babington, " lest I should give ground : I hope,through God's blessing, to be enabled to press forward,and never to abandon my pursuit or relax init till . . a supposition hardly conceivable . . it shall becomeright so to do. This is a matter wherein allpersonal, much more all ministerial, attachments mustbe as dust in the balance. Meanwhile exert yourselvesin the country with renewed vigour. I shouldbe glad to have some petitions, if possible, even be-diary.342 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1792.fore my notice, that it may be evident the country isalarmed, and that no receding of mine could preventthe measure coining forward. Poor fellow ! I can feelfor you : we people that live in this bustling place,are called off to other things from what would otherwisehaunt and harass us." Mr. Gisborne had writtenin a former letter, " 1 am very anxious on accountof the suspicion you intimate, but trust in your standingfirm if possible." " I must be very short," hereplies, " but I dare not let you wait another day, lestyou burst in ignorance. Nothing more has passedwith Pitt on the head I treated of in my last, norshall pass speedily unless I change my opinion as tothe best mode in which I can proceed. Meanwhiledo you in the country exert yourselves with tenfoldearnestness ; petition, resolve, &c. ; if it was beforeimportant, it is now indispensable."Nor was this the only difficulty peculiar to thattroubled season. It was at this time that the fraternizingspirit of revolutionary France established affiliatedsocieties in foreign nations, and threatened ourown population with the infection of her leproustouch. From the contagion of her principles thesounder part of the nation shrunk back with horror,and viewed with the utmost suspicion whatever borethe least resemblance to them. The supporters ofthe Slave Trade were not slow in turning to theirown advantage this excited state of public feeling.The name of Jacobin, and the charge of holding revolutionarytenets, might be easily affixed to any advo-1792. Jacobins OBSTRUCTS HIS MEASURES. 343cate of liberty ; whilst, however wantonly imputed,they could not in those times of wakeful suspicion hereadily removed. It was moreover inevitable, thatamongst the friends of Abolition should be rangedsome actual abettors of these extreme opinions. " Itis certainly true, and perfectly natural, that theseJacobins are all friendly to the Abolition ; and it isno less true and natural that this operates to the injuryof our cause. However, I am not discouraged.You seem yourself to be deep in Abolition lore ; I amglad of it, as I am sure you will be proportionablyearnest. It is a superficial view alone, which makesa man of sense honestly against us." 14 This evil hadbeen for some time spreading amongst a certain classof his supporters ; and had scarcely been suppressedby his skill and patience. " You will see Clarkson,"writes Mr. Wilberforce to Lord Lancaster ; 15 " cautionhim against talking of the French Revolution ; itwill be ruin to our cause." " Clarkson," writes Dr.Milner, " would tell you that he had a long conversationwith me. I wish him better health, and betternotions in politics ; no government can stand on suchprinciples as he appeals to, and maintains. I am verysorry for it, because I see plainly advantage is takenof such cases as his, in order to represent the friendsof Abolition as levellers. This is not the only instancewhere the converse of a proposition does not hold:levellers certainly are friends of Abolition." Greatmischief had already arisen to the cause. " What14 To W. Hey Esq. u Oct.344 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1792.business had your friend Clarkson," asked Dundas,to attend the Crown and Anchor last Thursday ? Hecould not have done a more mischievous thing to thecause you have taken in hand." 16 " On Wednesdaylast' says Mr. Wilberforce's Diary shortly after hereceived this letter, " to Pitt's at Holwood. Staidtill Saturday with Pitt to town in his phaeton, andinteresting talk about Abolition. Some vote againstit not to encourage Paine's disciples."This impression affected his success elsewhere ; it hadreached the highest quarter with peculiar force ; andcreated henceforth an inseparable obstacle to the exerciseof any ministerial influence in behalf of Abolition.There had been a time, when George III. had whisperedat the levee, " How go on your black clients, Mr.Wilberforce ? " but henceforth he was a determined opposerof the cause. Yet in spite of these unfavourablecircumstances, it was evidently right to bring thequestion forward. The sympathy of the country wastoo much aroused to be patient of delay. Publicmeetings, and petitions numerously signed, multipliedboth in England and in Scotland. From the lattercountry Mr. Ross writes, " The clergy to a man arefavourable to the cause ;" and Dr. Dickson adds, " Thepeople have taken up the matter in the view of dutyand religion, and do not inquire what any man, or setof men, think of it. From London to Inverness Mr.Pitt's sincerity is questioned, and unless he can convincethe nation of his cordiality in our cause, his'6 To W. Wilberforce Esq., July 18, 1791.1792, PITT'S SPEECH ON THE SLAVE TRADE. 345popularity must suffer greatly." Even from Liverpool,where the corporation had spent, first and last, 17upwards of 10,000 in their parliamentary oppositionto his motions, he hears from Dr. Currie " You will,perhaps, be surprised that Liverpool does not petitionfor the trade. Liverpool will never again, I think,petition on this subject ; conviction of the truth hasspread amongst us widely. Tarleton is doing himselfan injury he little suspects." 18Upon the 2nd of April Mr. Wilberforce proposed hismotion in a debate, which he describes the followingmorning to Mr. Hey. " I know how much you areinterested in what regards our poor African fellow -creatures, and therefore I take up my pen for a singlemoment to inform you that, after a very long debate,.owe did not separate till near seven this morning,)my motion for immediate Abolition was put by ;though supported strenuously by Mr. Fox, and byMr. Pitt with more energy and ability than werealmost ever exerted in the House of Commons."Windham, who has no love for Pitt, tells me, thatFox and Grey, with whom he walked home after thedebate, agreed with him in thinking Pitt's speech one'7 Besides printing works in defence of the Slave Trade, and remuneratingtheir authors'; paying the expenses of " delegates and agents to attendin London, and watch Mr. Wilberforce's proceedings" (order book ofLiverpool council); they pensioned the widows of Norris and Green, andvoted plate to Mr. Penny, for their exertions in this cause. The corporationof Liverpool, let it be remembered, believed firmly at this time, thatthe very existence of their town depended upon the continuance of thistrade.18 He was thrown out at the next election.Q3346 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1792.of the most extraordinary displays of eloquence theyhad ever heard. For the last twenty minutes hereally seemed to be inspired." " He was dilating uponthe future prospects of civilizing Africa, a topic whichI had suggested to him in the morning." I9 " We carrieda motion however afterwards for gradual Abolition,against the united forces of Africans and WestIndians, by a majority of 238 to 85. I am congratulatedon all hands, yet I cannot but feel hurt andhumiliated. We must endeavour to force the gradualAbolitionists in their Bill (for I will never myselfbring forward a parliamentary licence to rob and murder)to allow as short a term as possible, and under asmany limitations." 90 " I am glad to hear you say," repliesMr. Hey, " that you will not bring in a Bill tolicense robbery and murder. I think this resolutionbecoming your conduct on the ground you havetaken. But if no scruple of this kind weighed withyou, you will undoubtedly have the advantage inbeing the corrector, rather than the proposer, of theBill. W hat you proposed would probably be curtailedin some degree. Whatever others propose you willprobably be able to modify."Congratulations upon this limited success poured infrom all quarters. " I thought of you' wrote theDean of Carlisle, 21 "most unremittingly the wholeday of April 2nd, and a good deal of the night, whichto me was a very restless one. I bless God, andCon. Mem. w To Mr. Hey.April 9.1792. PARTIAL SUCCESS. 347surely you have great reason to be thankful, that itpleases him to endow you with so much bodily energy,that you are able to exert your talents so steadily, andfor so long a time, on such great occasions. Greateroccasions can hardly ever occur, and I think there canbe no doubt but you have gained some ground;though I find many people think otherwise. On thefirst view I thought so too, but on reading the debatesI am satisfied that much ground is gained as far asrespects public opinion ; the opposers are plainly overawedand ashamed. The worst circumstance is thisDundas nobody thinks well of him duplicity andartifice are esteemed parts of his character he isjudged to do what he does unwillingly and with design,in the worst sense. Ne graves upon my makingthese observations on him. I know he says you haveas pure a heart as ever inhabited human breast.Such things you can withstand, but there is a streamof more delicate applause which is likely to have moreeffect, and against which it is more difficult to guard."On the whole," he says after the debate, 22 " mattershave turned out better than I expected, and I amthankful for what we have obtained. And yet butthis would draw me on, and I must conclude." Onthe following day he wrote more fully to Mr. Gisborne." Instead of having a little leisure, I am justnow even more occupied than ever in dictating myspeech. Nothing ever was so absurd, and, in spite ofthe tragical nature of the subject, so ludicrous, asTo Rev. C. Wyvill, April 9.348 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1792.what the short-hand men have furnished. I have notseen Fox since Dundas gave his notice, (I was not inthe House at the time,) but I conceive the committeeof the 18th will, of course, be adjourned to a subsequentday. Of his plan I have heard no more since ,we parted, and I am a little shy of discussing thematter with him, lest I should be drawn into thenecessity of either irritating him by opposition, orappearing to acquiesce improperly. I mean to gotoPitt's tomorrow or the next day, and I shall thenbe able to keep a tolerable look out, safe from mischief.My present opinion, but I wish for yours, is,that I ought not to allow a longer term than fouryears, but denounce, if even five are talked of, a determinedand vigorous war hold out the possible adoptionof the abstaining measure, and the recommendationof it to the country at large. I rather believe,unless Dundas be forced to it, he will not name anyspecific time, but hold out the prospect of an acceleratedor retarded Abolition, accordingly as theislands shall more or less cordially concur in hisscheme, professing that if they will not concur at allhe will next year consent to immediate Abolition.But my impression is that this must not be allowed,but that the ultimate duration must now be fixed."In this hurry of business he enters, 23 " Perhaps Ihave been a little more attentive to my devotions inthis last week ; yet too little thinking of God's presenceand favour. But though with a cold heart, I1-3 Diary.1792. BILL PASSES THE COMMONS. 349will proceed, praying for more grace ; and though thisnext fortnight will be a sadly hurrying time, I willhope, by God's help, to amend at least in some things.Look to Jesus : all other modes are vain."On the 23rd Mr. Dundas brought forward his Resolutionsfor a gradual Abolition. " After a hardstruggle," writes Mr. Wilberforce, 24 " we were lastnight defeated in our attempt to fix the period of theAbolition for the 1st of January, 1795; the numbersbeing 161 to 121. But we carried the 1st of January,1796, (Mr. Dundas had proposed 18CO,) by a majorityof 151 against 132. On the whole this is more thanI expected two months ago, and I have much causefor thankfulness. We are to contend for the numbersof slaves to be imported ; and then for the Houseof Lords" " Not long ago," writes Dr. Milner, " Ihad no expectation of success respecting the SlaveTrade ; then you seemed to be carrying every thing ;and now we are down in the mouth again, both becausefour years are allowed, and because there seemsthe greatest danger from the House of Lords. However,you have great reason to be thankful, for Godseems to bless your labours ; and I remember I toldyou long ago, if you carry this point in your wholelife, that life will be far better spent than in beingPrime Minister many years."Upon the 1st of May, when the question cameagain before the House, Mr. Dundas declared himselfunable to propose his Resolutions as amended byM April 28. Letter to W. Hey Esq.350 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1792.the late division. They were therefore moved byMr. Pitt, and upon the following day communicatedto the Lords in a free conference. Here the opponentsof the measure rallied their broken forces ; andin spite of Lord Grenville's able arguments, prevailedupon the House to proceed by calling evidence totheir own bar ; a resolution in itself equivalent to adirect vote, which followed on the 5th of June, whenthe business was formally postponed to the ensuingsession.Much had undoubtedly been gained in the courseof these debates. All direct defence of the trade wasnow abandoned. The charges of its opponents wereadmitted to be true. Its ultimate necessity to thecolonies was no longer maintained. On the 2nd ofApril Mr. Jenkins had faintly attempted to raisehis voice in its defence ; but his proposal for encouragingthe breed of colonial negroes instead of directlyattacking importation, was at once rejected by theHouse. " No man hereafter," said Mr. Pitt, " canpretend to argue that the Abolition of the trade oughtnot to take place, however he may wish from motivesof private interest to defer the day of its suppression."Yet in conceding so much, and thus changing the groundof conflict, Mr. Dundas showed much of that adroitmanagement which distinguished his political career.A direct defence of the odious traffic was no longerpossible. Its existence might yet be prolonged by theeasy expedient of continual delay ; whilst the promiseof future Abolition gained the irresolute amongst the1792. GRADUAL ABOLITION DELUSIVE. 35ladvocates of humanity, and fully satisfied " the moderatemen," who hang as doubtful allies upon the skirtsof such a body. Nor could any one be fitter thanhimself for the task he had assumed. A frankand joyous temper was united in Mr. Dundaswith great natural sagacity, and much knowledge ofmankind. The apparent honesty and warmth of heartwhich marked his speeches, enabled him to turn asidewhat he knew well how to represent as a false andsickly humanity. Oppression could not find a kinderadvocate, or abuses a more honest patron. " I cannot,"was, thirty years later, Mr. Wilberforce's commentupon a letter, which he at the time received, " at allrelish what is here said in favour of gradual Abolition.You must remember that it was to the fatal appealmade to that principle, that we chiefly owed the defeatof our first assault, and the twenty years* continuanceof the murderous traffic." 55 " Our opponents,except a very few, who were directly interested by theirproperty or political connexion with certain towns,professed to concur with us in design, but to adopt amore moderate, and as they contended more effectual,method of accomplishing our common purpose ; sothat many who could not avowedly oppose us becameour most dangerous enemies."The friends of Abolition did not readily submit tothe postponement of the question. Other measuresof a temporary nature were projected, and only laidaside through a politic regard to their main object.45 Letter to W. Wallace Currie Esq.352 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1792.We found there was no chance of getting any Billthrough the Lords ; and Grenville and all those whoshould be best acquainted with the disposition of thatbody were not only positive on this head, but alsothat by any such attempt we should materially injureour main cause. To these considerations Iscarcely yielded so implicitly as not to be inclinedto try at least for a limitation of tonnage, but Grenvilledecided me (this entre nous) by saying thathe himself would not fight our battle, but wouldfrankly declare he thought this ' an excess of zeal.'Now I am sure such an avowal from him, or any coldnesson his part, would do us infinite mischief; for wehave nothing to depend on against the effect of St.James's, and the Guelph family's being against us,but that of Pitt and all his connexions and knownsupporters being warmly with us." 26The bustle of this busy session had not dispelledthose serious purposes with which he had commencedits labours. " The beginning of a long recess drawsnear, and I will endeavour to consecrate it to God bya day of solemn prayer and fasting. I will labour to lay-asideevery weight, and the sin which doth so easilybeset me, and to adorn the doctrine of God mySaviour ; to follow peace with all men, and above allto love the Lord my God with all my heart. Ostrengthen me, Lord, by Thy grace, for I am veryweakness ; cleanse me, for I am all corruption ; andsince ease begets carelessness, may I be clothed withTo Mr. Babington, June 7-1792. SIERRA LEONE BUSINESS. 353humility, and may I fear alway." 27 The conclusion ofthe session did not at once release him. " Parliamentwas prorogued upon the 18th," he says, " but I amkept here in expectation of Mr. Gilbert, from SierraLeone. Upon the 16th I dined at Lord Camden's,Grenville, Chatham, Pitt, Dundas. I rejoice thatI am now likely to have leisure for quiet thought ;how much do I stand in need of it ! Dropped in oneday at Dundas's, and much surprised to find LordLoughborough there. After staying till June 28th,I set off from town with my sister for Bath, goinground by Corse Castle." " After danglingin and about town, till my patience was exhausted,and my health really suffering, in expectation ofa ship from Sierra Leone, I drove off into Dor-seashore,and thence travelled to Bath. But scarcehad I entered upon my course of waters, when Ireceived from Henry Thornton a summons to LawrenceCourtney Lane, and after some consideration Idetermined to obey. Accordingly I despatched mysister to a friend in the neighbourhood, and came off,though not ' creeping like snail' yet most 'unwillinglyto school.' You will naturally conclude I have hadlittle leisure in this constant state of locomotion ; andtravelling in the summer is always unfavourable to myeyes. I am therefore dreadfully in arrears with allmy correspondents. We are sitting here all day long,and I cannot but believe to good purpose finally,though daily more and more sensible of the dispenseJournal, June 10.354 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1792.able necessity of the Abolition of the Slave Trade,and of the terrible influence of this detestable trafficon the morals and characters of the natives." *The contest in behalf of Abolition was throughoutconducted by Mr. Wilberforce in a spirit of conciliationtowards the supporters of the trade. Someamongst the West Indian body were his personalfriends, and of all " we should not forget," he writesto Dr. Currie, " that Christian candour is due to thecharacters of those who carry it on. There may be, Idoubt not, amongst them many men of enlarged andhumane minds. I trust that you have done me thejustice to acquit me of having adopted any such indiscriminateand false judgment as that you oppose."But it was not to be expected, that in a strife which calledinto violent action the whole energies of many lowernatures, he should always meet with opponents of aspirit like his own. He had throughout the struggleto bear the imputation of unworthy motives, and thevarious assaults of personal slander. No one couldunite with him in this cause, without in some measuresharing in this treatment. " My testimony beforethe House of Commons," writes one 29 who had theboldness to detail the observations of a long residencein the West India islands, " has drawn upon me aplentiful load of abuse, the falling off of all my WestIndia connexions, and from some of them the grossestinsult." " I crave your friendship," wrote Captain88 To Lord Lancaster, July.49 Hercules Ross Esq. of Rossi, North Britain.1792. VIOLENCE OF HIS OPPONENTS. 355Hall, " in behalf of a virtuous family of eight personswho have been deprived of the benefits of my industry,through my evidence on the African Slave Trade.No other cause whatever has operated to my prejudiceas master of a ship, but my testimony on that blackcommittee." To engage in correspondence withWilberforce, was esteemed sufficient ground forsuch annoyance. In the island of Tortola, the papersof an English gentleman known to be guilty of thiscrime were seized by order of the president of thecouncil, on the charge of their containing proofs of atreasonable correspondence with the French. Thisjealousy extended even to Great Britain. " The boxin which our petition is enclosed," says a Glasgowcorrespondent, " has been directed to another, that itscontents may be unsuspected." And other residents inLiverpool of the same rank of life asked with the lateDr. Currie, " If you write, be pleased to direct withoutyour franking it." Their correspondence wasconducted in unsigned letters, sent under the coversof unsuspected persons. In a letter which does notallude to West Indian matters, and was thereforeopenly transmitted, Dr. Currie adds this postscript,Trusting this letter to our post office with your address,I shall be anxious to hear of its safe arrival."The attacks which were aimed against himself, werenot always of this comparatively harmless character.At an early period of the contest he had been indanger of personal violence, from " one, who from myhaving been compelled in quality of examiner in the356 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1792.committee to bring forward his inconsistencies, conceivedso violent a hatred of me, as even to threatenmy life." 30 The summer of 1792 had exposed him totwo more such assailants. He had just returned toLondon upon Mr. Henry Thornton's summons, whenthe challenge of a West Indian captain, which hadbeen delivered at his Bath lodgings, followed him bypost to town. He marks in his Journal his sense ofGod's goodness in so ordering this business, that hewas thus allowed leisure to reflect upon the line ofconduct which it became him to adopt. " Talked,"says his Diary at this time, " with S. about duelling.He says he should fight, though disapproving. I deprecated.My plans uncertain. I rather think of returningto Bath, perhaps partly from a desire of notappearing to be deterred thence ; and partly fromthinking, that a proper and easy explanation of mydetermination and views in respect to duelling, mightbe in all respects eligible. At all events, I will enternow upon a more diligent course, which may suit anyplan. I often waste my time in waiting for suitableseasons ; whereas I ought, as a single man, to be athome every where ; or at least, to be always at work."This affair was carried no further; but he was, atthe very same time, brought into collision with anotherassailant, to whose threatened violence he wasexposed for more than two years. Kimber, anotherWest Indian captain, was thus described by Sir JamesStorehouse, to whom Mr. Wilberforce had applied for*> Letter to W. Wallace Currie Esq. Jan. 21, 1829.1792. CAPTAIN Timber's TRIAL. 357the particulars of his character. " He is a very badman,a great spendthrift; one who would swear toany falsehood, and who is linked with a set of rascalslike himself." This man had been charged by Mr.Wilberforce, in the debate of April, 1792, with greatcruelty in his conduct of the trade. Several trials inthe courts of law followed ; in one of which the Captainwas himself capitally indicted for the murder of anegro girl. Of this charge he was not found guilty ;escaping, in the judgment of Mr. Wilberforce, " throughthe shameful remissness of the Crown lawyers, andthe indecent behaviour of a high personage whofrom the bench identified himself with the prisoner'scause." These reasons were aided by the apparentcontradictions of a principal witness, in hisevidence upon a collateral point, for which he wastried and convicted in the penalties of perjury ; asentence afterwards commuted by the Crown.You will have collected" (writes Mr. Wilberforceto Lord Lancaster 31 ) " from the newspapers, thatwhatever may have been the demerits of the witnessesfor the prosecution, Kimber is in no degree acquittedin foro conscience, of the cruelties with which he ischarged. The witnesses have been scandalously used,and after their fate he will be a bold man whoshall venture to step forth to bring an Africancaptain to justice." " I have read Kimber's trial,"replies Lord Lancaster, " and though publishedpartially by his friends, I am astonished at theirJune 14, 1792.358 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1792.triumph to me there appears conscious guilt throughout."As soon as he was discharged from prison he appliedto Mr. Wilberforce for what he termed remunerationfor his wrongs. "July llth. Morning receivedKimber's letter. Friday, by Pitt's advice,wrote answer to Kimber." The satisfaction he demandedwas "A public apology, 5000 in money,and such a place under government as would make mecomfortable." Upon receiving a brief refusal of his propositions,Kimber had recourse to violence. "Kimberlying in wait for me first civil, then abusive." 32Kimber called between seven and eight, and againabout ten." " ' Very savage looking,' Amos said,{ he went away muttering and shaking his head.' " 33The interference of Lord Sheffield (an honourable opponent)at last terminated this annoyance, but not beforeone of his friends (the late Lord Rokeby) had thoughtit needful to become his armed companion in a journeyinto Yorkshire, to defend him from anticipated violence." I know," wrote Mr. Wilberforce at thistime to Lord Lancaster in Cumberland, " how littlethe proverb, ' Out of sight out of mind,' holds goodin the case of any of your friendships, and therefore Iwas not surprised at the warmth with which you expressedyourself on the subject of Kimber. Howcame you to hear any thing of the matter ? Was itfrom me ? I am sure I intended not to mention itlest I should awaken your kind solicitude, which atas Diary. M Ib.1792. DANGER FROM Timber. 359three hundred miles from its object is not the mostcomfortable companion. Perhaps at some unguardedmoment the matter slipped from my pen. I don'tyet know whether he has any further measures instore : meanwhile be assured I will do all for my ownsecurity, which you would think proper if you weremy adviser. I can't say I apprehend much, and Ireally believe, that if he were to commit any act ofviolence it would be beneficial rather than injuriousto the cause."Being still detained in the neighbourhood of Londonby Sierra Leone business, he applied himself at onceto his intended course of study. " Taken in," hesays, 34 " to dine at W. Smith's, with avast companyDr. Akin, Gillies, Mr. and Mrs. Barbauld, HelenMaria Williams, Mackintosh, Mr. Pelham, Mr. SabaMr. and Mrs. Osgood. I was not sufficientlyguarded in talking about religion after dinner.Mackintosh talked away he spoke most highly ofPitt's Slave Trade speech. Came home as if huntedto Thornton's quiet family party, and much struckwith the difference. I threw out some things whichmay perhaps be of use. 25th. Had a long conversationwith Pearson, on the proper measure of a Christian'sliving in society, whether religious or worldly.He was very strong for solitude, and speaks of thebenefit he personally has received from it. I talkedwith him very openly, and was much struck with whathe said. Sunday, 29th. I have to-day been forM July 24.SCO LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1792.several hours engaged in religious reading, but toolanguidly. I have had this week some very serioustalk with Mr. Pearson. He strongly pressed solitude,from reason, Scripture, and his own personal experience.I believe he is right, and mean to seek more quietand solitude than I have done ; to consider thepoint, and draw up my thoughts upon it. 30th.Read Howe ' On Delighting in God,' and muchaffected by it. Heard from Osborne that there wouldbe no county meeting, and therefore set free ; andon thinking the matter over, resolved for Bath.Wrote to Mr. Cecil to ask him to be my companion.Amongst my reasons for Bath one, though not theleading one, is the desire of solitude; may Godrender it useful to me."Next day he set off for Bath, and " on the road itoccurring to me 35 that it might be useful for me to beearly in seeing Sir W. Young, who is just come fromthe West Indies, and that he was not a quarter of amile out of the road, I drove to his house, Hunter-combe,and staid all night. The visit did notturn out to answer any good purpose. Boswell there,a great enemy of the Abolition said that he was atKimber's trial, and gloried in it. Sir William read aletter from G. to his father some wit, but affected,and full of levity and evil; written in 1773, when hewas near sixty, alas ! Bozzy talked of Johnson, &c. Satup too late. Sir William very friendly talked ofSlave Trade, and mentioned having found a greatDiary.1792. BOSWELL. 361number of children without relations on board severalships he visited, who from inquiry appeared to havebeen kidnapped. Wednesday. Had some serious talkwith Bozzy, who admitted the depravity of humannature. Last night he expressed his disbelief of eternalpunishment. He asked Sir W. to take his boyhome, and walked off into the West of Englandwith the 'Spirit of Athens' under his arm, andtwo shirts and a night-cap in his pocket, sansservant, I drove with Sir W. Young in his phaetonto Maidenhead, and then got into my carriage.Sir W. speaks highly of the Moravian, and theiroperations. He himself preached to his slaves onthe Ten Commandments, &c. His adherence tohis own principles is highly honourable to him. Howlittle is my heart or conduct answerable to my greaterknowledge ! Travelled on reading and writing inthe carriage, but not fixedly. 4th August. Beganthe waters. Saw Forster much altered, and feltrather ashamed to speak to him in a public room ; butshook hands with him. 5th, Sunday. Abbey church,morning P. preached a Calvinistic sermon which inamethodist ' would have been called antinomian :but character, and want of pressing home, secured him.S.'s sermon in the afternoon rather too much split intodivisions ; not unity enough preserved, which obstructsthe roll and prevents effect, I do not find mysolitude irksome, though a rational friend, particularlyif a fellow-student and a truly serious companion,would certainly be an acquisition.VOL. I. R362 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1792.My dear Lancaster," he writes ** in answer to afriendly remonstrance upon the postponement of along-promised visit, ff notwithstanding your admonitionbehold me entering upon a course of Bathwaters, prudently however and moderately likeLancaster the citizen ; not rashly and violently likeBennington the soldier. My dear fellow, I the morereadily yield myself to the impulse of duty whichbrings me hither, because it is altogether contrary tomy inclination, and I am therefore sure I am notunder any unfair bias. It would be a high gratificationto me to be cooling my feet upon the mossy browof Lancaster Park, instead of burning and parchingthem on the rest-refusing pavement of Bath. But donot think I am dissatisfied, and not rather grateful toGod for His overflowing mercies to me of every kind;indeed I know no man who has so many. I have oftenthought, that the loss of nine teen-twentieths of myfortune would scarcely be a loss to me, since I have somany friends whose attachment I know so well that Ishould not fear to visit them though reduced to poverty ;and you know human nature well enough to acknowledgethat this implies confidence. I assure you thatin such a case I should not be slow to direct my stepsto Lancaster. You will, I know, be shocked to hearthat poor Philips has been suddenly carried out ofthis world. O my dear friend, may events like thisimpress on us the survivors by how frail a tenure wehold our present life, and excite us to strive for that36 June G.1792. TO LORD Lancaster. 363state wherein we may be always ready to attend theawful call. In a moment like that, how contemptiblewill appear all those objects of pleasure or ambitionwhich have at times engaged our warmest affections !Give an account of thy stewardship, for thou mayestbe no longer steward.' What emphatic words !I am always affectionately yours,W. Wilberforce."He was soon joined by such a companion as he haddesired, in the person of Mr. Grant, who with hiswife and eldest daughter arrived at Bath upon the10th of August. " Since the Grants are with me,"he says, " I study less. I have been reading SirB. Booth's pamphlets, Mackintosh's, G. Rose's ;Goldsmith's Animated Nature, Loath's Isaiah,Owen, Thomson's Seasons, and Horace by heart.16th. Forster and D. dined with us. The conversationturned on interesting topics education of children,behaviour towards irreligious people, &c. Ithought them not sensible enough of the value of time.Forster extremely humble. D. showed too much levityin speaking of serious things. Talked with strangeapparent ease and cheerfulness of his father's dying arank Socinian, almost an atheist ; and of his twobrothers being now unbelievers. 17th. This is theday on which Pitt, Dundas, P. Arden, and Steele areat Camels. 37 I am disposed to wish myself with them.I find that even here in religious society I can have37 Mr. Robert Smith's.R 2364 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1792.an earthly mind ; yet to depart (when not necessaryto be with them) from those who fear not God, and toassociate with those who do, is one part of waiting onGod to which the promise is made. * Awake, thou thatsteepest, and arise from the dead, and Christ shallgive thee light.' "Though he at this time diminished in somemeasure his intercourse with those of whom hecould not hope that they were living with a constantreference to unseen things, yet he did not retirerudely from their friendship. Not that his intimacieshad ever been among the enemies of religion ; he hadnever been so blind as to expect a national reformationfrom men of abandoned character ; and neither Mr.Pitt nor his other friends had ever been tainted withunbelief, or allied to that infidel party which has at alltimes found its rallying point in opposition to God andHis church. Hence his constant care to employ hisprivate influence for the advancement of religion wasnot impeded by their opposition of principles : themaxims for which he contended might not be dulyappreciated, but they formed part of their admittedcreed. Thus, upon the llth of August, he hearsfrom Mr. Dundas :My dear Wilberforce,I received your letter, and have given directionsfor the appointment of the clergyman * you recommend.Perhaps, as you say, I do not think to the39 As additional chaplain at Botany Bay.1792. PITT WARDEN OF THE CINQUE PORTS. 365same extent as you do upon subjects of this nature,but I do not yield to any one in my opinion of thenecessity of religious education, and continued instructionsunder regular institutions, if we hope to preserveany tie upon the actions of men in civil society. Ishould doubt, however, whether the settlers were sonumerous as to require more than one clergyman ateach place, but if you convince me that I am mistakenI am willing to retract, and do not regard anyexpense that may arise from it. As to the schoolmastersthe case is more pressing, and I have no difficultyin trusting to your discretion, and the purity ofyour intentions, in providing and recommendingproper persons to me. It will give you pleasure tohear that the King, in the most handsome and gentlemanlikemanner, has compelled Mr. Pitt to accept theappointment of Warden of the Cinque Ports, vacantby the death of poor Lord Guildford. I wish youmuch success from the waters of Bath and remain,my dear Wilberforce,Yours very sincerely,HENRY DUNDAS.To W. Wilberforce, Esq."Mr. Pitt had not left him to gather this appointmentfrom a third person ; but with a readiness whichshowed something of Caesar's anxiety for the applauseof Cato, had written to him upon the very day theoffer reached him.R 3366 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1792.Burton, Pynsent, Aug. 8, 1792.My dear Wilberforce,I should like of all things to accept your invitation,but I must be at Windsor on Sunday, and Iwant to stay here till the last minute for the chanceof seeing Eliot and my little niece, who may perhapsarrive from Cornwall before I set out. Since I receivedyour letter, a circumstance has happened, which Ibelieve upon the whole you will not be sorry to learn.Immediately upon Lord Guildford's death the Kinghas written to me in the most gracious terms, to saythat he cannot let the Wardenship of the CinquePorts go to any one except myself. Under all thepresent circumstances, and in the manner in whichthe offer came, I have no hesitation in accepting it ;and I believe you will think I have done right.Yours ever,W. PITT."I told him," says Mr. Wilberforce to anotherfriend, " that I agreed with him in thinking that uponthe whole he had acted right."Sunday, 19th. To Bathwick, where an old venerablepastor has had the living since 1745. Mr.Forster dined with us. An Israelite indeed he saidthat he never felt that longing to depart, unmixed withfear, which Mr. Barham's Memoirs, we were reading,ascribed to him, and asked Grant and me if we did.God help me.1792. COWSLIP GREEN. 367"20th. Had some useful meditation. F. dinedwith us. Poor fellow, sensible, generous, unaffected,temperate, but I fear without God.23rd. Forster dined with us. He more and moregains on me mentioned that his first impression wasfrom seeing a poor manufacturer praying with hischildren. They turned out ill, whilst Forster wasbrought by it to God. How wonderful are His ways ;and how unsearchable His counsels !24th. Spent this day chiefly in religious exercises,and had much serious thought, but found my heartoften earthly, and wasting time in what was rathergeneral staring than distinct self-examination. I havebeen looking over the principal events of my past life ;and what cause do I find for contrition, and for admiringthe long-suffering of God, that he did not cut meoff whilst in the full career of thoughtlessness ; orsince, when enjoying every advantage, I have put themto so little purpose ! I am now entering my thirty-fourthyear ; above the half of my life is spent. Ohspare me yet, Thou God of mercy, and render me yetan ornament to my Christian profession ; yet in thismake me altogether resigned to Thy will, give me onlythe love of Thee, and a victory over my corruptions.25th. To Cowslip Green, calling upon Sir JamesStorehouse. Found Miss H. More very poorly, yet allactivity."26th, Sunday. Accompanied the Miss Mores toShipham, Brunswick, Abridge, and Chedder. Godseems indeed to prosper their work ; both amongst368 LIFE OF Wilberforce. 1792.young and old are those who are turning to Him. Neara thousand children in all. One mere child hadbrought all his father's household to family prayers.On the 27th, returned to Bath.Tuesday, Sept. 4th. Set off early for London ; andon the 5th went on to Camels, thinking it was rightSmith, Pitt, and Dundas expecting me ; found alsoPepper and Lady Arden." Upon the 15th, " at Mr.Grant's persuasion," he " returned to Clapham forthe purpose of seeing Shore, 39 (who is just fixed on forgovernor-general,) and instituting a connexion withhim for the sake of Indian objects." " 19th. Dinedwith Pitt, where Dundas and Shore."The convention" had bestowed upon Mr. Wilberforcein the course of this summer the doubtfulhonour of French citizenship. " I was provoked lately,"writes Mr. Mason, 40 " to see your name registeredamong the list of citizens by the French savages.And for what ? Merely for taking up the cause ofhumanity previous to their taking up the love of freedom; the love of which, even during their first andbest exertions, was not strong enough to induce themto follow your humane steps." " I am considering,"he himself writes to Mr. Babington, " how to preventthe ill effect which this vote might have upon ourAbolition cause' Such an opportunity was affordedhim by a public meeting held in London at this timeto raise subscriptions for the emigrant clergy.Friday, 20th. To town to the French clergy public39 Sir John Shore, afterwards Lord Teigmnouth. < Sept. 11.1792. Walter CASTLE. 369meeting, and consented to be on the committee atBurke's request, partly to do away French citizenship.26th. Shore and Mrs. S. to dine and sleep hevery pleasing. Evening dragged, because we did notseparate ; this the source and obligation for cards."This acquaintance with Sir J. Shore, which he soughtat first with a view to future exertions for the good ofIndia, grew into an intimate friendship, which outlivedthe interruptions of middle life, and lasted intothe peaceful evening of their days.Oct. 1st. To town ; breakfasted with Shore, andmuch pleased with him dined to meet him at Grenville's.French clergy's committee in the morning,where Burke flew off on the French Revolution.2nd. Off for Walter Castle at Canterbury foundit too late to go on, so halted. 3rd. On to Walter.Pitt received me very kindly, and with great warmthof affection. 4th. At night alone with Pitt, but talkedpolitics only did not find myself equal to better talk.I came here hoping that I might really find an opportunityof talking seriously with Pitt. What am I, todoso with any one ? O Christ, help me. 5th. Morninghad some serious talk with Pitt interrupted or shouldhave had more. Walked with him. I see muchreason to admire his integrity, public spirit, and magnanimityin despising unpopularity. Told me hisfinance plans. An incident showed the nature of theKing's mind, (Charterhouse Governorship,) and Dundas'sgenerous and high spirit. Eliot arrived at alate dinner. Affection glistened in his countenance,370 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1792.when he came in to Pitt. I stole off to hed at 11, andgot off early on Saturday morning, thinking no furtherobject of sufficient magnitude would be attained bymy staying, to balance a quiet instead of an unsabbati-cal Sunday, feeling for my servants," &c.At Theobald's, (the house of his cousin Mrs. LucySmith,) where he joined his mother and his sistershortly afterwards, he received upon the 13th ofOctober " a letter from Sir C. Middleton, containingthe account of the sudden death of Lady Middleton,and of Edwards' child." " I resolved to go to them,hoping that I might comfort them, and perhaps be ofuse to Edwards. Drove to Teston. Oh how unavailingis all but the grace of God to change the heart !Here I am earthly-minded O change my heart, Thouwho alone canst effect this mighty transformation.15th. Spent most of the day in talking with Sir C.Middleton. Much affected at night, and prayedearnestly. Struck solemnly with the thought of poorLady M.'s dead body in the house. 16th. Morningspent in talking; prayed with some earnestness I hope.The Bishop of London and Mrs. Porteus called, andhad some talk. But how much easier is it to talk ofthese things than to be religious. 17th. The funeralthis evening. Sir Charles greatly supported, and Mrs.Edwards still more signally; her ready and powerfulhelp from prayer : prayed to God if it were Hiswill for strength to bear the funeral of her child, andshe supported it without a wet eye. Sir Charles saidin walking from church that he was really very .ADVANCE OF HIS CHARACTER. 371portable, and that though he felt much in slowly pacingafter the coffin, yet on entering the church he found aholy contentment and composure which was scarceever disturbed. He went to the grave. I had muchtalk with Mrs. Bouverie this and the next day. 18th.I had resolved to stay over this day lest they shouldbe at once too solitary. Sir Charles has risen verymuch in my esteem. Mrs. Bouverie very humble, andthough tried with speculative doubts, firmly resolvedto do her duty ; she talked to me to-day very openly.May God bless them all, and reward and advancethem."From Teston he returned to Theobald's, and in thecourse of the succeeding week went on to YoxallLodge, where, with the exception of a short visit toRothley Temple, he remained until he was called toLondon by the business of the session. Here he resumedthe diligent employments of the precedingsummer, giving however more time than formerly tostudies of a directly religious character. " I havebeen employing," he says, " most of this morning 41in reading St. Paul's Epistles to the Romans andthe Galatians." It was by this careful study, whichno press of business ever interrupted, and whichcontinued daily through his life, that he obtainedan acquaintance with holy Scripture unusual evenin professed theologians. A marked advance inhis character during the course of this year may betraced in the altered tone of his most private entries.> Nov. 22.LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1792.Still indeed they abounded in that deep humiliationwith which they who have looked closely into the perfectlaw of liberty must ever contemplate their ownfulfilment of its demands ; yet they bear already moreof that calm and peaceful character which cast sowarm a light upon his later days. " Though utterlyunworthy," he says, " I thank God for having enabledme to pray with earnestness. Oh that this may notbe as the morning cloud and as the early dew ! By Hisgrace I will persevere with more earnestness than ever,labouring to work out my own salvation in an entireand habitual dependance upon Him." " If you havetruly learned to feel the insufficiency of your ownpowers," says the Dean of Carlisle, to whom he hadpoured forth his earnest desires after a more rapidgrowth in holiness, " you have made more progress thanyou think of; and if you can support that feeling and actupon it for any time together, your advance is very considerable."He judged himself indeed to be " in amore pleasing state." " I have been praying," hesays, " earnestly to God for His Spirit through Christto renew my corrupt nature and make me spiritually-minded; what folly is all else ! Let me take courage,relying on the sure promises of God in Christ and thepowerful operations of the Spirit of grace. Though Iam weak He is strong. I must more cherish thisheavenly inhabitant."This tranquil state of feeling was henceforth fosteredby a system of greater domestic intercourse with thefriends whose principles he valued, and by mingling1792. BATTERSEA RISE. 373consequently less frequently than of old in the turbulentcurrents of life. Some such alteration in his planwas rendered necessary by the loss of the opportunityof retirement which had been afforded him, since heceased to own a house at Wimbledon, by the enlightenedhospitality of his relative John Thornton.Young men and old have different habits," said hiskinsman when he offered him a room in his house andthe command of his spacious garden, "and I shallleave you therefore to keep your own hours, and takecare that you are not interrupted."Of this offer he availed himself until the death ofMr. Thornton in 1790, and in the course of 1792 heagreed to share a house on Clapham Common with Mr.Henry Thornton, the youngest son of his deceasedrelative. " Henry Thornton," he says, 42 " has boughtLubbock's house at Battersea Rise, and I am to shareit with him, and pay so much per annum towards expenses.Last night I went over the house and groundswith Grant and Henry Thornton. How thankful Ishould be, to whom it is the only question, which ofmany things all comfortable I shall choose ! " Whilsthis general influence was silently extending, there grewup around him here a chosen circle of peculiar friends.Amongst these must especially be noticed the Hon. E.J. Eliot, Mr. Grant, and Mr. Henry Thornton. Mr.Eliot, 43 his early friend and fellow-traveller, was nowsettled, for the sake of his society, in the immediateDiary, May 16.43 For an interesting tribute to Mr. Eliot's memory, see Reports of theSociety for Bettering the Condition of the Poor.VOL. I. S374 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1792.neighbourhood of Battersea Rise. The loss of a wifeto whom he was ardently attached, (the favourite sisterof Mr. Pitt,) had given a tone of earnest piety to thewhole character of Mr. Eliot, and taught him to cooperatein every useful scheme suggested by his friend ;whilst at the same time there had been inflicted onhis spirit a wound from which he never rallied. Hisdeath, in 1797, was attributed by those who knew hisinmost feelings, to the lingering sorrow of a brokenheart. Of Mr. Grant and Mr. Henry Thornton it isneedless here to speak. " Few men," says the latter,referring to this period, "have been blest with worthieror better friends than have fallen to my lot. Mr.Wilberforce stands at the head of these, for he was thefriend of my youth. I owed much to him in everysense soon after I came out in life : for his enlargedmind, his affectionate and condescending manners,and his very superior piety, were exactly calculated tosupply what was wanting to my improvement and myestablishment in a right course. It is chiefly throughhim that I have been introduced to a variety of othermost valuable associates." "When I entered life, I sawa great deal of dishonourable conduct among peoplewho made great profession of religion. In my father'shouse I met with persons of this sort. This so disgustedme that, had it not been for the admirable patternof consistency and disinterestedness which I sawin Mr. Wilberforce, I should have been in danger of asort of infidelity." 4444 Private and conversational memoranda of Mr. Henry Thornton.1792. POSITION AND CHARACTER. 375Such was at this time his position ; high in publicestimation, and rich in private friends ; engaged in theconduct of a most important cause ; with his mindnow disciplined by culture, and enriched by study ;whilst the unseen life of his spirit, escaping from itsearly struggles, was strengthening into tranquil vigour,as religion took a firmer hold upon his character, andleavened more thoroughly the whole man. By thisearly self-discipline he had purchased the calm andpeaceful obedience of the remainder of his course. Hewas now about to be tried in his political life with farmore searching difficulties than any which he had yetencountered. Like that holy man of old to whom asevere observer has beautifully compared him, he wasprepared by humility and self-denial for the arduoustrials of a public life ; and like him he supported themwith uncorrupted faith. " From a careful scrutiny,"says Mr. Matthias, 45 " into the public and private lifeof Mr. Wilberforce, I am inclined to think that hisenemies would be forced into an acknowledgmentthat they can find no occasion against this man, exceptthey find it against him concerning the law ofhis God."45 Pursuits of Literatures2APPENDIX.APPENDIX.Memoranda dictated by Mr. Wilberforce.More private.IT would indicate a strange insensibility to the ways of agracious Providence, if I were to suffer the circumstance of myhaving Dr. Milner for my fellow-traveller to pass without observation.Wishing for an intelligent and agreeable companion,I requested my friend, Dr. Burgh of York, to accompanyme, a man of whom it is difficult for me to speak withmoderation, full as my memory must ever be of marks of akindness that could scarcely be exceeded, and of a dispositionalways to forget himself, and to be ready to conform to hisfriend's wishes. A fund of knowledge of various kinds, greatcheerfulness of temper, and liveliness of fancy, rendered hima delightful companion. But he had qualities also of a higherorder an entire conviction of the truth of revelation ; a considerableacquaintance with ecclesiastical history ; just principlesof religion ; and as affectionate a heart as ever warmeda human bosom ; with a continual promptitude to engage inevery office of benevolence : but the habit of associating with380 APPENDIX.companions, and living for the most part in society which,whatever might be the opinion assented to by the understanding,exhibited no traces of spirituality in its ordinary conversation,had induced a habit of abstaining from all religioustopics in his common intercourse, and even an appearance oflevity which would have prevented his being known, except bythose who were extremely intimate with him, or rather bythose who being themselves also religious were likely to drawforth his secret thoughts and feelings, to have any more reflectionthan that average measure for which we are to givepeople credit, whose only visible attention to religion consistsin their going to church on a Sunday. A graciousProvidence prepared him, I doubt not, by a long illness forthat change which he was to experience much sooner thancould have been anticipated from the uncommon strength ofhis constitution, and the temperance of his habits; but hadhe been my fellow-traveller I should never have benefited byhim in the most important of all concerns ; indeed I am persuadedthat we neither of us should ever have touched on thesubject of religion except in the most superficial and cursoryway.To my surprise Dr. Burgh declined accepting my proposal,and I next invited Dr. Milner to accompany me, chieflyprompted by his acknowledged talents and acquirements,and by my experience of his cheerfulness, good nature, andpowers of social entertainment. It was the more importantto me to secure such a fellow-traveller, because we were tohave a tete-astute in my carriage; the ladies of my partytravelling with their maids in a coach. It is somewhatcurious that, as I* learned accidentally long afterwards, mygrandfather had declared that in after-life I should go abroadwith Isaac Milner as my tutor. I am bound to confess that Iwas not influenced to select Dr. Milner by any idea of hishaving religion more at heart than the bulk of our Cambridgesociety ; and in fact, though his religious opinions were thesame as his brother's, yet they were then far from having thatinfluence over his heart and manners which they subsequentlypossessed ; though it is due to him to declare that his conductwas always what is called correct and free from every taint ofRELIGIOUS CHANGE. 381vice, and he had a warmth of benevolence which rendered himalways ready to every good work. I must go further ; had Iknown at first what his opinions were, it would have decidedme against making him the offer : so true is it that a gracioushand leads us in ways that we know not, and blesses us notonly without, but even against, our own plans and inclinations.The recollections which I had of what I had heard and seenwhen I lived under my uncle's roof, had left in my mind a prejudiceagainst their kind of religion as enthusiastic and carryingmatters to excess ; and it was with no small surprise I foundon conversing with my friend on the subject of religion, thathis principles and views were the same with those of the clergymenwho were called Egotistical : this led to renewed discussions,and Milner (never backward in avowing his opinions,or entering into religious conversation) justified his principlesby referring to the word of God. This led to our reading theScriptures together, and by degrees I imbibed his sentiments ;though I must confess with shame, that they long remainedmerely as opinions assented to by my understanding, but notinfluencing my heart. At length, however, I began to be impressedwith a sense of the weighty truths, which were moreor less the continual subjects of our conversation. I began tothink what folly it was, nay, what madness, to continue monthafter month, nay, day after day, in a state in which a suddencall out of the world, which I was conscious might happenat any moment, would consign me to never-ending misery, whileat the very same time I was firmly convinced from assenting tothe great truths taught us in the New Testament, that the offersof the gospel were universal and free, in short that happiness,eternal happiness, was at my option.As soon as I reflected seriously upon these subjects, thedeep guilt and black ingratitude of my past life forced itselfupon me in the strongest colours. I condemned myself forhaving wasted my precious time, and opportunities, and talents ;and for several months I continued to feel the deepest convictionsof my own sinfulness, rendered only the more intense bythe unspeakable mercies of our God and Saviour declared tousin the offers and promises of the gospel. These howevers 3382 APPENDIX.by degrees produced in me something of a settled peace ofconscience. I devoted myself for whatever might be the termof my future life, to the service of my God and Saviour, and,with many infirmities and deficiencies, through His help I continueuntil this day.Conscious of my having sadly wasted my time and neglectedmy opportunities of improvement, I began to consider how Imight best redeem whatever of life might remain to me. Parliamentarybusiness both of a public and private nature (forwherever any landed, commercial, or manufacturing interestwas in question, the county of York was interested) found mefull employment for my time during the sitting of the House.I therefore considered how to employ my recess to the mostadvantage. Accordingly so soon as parliament was prorogued,I commonly settled myself, except for occasional residencesat Buxton or Bath when my health required it, in the houseof some intimate friend, chiefly at Mr. Gisborne's and Mr.Babington's, who kindly also received my mother and sister,where I was allowed the entire command of my own time, andwas very little incommoded by country hospitalities. I breakfastedin my own room, dined with the family, and resumedmy studies in the evening, joining the family party when I tookmy little supper half an hour or an hour before bed-time.This may be a proper time for mentioning the uncommonkindness and liberality which I experienced from my constituents.In former times the county members displayed theirequipages annually at the races, and constituted a part of thegrand jury at the summer assizes ; the latter indeed I shouldhave been glad to attend but for the unseemly festivities whichcommonly take place at that period; I was not howeverwanted ; the number of gentlemen of large fortune in the countywas far more than sufficient to constitute a most respectablegrand jury both at the spring and summer assizes. I could notconsistently with my principles frequent the theatre and ballroom,and I knew that I should give offence by staying awaywere I actually at York ; but no discontent was ever expressedat my not presenting myself to the county on these occasions.My friends appeared tacitly to admit my claim to the com-representationOF YORKSHIRE. 383and of my own time during the recess, satisfied with my attendingto their and the public interest during the session ofparliament. In fact no man I believe was ever more punctualin his attendance on the House of Commons than myself. Iwas always in my place on the first day of the session, and Ido not remember having been ever absent on the last, exceptingonce when I was drawn into the country a day or twobefore the prorogation by the illness of some of my family ;occasionally also I was present at the county meetings, andwhen there I always took an active part in their proceedings.That gracious Providence which all my life long has directedmy course with mercy and goodness, and which in so many instancesknown only to myself has called forth my wonder andgratitude, was signally manifested in the first formation of myparliamentary connexion with the county of York, and in itsintermitted and long continuance. Had the change in myreligious principles taken place a year sooner, humanly speakingI never could have become member for Yorkshire. The meansI took, and the exertions I made, in pursuing that object, weresuch as I could not have used after my religious change ; Ishould not have thought it right to carve for myself so freely,if I may use the phrase, (to shape my course for myself so confidently,)nor should I have adopted the methods by which Iingratiated myself in the good-will of some of my chief supporters; neither after my having adopted the principles I nowhold, could I have conformed to the practices by which aloneany man would be elected for any of the places in which I hadany natural influence or connexionMy having been member for Hull gave me the opportunityof making myself known as a public man ; it led to my formationof political connexions, and to my cultivation of the art ofpublic speaking all of which were among the means that preparedthe way for my representing the county.All circumstances considered . . my mercantile origin, mywant of connexion or acquaintance with any of the nobility orgentry of Yorkshire . . my being elected for that great countyappears to me upon the retrospect to have been so utterly APPENDIX.probable that I cannot but wonder and in truth I ascribe it toa providential intimation that the idea of my obtaining thathigh honour suggested itself to my imagination and in factfixed itself within my mind. I mentioned it as a possible eventto one or two private friends, but not to Mr. Pitt or any of mypolitical connexions ; yet entertaining this idea I carefully preparedmyself for the public debate that was soon to follow inthe face of the whole county, and both at the public meetingand in the subsequent discussions which took place in themiscellaneous body of Mr. Pitt's supporters, it was this ideawhich regulated the line as well as animated the spirit of myexertions.KING'S ILLNESS. 385King's illness, 1788.SELDOM has there been more political intrigue, even in thecourt of a pure monarchy, than prevailed in the ministerialcircle in this country during the King's illness : and it is dueto truth, and to the cause of political and moral integrity, todeclare that one man, who by his strong public declarations,enforced by a manner of peculiar gravity and weight, obtainedfor himself the highest credit even from well-informed menthroughout the country, was in fact utterly unworthy of thecredit he acquired. This was Lord Thurlow. He was thenLord Chancellor, and consequently at such a season was to beregarded as the head of the government. It is well knownthat the Prince of Wales, together with Mr. Fox and the oppositionof the day in both Houses, opposed in the strongestmanner the plan for conducting the King's government duringthe continuance of his Majesty's illness, which had been devisedby the King's ministers, and finally approved of by bothHouses of parliament. This therefore must be consideredthe plan of Lord Thurlow, at least as much as that of anyother member of the administration. So many of the regulationsbeing of a legal character, the Chancellor's opinionwould of course be entitled to peculiar weight and deference.Yet it is certainly true, however difficult it might be to obtaincredence from those whose estimate of Lord Thurlow wasformed from his own lofty pretensions and swaggering language,that on the very day on which the Regency Bill was tobe contested in the House of Lords, Mr. Pitt, his colleague,knew not with certainty whether Lord Thurlow would supportor oppose him.So soon as the King's illness had assumed so decided acharacter as to render it indispensable for the administration386 APPENDIX.to consider of the measures which might be required in so noveland embarrassing a conjuncture, all the ministers were summonedto Windsor where his Majesty then resided, and theCabinet Council was assembled in full force : the physicianswere examined ; and, the requisite consultation being concluded,Lord Thurlow was asked by the late Lord Camden if hewould accompany him back to town. Lord Thurlow declinedthe proposal, alleging that he had a friend at Windsor, towhom he wished to pay a visit. Some circumstance leadingLord Camden to conceive a jealousy of Lord Thurlow's proceedings,he was led to inquire who the friend was whom theChancellor was to visit, and he afterwards ascertained that itwas no other than the Prince of Wales, to whom it canscarcely be doubted, since he could then see him for no otherpurpose, that he communicated the system which governmentwas about to adopt ; thereby giving the opposition, with whichthe Prince was then openly and avowedly connected, the advantageof knowing government's plan, and meeting it withthe most effectual hostility.During the progress of the sharp political contest whichfollowed, (in the interval which elapsed previously to thepassing of the Regency Bill,) Lord Thurlow was discovered tohave been several times closetted with Mr. Sheridan, one ofthe Prince's chief advisers, once at least in the house of Mrs.Fitzherbert ; yet this was the man who affected publicly to considerthe granting to the Prince those unlimited powers whichwere contended for by the opposition as almost treason againstthe royal authority, and who exclaimed in the memorable phrasethat was afterwards engraved to his honour on rings and snuff-boxes," When I forsake my King, may my God forsake me."There can scarcely be a doubt, that Lord Thurlow's suddenfit of loyalty resulted from the unexpected improvement in theKing's health. In the instance of the King's illness, partyspirit exhibited itself in its utmost force. It was notoriousthat if the executive power of the State should be lodged withthe Prince of Wales, the Whigs, or rather those who claimedfor themselves that distinction, would immediately come intooffice. Consequently, as men are naturally led to take theKING'S ILLNESS. 387direction of their wishes, the physicians who were friendly tothe opposition confidently predicted that there was no hopeof the King's recovery. Dr. Warren especially was the chiefauthority on this side, and he and the Prince's adherents setthemselves in direct opposition to the Willis's, who with equalconfidence predicted the King's recovery. The language onthe one side was, that if a regency should once be establishedthe King would never be suffered again to resume his authority ;that of the other, that ministers were resolved at all hazardsto restore him to his power, and the Willis's were said to bethesupporters of the plot. Persuaded that his Majesty's restorationwas hopeless, opposition did not press forward theparliamentary proceedings, as otherwise they would havedone, and they gave into Mr. Loved's motion for a freshexamination by a second committee. During these dilatoryproceedings, the King became well enough to resume hisauthority. This same persuasion led to many unprincipledand even shameless desertions of the party with which theyhad formerly acted, by political speculators chiefly in the UpperHouse, who thought they could not be too early in worshippingthe rising sun, and who were grievously disappointedwhen the King recovered. During several successive yearsLord Thurlow continued to form a part of Mr. Pitt's government; but, as was remarked of him, he opposed every thingand proposed nothing. At length, when Mr. Pitt's SinkingFund Bill was on its way through the House of Lords,he not only opposed it, but condemned it in such contemptuouslanguage, that Mr. Pitt felt their union could continueno longer, either with advantage to the country, or creditto himself. He therefore wrote to the King stating thispersuasion, and requesting his Majesty to decide whetherhe would part with his Lord Chancellor, or his First Lordof the Treasury. The King without difficulty determinedthe point in Mr. Pitt's favour, who in consequence broughtMr. William Grenville into the House of Lords, to makea stand against Lord Thurlow. Mr. Grenville had beenmade Foreign Secretary of State in 1789, being then Speakerof the House of Commons, in which office he was succeeded byMr. Addington.388 APPENDIX.Vid. page 56.Yorkshire Address, in 1784.To the King's most Excellent Majesty.May it please your Majesty,We, your Majesty's most dutiful and loyal subjects thefreeholders of the county of York, alarmed at the present distractedstate of public affairs, beg leave to approach yourthrone with assurances of an unfeigned and zealous attachmentto your Majesty's person and government.Convinced that the very existence of our excellent constitutiondepends on the preservation of the due balance ofpower wisely placed in the different branches of the legislature,we declare ourselves equally solicitous to maintain the dueprerogative of the Crown, and the just privileges of the twoHouses of parliament.We cannot too strongly reprobate the late attempt to seizethe property, and violate all the chartered rights, of the EastIndia Company ; the enormous patronage of which wouldhave produced an influence equally destructive of the prerogativeof the Crown and the liberties of the people.To remove ministers who made such an attempt we deemto be a just exertion of your Majesty's prerogative, and underYORKSHIRE ADDRESS. 389the peculiar circumstances of the case, we think your Majestyacted with equal justice by retaining your present ministersuntil an appeal to your people could be made. Imperfect assuch an appeal to the constituent body must ever be under thepresent manifold defects of our national representation, we stillconceive the calling of a new parliament to be the only trueconstitutional measure which your Majesty in your royalwisdom can adopt, to settle the present differences between theseveral branches of the legislature."And after debate thereon, and the question put, whetherthe said Address should pass as the act of this meeting or not,upon the show of hands a considerable majority appeared tobe in favour of the Address proposed : But a division beingdemanded, the same immediately took place, and upon thatdivision the Sheriff could not take upon himself to determine.It was then alleged to be, and assumed as a necessary consequenceof the Sheriff's determination in the mode abovestated, that the said Address should be signed by him as theact of this meeting.Resolved unanimously, that the thanks of the meeting begiven to the High Sheriff for his impartial conduct in thebusiness of the day.Mr. Wilson then moved, and Major Pulleys seconded, themotion that the Sheriff should be requested to present the saidAddress to his Majesty, which upon the question put, passed inthe affirmative by a great majority.WILLIAM DANBT, Sheriff.March 25, 1784.390 APPENDIX.His own conduct. Without date or title.I CANNOT deny that from associating with men of the world,and hearing their principles, and calculations, and prospects,the ideas of aggrandizement would sometimes present themselvesto my mind, and court my adoption. Various gentlemenwere raised to the Upper House, whom the partiality wefeel where we ourselves are in question might excuse myconsidering as having no better pretensions than myself to suchan elevation : and besides the solid advantages of a permanentseat in the legislature, the securing of which involved thepossessor in no expense or trouble, the Upper House appearedfrom various considerations to afford a more favourablefield for bringing forward religious and moral improvements,the neglect of which, I had almost said the entire forgetfulnessof them, has long appeared to me to be the grand defect of allour modern statesmen (for the last century). How differentin this respect are they, though blessed with the light ofChristianity, from the great legislators of antiquity, in whomthe conservation or improvement of the national morals wasalways the primary object of their care ! My fortune too wasgreater than that of some of those who were raised to thepeerage; and at that time T thought it far the most probablethat I should never enter into married life. But a little reflectionbeat down at once all such worldly appetencies. Since therecould be no possible plea of a public nature, my exaltationwould appear, and truly appear, to arise solely from my ownrequest, and therefore would not merely have exhibited theshow, but the reality, of my carving for myself, (if I may soHIS OWN CONDUCT. 391express myself,) of my being the artificer of my own fortune; whereas the true Christian, deeming it to .be hisduty to pursue the course that will be most agreeable to thewill of God, endeavours to discover the path of duty from theindications of the Divine will to be collected from the passingevents and circumstances, considered in combination with hisown qualifications and dispositions : his grand inquiry continuingalways the same, how he may best promote the gloryof God, and secure his own salvation and that of those whoseinterests are consigned by Providence to his care.Independently however of all religious considerations, it appearedto me that no little injury had been done to the creditand character of the House of Commons by the numerous peer-agesthat were granted to men who had no public claims to sucha distinction, and whose circumstances clearly manifested thatborough or parliamentary interest was the basis of their elevation:hence the inference formerly to be drawn from thesupport of Commoners of large landed property, that theministers who enjoyed it enjoyed also the esteem and confidenceof the public, was no longer to be drawn ; nor were suchmen entitled to more credit for the independence and purity oftheir political support than the representatives of the mostordinary boroughs. Various were the instances of countrygentlemen of family and fortune, who appeared for a timeto be honouring government by their support, sometimes inopposition to their family habits or political connexions, whenat length out came the Gazette, proclaiming the explanation oftheir conduct, or at least bringing it into doubt with those whowere disposed to suspect the purity of politicians. An exampletherefore appeared to me to be required of a contrary kind, norcould it be exhibited more properly than in the instance ofone who having been some time member for the greatest countyin England, and being also the personal intimate of the PrimeMinister, might be supposed likely to have been able, if he hadmade the endeavour, to succeed in obtaining the object ofhis wishes. Nor could the world, always sufficiently acute indiscerning the faults and infirmities of those who profess tohave more respect than ordinary for religion, have failed tonotice the inconsistency of eagerness for worldly aggrandizedAPPENDIX.ment in one, whose principles ought to have moderated hisdesire of earthly distinctions, and to have rendered him evenjealous of an advancement which would be likely to augmenthis temptations, and thereby increase the danger of his makingshipwreck of his faith.If such were my conclusions in the circumstances in whichI was then placed, how much have they been strengthenedsince I have been blessed with a family ! No one who formshis opinions from the word of God can doubt, that in proportionto a man's rank and fortune the difficulty of his progressin the narrow road and his ultimate admission into heaven isaugmented ; and no Christian can possibly doubt its being aparent's first duty to promote his children's spiritual advancementand everlasting happiness ; but were their comfort in thislife only, the object in view, no one at my time of life who hascontemplated life with an observant eye, and who has lookedinto the interior of family life, can entertain a doubt that theprobability of passing through the world with comfort, and offorming such connexions as may be most likely to insure theenjoyment of domestic and social happiness, is far greaterin the instance of persons of the rank of private gentlemen,than of that of noblemen who are naturally led to associatewith people of their own rank the sons being led to makefortune their primary object in the forming of matrimonialconnexions that they may be able to maintain their stationsin society. As for the daughters, private gentlemen of moderatefortunes, and clergymen, and even still more mercantilemen, have few opportunities of cultivating an intimacy withthem, and are afraid of venturing upon a connexion for lifewith partners whose opinions and habits have been formed ona scale disproportionate to the resources of people of moderatefortunes.PROCLAMATION SOCIETY. 393Vid. page 133.Prospectus of (he Society for Enticing the King's Proclamation.WE, the undersigned, truly sensible of His Majesty's tenderand watchful concern for the happiness of his people, manifestedin his late royal Proclamation, and being convinced ofthe necessity, in the present juncture, of our attending to HisMajesty's galleon all his faithful subjects to check the rapidprogress of impiety and licentiousness, to promote a spirit ofdecency and good order, and enforce a stricter execution of thelaws against vice and immorality, do agree to form ourselvesinto a Society, for the purpose of carrying His Majesty'sgracious recommendation into effect.2. With this view we will be ourselves, and will countenanceand encourage others in being, vigilant in the effectual prosecutionand punishment of such criminal and disorderlypractices as are within reach of the law.3. We will endeavour to afford the Magistracy such assistancein the discharge of their duty as the nature of thecase may require.394 APPENDIX.DUKE OF MONTAGU, PRESIDENT.Duke of Buccleugh Archbishop of CanterburyMarlborough YorkNorthumberland Bishop of HerefordGrafton ChichesterChances St. AsaphMarquis of Buckingham * SalisburyLord Aylesbury PeterboroughHopetoun ElyDartmouth RochesterGuilford ChesterNorth OxfordRadnor LincolnEffingham BangorBridewell LichfieldHarcourt GloucesterLancaster NorwichLlandafFSt. David'sBristolSir Lloyd Kenyon * Mr. Morton PittWilliam Dolben * Samuel ThorntonHenry Houghton * WilberforceJames Long * Edwards FreemanCharles Middleton Richard MilnesMr. Mainspring * Rev. Dr. GlasseBrook WatsonNote. The names to which asterisks are annexed are those of membersof the Committee.THE KING TO MR. DUNDAS. 395Fid. page 365.Letter from Right Hon. William Pitt, to WilliamWilberforce Esq.THIS letter is printed from a copy retained by Mr. Wilberforce,when he gave the original, as an autograph, to theRight Hon. John Wilson Croker. It was accompanied withthe following statement, for which the writers are indebted toMr. Croker.Happening to find this letter on looking for some pressingpaper, I add to it the solemn assertion of a fact, which I perfectlyrecollect, viz. that the King, knowing Mr. Pitt's indifferenceto his pecuniary interests, at the same time that he wroteto Mr. Pitt the letter herein mentioned, wrote also to Mr.Dun cas, (afterwards Lord Melville,) requesting him to use hisinfluence with Mr. Pitt to induce him to accept this office.W. WILBERFORCE."Mr. Croker adds, " Mr. Wilberforce's recollection as to theKing's writing to Mr. Dundas, to induce Mr. Pitt to accept theoffice, was 'quite correct; for Mr. Croker possesses also theoriginal of that note, which is as follows :396 APPENDIX.THE KING TO MR. DUNDAS.'Windsor, Aug. 6, 1772.mp. 7. a. m.The enclosed is my letter to Mr. Pitt, acquainting him withmy having fixed on him for the office of Warden of theCinque Ports. Mr. Dundas is to forward it to the west, and toaccompany it with a few lines expressing that I will not admitof this favour being declined. I desire Lord Chatham mayalso write, and that Mr. Dundas will take the first opportunityof acquainting Lord Grenville with the step I have taken.*G. R.Mr. Pinckney may have his audience on Wednesday.'This is I suppose the only instance extant in which theSovereign thought it necessary to make interest with theprivate friends of a minister to induce him to accept a royalfavour."A part of this letter is printed in Toiling's Life of Pitt.END OF VOL. I.