THELIFEWILLIAM WILBERFORCEBY HIS SONS,ROBERT ISAAC Wilberforce, M. A.VICAR OF EAST Harleigh, LATE FELLOW OF ORIEL COLLEGE;ANDSAMUEL Wilberforce, M. A.RECTOR OF Brimstone.IN FIVE VOLUMES.VOL. IV.Happy is the stateIn which ye, father, here do dwell at ease,Leading a life so free and fortunateFrom all the tempests of these worldly seas.SPENCER.LONDON :JOHN MURRAY,MDCCCXXltviII.\^fAjrvc,>C * ^OR5WW6W6JOHN GUILDS AND SON, BUNGAY.THELIFE OF WILBERFORCE,CHAPTER XXVI.JANUARY 1812 TO JULY 1812.New-year's day Charitable Donation Bill Trinidad RegistrationMr. Stephen American War Christianity inIndia Endeavours to keep back Dissenters Bishop ofDurham Perceval Ministry Orders in Council Sessionalbusiness Religious Societies Archdeacon PottMr. Perceval's assassination Formation of a ministry Mr.Sheridan Orders in Council withdrawn Distress of thecountry Mr. Canning Wilberforce's domestic character.THE new year opened with his usual song of praise.Oh what mercies have I to acknowledge during thepast year ! Surely it is a solemn season,, but I go toprayer ; only let me put down my gratitude andhumiliation. I must especially try to husband timemore. O Lord, enable me to redeem it ! I must tryto keep an account of time and work, to take securityagainst trifling." 1 " I have been detained long atchurch," he tells Dr. Coulthurst, " according to a1 Diary and Journal, Jan. 1, 1812.VOL. IV. B"2 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1812.custom which I have observed for twenty-six ortwenty-seven years, of devoting the new year to Godby public worship in a sacrament on the 1st of Januarybut you shall hear from me tomorrow ; and atthis season, when it is usual for friends to interchangegood wishes, accept the assurance of my best remembrancesand kindest wishes for yourself and all thatare dear to you for time and for eternity." A fewdays later he resumes his pen " I have not been negligentthough I have been silent concerning Mr. Rose'sBill. I have written to him once or twice for his proposedmodifications. I shall receive them I dare sayin a day or two, and will transmit them for your consideration,and that of our common friends the clergyin and about Halifax.Mr. Lockhart is M. P. for Oxford, and his bill ismuch the same as that which I brought in two yearsago, to render all donations public, in the hope of preventingthereby their being alienated or abused. Youhave no reason for apprehension in that quarter."With regard to the Charitable Donation Bill," hetells Mr. Roberts shortly afterwards, " I should have along story to tell, if I were to put you in possession ofthe past and present proceedings. I brought in the Billtwo successive years, but was foiled by the lawyers.Mr. Lockhart tried it last year, but with no bettersuccess. This year he has put the draught into thehands of Sir Samuel Romilly, desiring him to modifyand correct it. I will give your suggestions to Mr.Lockhart, desiring him to communicate them to SirSamuel."1812. REGISTRATION OF SLAVES. 3West Indian matters occupied his first attention.On the 6th of January he held a consultation withStephen, Sir Samuel Romilly, and Brougham," and"settled to proceed with Registry Bill this year." 2On this essential safeguard of the Abolition Bill hehad long been intent j and after many private interviews,Mr. Perceval had consented to establish immediatelya registration at Trinidad. This was a promisingbeginning ; but just when it was to be gazetted,a " difficulty was suggested by the Attorney andSolicitor General, who wished that some colonial personsshould be consulted before the plan was adopted ;forgetting that the whole was considered as alreadysettled." 3 This fatal step was happily prevented.'' The Trinidad Registration has been in great dangerof striking on a rock when we thought ourselves inport, by being referred to Marryatt ; the design defeatedby urgent remonstrances of Stephen and myself toPerceval and Lord Liverpool." 4 But a change ofministry, of which there were many rumours current,might still have mocked their hopes, and until themeasure was in actual operation he could not ceaseto press it upon Perceval," who at length wrote himword41 Downing Street.Dear Wilberforce,I will endeavour to put the Privy Council inimmediate action upon the Trinidad Registration. I2 Diary, Jan. 6. 3 Ib. Jan. 11.Ib. Jan. 18.B 24 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1812.am sorry you continue still apprehensive of an increaseof your hoarseness.I am, dear Wilberforce, ever yours,SP. PERCEVAL."Though his continued indisposition kept him stillaway from public business . . " I wished heartily thatI had been in the House with my voice the othernight, when I read next morning the account ofReeves's speech," 66 . .he spared no exertions compatiblewith chamber practice. " I thought it right togo to attend Privy Purse Committee Perceval,Ryder, Canning, Adams. No real business ; but tosettle about the King's charity engagements." ' Hewrites at night to Mr. Stephen.Jan. 18, 1812.My dear Stephen,I went this morning to the secret committee,conceiving it would be no more than sitting by a goodfire in a private room ; but having been detained, Ihave not been able to look through my papers.I wrote to Lord Liverpool aswell as to Perceval about Trinidad. I hope you willbe able to keep your two Sir Williams 6 from anydangerous alteration, and I trust they will at least befair critics.I must break off, my dear fellow ; it is late, and Imust say good night, otherwise I should be tempted5 Diary, Jan. 18.Probably Sir William Scott and Sir William Grant.1812. AMERICAN WAR. 5to scribble on and pour forth out of the fulness of myheart. " In what a bustle do we live ! You howeverare attending to the great objects. I am grieved tothink how little ones often swallow up my days. Ohsaid Grotius, vitam perfidy strange nihil agent.Well, let us try to amend where we are wrong ; andfor our comfort under a sense of unworthiness, whilehowever we are striving to mend, we serve a kind andmerciful Master. But good night once more. I amever affectionately, and never so affectionately as whenmy mind is in its best state,Yours most sincerely,W. Wilberforce."Other subjects were crowding on to increase thisbustle. The approaching crisis with America filledhim with uneasiness. " There seems real reason tofear a war with America, yet honest Butterworth'scorrespondents say that we need not heed the warcry, as being only meant to intimidate. It may beso ; but nine times out of ten it is a game at brag,wherein each party depends upon the giving way of theother, or would not himself push on so warmly. Alas,alas ! 7 Feb. 3rd. Bankes thinks with me that thereis no chance of the Prince's changing the ministry, orconsequently of a speedy dissolution, but we both fearan American war. I am wanting my voice much, thatI may plead the cause of Christianity in India, andsoften the asperity of hostile tempers between Great7 Diary, Jan. 29.6 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1812.Britain and America." " I am so much affected,"he tells Mr. Babington, " by the probability of awar with America, that I am strongly disposed to gotothe House if Whitbread brings on his motion, 8 thatI may declare the grief and pain with which the verythought of a war with America nile my heart. Ihave often thought that we have not enough borne inmind that the people of America have a great influenceover their government, and that their thinkingthat a great number of people in this country feel forthem might tend to allay irritation, even if a warshould break out." 9 Mr. Whitbread's motion cameon upon the 12th of February, and after " thinkinga little about American question in the morning hewent down to the House for the first time this session.People kindly welcomed me I spoke for abouttwenty minutes without suffering in voice, and verywell heard. Whitbread angry at me for voting andspeaking against him, and very rough and rude. Heseemed himself to think so, for he came up next dayand talked with me some time, saying how much hehad been disappointed by my going against him. Yetall our set voted with me much misrepresented inthe Morning Chronicle next day. I went against mywife's remonstrance, to soften and prevent irritation."10To his friends in the country he thus explains themotives of his conduct.8 For the correspondence between the two governments.9 Feb. 4. 10 Diary.1812. NEGOCIATIONS WITH AMERICA. 7TO S. ROBERTS ESQ.Near London, Feb. ]5, 1812.My dear Sir,My complaint has been much more serious,and has hung on me far longer, than I expected. Ithank God, I am convalescent I hope, though notwell. But on Thursday last, the great anxiety I felt,and indeed continue to feel, on the American question,carried me to the House of Commons muchsooner than perhaps was prudent ; and really I havebeen as usual so misrepresented and traduced in thenewspaper reports of the debates, that I almost regretmy not having staid away. It is a satisfaction to mehowever to reflect, that 1 went for the purpose ofsoothing any irritation which might arise, and of preventingany mischievous discussions. I have nottime to be at all particular,, but I can assure you, hadWhitbread's motion been complied with, and the variousparticulars mentioned in the correspondence betweenthe British and American ministers come intodiscussion, the most acrimonious debates and thestrongest charges (and I must say, well-foundedcharges in some instances) against the Americangovernment, and its representative, General Armstrong,must have come forward.Again, I fear there is too much cause for apprehending,that the American government, finding itsthreatening language produce the effect of making ourparliament take the negociation into its own hands,would conceive that it need only go on threatening8 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1812.with increased warmth, to insure our conceding allit should require ; whereas, I know it would therebycall forth a spirit of a directly opposite kind in manyof our country gentlemen, as well as in government,and would consequently produce the rupture whichI so greatly deprecate. But I must say farewell;and believe me, with esteem and regard, my dear sir,Yours sincerely,W. WILBERFORCE.Samuel Roberts Esq."TO LORD Lancaster.Near London, Feb. 17, 1812.My dear Lancaster,Your inference was but too well founded. Itwas by medical prohibition that I was kept from theHouse ; and it was in defiance of conjugal entreatiesthat I made my appearance there on Thursday last.In truth, I was afraid of some acrimonious disputation,and I went to the House for the purpose ofdropping a few healing and balsamic expressionswhich might tend to prevent the rankling of thatwound, which however fatal to America if it were actuallyto break forth into a war, would be in a thousandways pernicious to this country. Neither willyou wonder when I declare, that I cannot look forwardto the idea of victory in any war between GreatBritain and America, as in a contest with our ancientenemies. You will not however be surprised, that Ithought it safer not to vote with Whitbreacl the other1812. TO LORD Lancaster. 9night ; for if the American government, after theirthreatening language, had found us for the first timegiving way, it would probably infer that it had onlyto bully us in still coarser terms to dispose us to stillfurther concessions. Thus it commonly happens thatnations get involved in war ; each of them hoping byputting on a bold face, and using terrific language,to deter the other, and intimidate him into acquiescence.When, my dear Muncaster, will you again comeamong us ? I see that you have had enough ofLondon ; and I cannot wonder that you come to itmost reluctantly when I compare your Jermyn Street,or any street quarters, with the varied comforts andinterests of your venerable castle. " You would beamused just now if you were here to witness the expedientswith which certain classes of politicians arelaying in to meet whatever face of parties they findpresented to their view. But the whole mystery mustbe cleared up in two or three days, if it be not alreadyso. I dare say you know more at 300 miles fromLondon, than I do at one. Farewell.My dear Muncaster, ever yours,W. Wilberforce."The other great cause which he " wanted voice toplead," and which eighteen years before he had pressedso earnestly on parliament, was brought on at thistime by the approaching expiration of the East IndiaCompany's charter. 11 Liverpool and Greenock had11 Its charter was to expire in May, 1814.B 310 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1812.already petitioned parliament against its renewal ; andfrom the coming contest Mr. Wilberforce hoped " toobtain some spiritual advantages for Hindostan." 12We have now approaching," he tells Mr. Roberts,three or four of the most important subjects whicheverengaged the attention of parliament. Above all,the East India Company's charter, on which I ambusily engaged in reading, thinking, consulting, andpersuading' Upon the 14th he "wrote to Gisborneabout East India religious instruction, urging his writinga short pamphlet, and making if possible a stiramongst the clergy." He was most anxious that theChurch should assume her proper station in this nobleundertaking, and was therefore " trying to keep backthe Dissenters and Methodists, until the Churchfairly come forward, from fear that if the sectariesbegin the Church will not follow. I wish them thereforeto delay applying to *the legislature, for instructingthe East Indians, or for the repeal of the ConventicleAct, which they are about to attempt inconsequenceof the judgment of the King's Benchthat a man must be a teacher of a separate congregation."13 This view he endeavoured to impress onMr. Butterworth.Feb. 15, 1812.My dear Sir,I have long been looking forward to the periodof the renewal of the East India Company's charter,as to a great era when I hoped that it would please12 Diary. 13 Ib. Feb. 14.1812, KEEPING BACK DISSENTERS. 11God to enable the friends of Christianity to betheinstruments of wiping away what I have longthought, next to the Slave Trade, the foulest blot onthe moral character of our country the suffering ourfellow-subjects (nay, they even stand towards us in thecloser relation of our tenants) in the East Indies, to,remain, without any effort on our part to enlighten andreform them, under the grossest, the darkest, andmost depraving system of idolatrous superstition thatalmost ever existed upon earth.To your observing eye I need not point out manyevents which may well encourage a humble hope thatbetter days are approaching for India. But at thesame time I am but too well aware, that if the un-biassedjudgment of the House of Commons were todecide the question, fatal indeed would be the issue.I am not without hopes of Mr. Perceval's lending himselfto any moderate plan ; but it will be necessary, Iam persuaded, to call into action the whole force of -the religious world. But on this subject, knowingwith whom I have to do, I shall express myself withoutreserve, trusting to your candour for a fair constructionof my sentiments. I am not without hopesof prevailing on a considerable party in the Church ofEngland to interest themselves on the occasion : butI own I fear that if the Dissenters and Methodistscome into action before our force from the Establishmenthas stirred, a great part of the latter will eitherdesert our ranks, or .be cold and reluctant followers.Now, if I mistake not, the organization of the Dissenters,and still more of the Methodist body, is so12 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1812.complete, that any impulse may be speedily conveyedthroughout the whole frame. It appears therefore,,that it would be expedient for the Dissenters andMethodist bodies not to show themselves till themembers of the Church have actually committedthemselves, (according to our parliamentary phrase,)or till it be seen that they cannot be prevailed on tocome forward.I was more grieved than surprised to hear fromMr. Stephen yesterday that there was an intention ofapplying to the legislature shortly for a repeal of theConventicle Act. Such a discussion would infalliblyproduce a violent contest between all the high Churchmenand the Methodists and all classes of Dissenters ;and when once the two parties should be arrayedagainst each other, I fear they would continue tooppose each other on the East Indian Instruction subject,as well as on the other. What great harm couldthere be in pausing for one year ?I am, my dear sir, with cordial regard,Yours always sincerely,W. WILBERFORCE."He was himself endeavouring to arouse the Church ;setting hard to work on a paper for the ChristianObserver urging clergymen to come forward andpress the communication of Christian light to thenatives of India ; " and using freely in all directionshis own personal influence. " Feb. 15th. Called onBishop of Durham about East India Company's renewalaffair he professing to feel much, and I hope1812. EAST INDIAN INSTRUCTION. 13truly, for a good man, (a bishop 43 years,) but saidfairly that from the bishops nothing could come wellbut from an Archbishop of Canterbury, and thoughthe present at school at least when he a bishop, yethe might be jealous of an old man. He talked muchabout national schools liberal and prudent stronglyopposed the rule of using no books but what inBartlett's Buildings' catalogue. Lord Grenville, theSpeaker, and others opposed the rule, but carried byone. Bishop of London and Archbishop of Canterburysupported it. Bishop of Durham moved ( orwere approved by the bishop of the diocese,' yeteven this negatived only saying to him, that anybooks he used (for he said he did give his schoolssome not in the catalogue) should be added to theirstock." 14On the same errand too he called on Mr. Perceval.Went to see him entirely about the East Indiacharter occasion, for securing the means of introducingChristian light into India. He freely professed himselffavourable to the object, but saw great difficultiesin the way, and asked for some distinct proposition.I had told Grant he would. I replied by sayingthat at least parliament might in the Act insert somesuch general declarations of principles, as in the tworesolutions I moved in May, 1793, and carried in theCommittee and House, but which Lord Melvillewould not put into the Bill. But more that wemust secure the entrance of missionaries. To whomcan any discretionary power of granting or refusing11 Diary.14 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1812.leave to go be trusted ? I must think over this mostimportant point, but I have long conceived that probablythose who are interested for religion will becompelled to join the great body of commercial andpolitical-economy men, who will I doubt not contendfor destroying the monopoly of the Company, andleaving the road to the East Indies free and open ;" 15and I cannot doubt that the most mature considerationwill only confirm the present inclination of mymind, to throw open the whole, and even abolish theEast India Company altogether, rather than not insurea passage for the entrance of light, and truth,and moral improvement and happiness into that benightedand degraded region." 16I am sadly disappointed," he says a week later, 17in finding even religious people so cold about theEast Indian Instruction. Partly produced I think bythe sectaries having had a notion that the Church ofEngland to be established. Alas ! alas ! let us havesome substance before we differ about form." " Ibegin to despair of much being gained for the Christiancause in the East Indian charter discussion." 18Yet he did not intermit his efforts. All through thesession he was on the watch to seize every opportunityof diffusing right views on this important subject, andwas thus preparing the way for the triumph of thefollowing year. " March 7th. Writing to the Bishopof St. David's about East India Christianizing.Dined at Speaker's sat next to George Holforcl andDiary, Feb. 11. * Letter to J. Butterworth Esq. M. P.>7 Diary, Feb. 21. is ib. Feb. 26.1812. CHRISTIAN-KNOWLEDGE SOCIETY. 15Leicester. Talked to former about East Indian mission,and Buchanan. Cunningham of Lainshawbreakfasted with me, to talk about getting the GeneralAssembly of Scotland to take up the cause ofChristianizing India. 19 Dined at Lord Warrington'sLord and Lady Camden, Lord Glastonbury, andLansdown, &c. I told them Saba's story, which theyscarce believed, or about infanticide. 20 Sir J. Barlowopposing diffusion of Scriptures in Hindostan. A mostalarming private account of Scientia writing to thesecretary of government, resenting our measures forproselyting India. Surely this is the evil spirit'sstirring up. It is not yet known. We are all atwork about the best mode of providing for the freecourse of religious instruction in India, and this intelligencemade known would ruin us. 21 To town,calling at Bartlett's Buildings to inquire what doneabout East India Company's charter. Conference atButterworth's till near five. Settled that the differentsects should apply separately to Perceval, and to thechief members in the House of Commons, stating theirdeep interest and also inform the minds of theirpeople every where throughout the country." 22I am extremely sorry," wrote Archdeacon Potta few days afterwards, 23 " that you had a journey toBartlett's Buildings to no purpose. I took the firstopportunity which occurred of calling the attention ofthe Committee to the spiritual wants of India, andthe Committee concurred with me in bringing thei9 Diary, March 11. 20 April 25. 21 April 12.April 15. To William Wilberforce Esq.16 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1812.matter before the Board. The application to parliamenthad been in my mind, and the Committee hadconcurred in that design, but the Bishop of Londonreminded us that we were no corporate body, andthought it would be best to apply first to the EastIndia Company."To town to meet Grant, and with him to LordMelville, about getting leave for gospel light to passinto India. This is indeed a cause for which it isworth while being a public man. Kept waiting long,and wrote to stir up Wrangham, and through himLord Milton." 24Public affairs meanwhile were of a highly interestingcharacter. " The 18th of February was the day onwhich the Prince came into possession of his power,and his decision to retain Perceval was what many haveanticipated. Yet it is to be regretted that Percevalshould so cross the public feeling about economy andreform by throwing out Bankes's Reversionary Bill,and giving away M'Mahon's place, one shilling in thepound on widows' pensions." 25 "25th. Castlereaghsat yesterday upon the Treasury Bench for a time, evidentlyto show he was in. I named it to Perceval afterwards,and said what a good man of business he was.Perceval was quite silent. 27th. House till half-pastthree on Sir T. Burton's motion on the state of thenation, which, though going off without the great onescoming to combat, at length brought to light its realmeaning who to be minister ; and Canning firsttime divided with opposition, 136 to 209. 29th. Mr.Diary, March 19. Ib. Feb. 20.1812. ORDERS IN COUNCIL. 17Alexander Baring came at one by appointment totalk of Orders in Council and licences till four. Thescales doubtful ; but if an American war certain providedthe Orders are retained, that makes them preponderate."" I never was a warm friend to thosemeasures ; or rather no friend at all, but an enemyto parts of them. I am sick at heart from the sadprospect of a war with America." 26 Upon the 3rdof March this question came before the House.Brougham's motion on Orders in Council andlicences till half-past four I spoke, and treated ratherunkindly I thought, but a momentary thing, or rathera ministerial temptation. Canning for the first timeshowed plain opposition front Stephen spoke well ;and still better, like an honest man. He is one of themost upright of men." 2rThe defeat of Mr. Brougham's motion set this questionat rest for the present, but the commercial distressesof the country led soon afterwards to a generalclamour against the Orders ; and on the 28th of AprilMr. " Perceval agreed to a committee on the petitionsof distressed places. He mentioned to Stephenmy opinion as a motive. Taunted by Whitbreadhow uncandid ! and true party spirit." 28 He wasnow leading his usual London life ; constant in theHouse, full of all plans for public or private charity,and showing to others no symptom of the decay whichhe suspected in himself. One " day at home writingand correcting a paper about Danish confiscation ; "then " to Rose at the Council Office with Latrobe26 Letter to Mr. Roberts. 27 Diary. Ib.18 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1812.about the Moravian missionaries in Greenland' 29or " all the afternoon busy about setting up a dispensaryfor our neighbourhood," 30 and " waiting on theDuke of York to ask him to be patron of it. Hevery obliging and civil, and consented " an amiabletrait in his Royal Highness towards a conscientiousopponent, 31 which he always loved to mention. Inthe House he spoke more than once upon the systemof punishments in the army, " enforcing my argumentthat no flogging but by general court-martial. Also thehardship of not letting people quit the army ; also Pitt'ssystem of rewards ; honouring Sir F. Burdett for hisfeelings, yet durst not abolish it altogether, (navy forexample,) where perhaps indispensable to ship's safetyto have some prompt mode of enforcing discipline andobedience ; also danger of teaching soldiers to look toHouse of Commons for remedying individual cases ofgrievance their getting even patrons in our House.Most vilely used 32 in the newspapers." 3SOn the first motion against the place of ColonelM'Mahon, he " spoke, and we beat the ministers bythree." He objected only to the mode of payment, 3 *and on the 14th of April, deeming the attack "a mostclear party motion," he maintained the fitness of theoffice, only urging, which Mr. Perceval conceded, that*> Diary, March 26. 30 Ib. March 20.31 Vid. vol. 3. p. 406.32 The newspapers reported him to have maintained, (and the ParliamentaryDebates preserve the error,) that it was now easy for a privateto obtain his discharge. His speech was aimed especially against thedifficulty which he had just found insuperable, in the case of a pool-client,who had enlisted during a period of occasional insanity.33 Diary, March 26. 3l By a per-centage upon widows' pensions.1812. REGISTER BILL. 19its salary should come from the Regent's privy purse.The cry of " secret influence" had been raised, andin reply he told the House, "that loudly as LordNorth had charged it upon the early years of Georgethe Third, he had the strong assurance of the nobleLord himself, in later life, that the suspicion had beenaltogether groundless." " May 8th. House till abouttwo on Parliamentary Reform. I should have spokenbut for Ryder's telling me he would have followed,saying, How shocking to throw such an apple amongstthe factious in Yorkshire ! I thought I had better besilent. I for Parliamentary Reform moderately.Elliot, (Castle Spectre,) and Ward, Lord Dudley'sson, spoke very ably against Reform, pushing stronglyagainst all Reform, and arguing for extremes. SirFrancis Burdett moderate and able." West Indianquestions too were constantly arising. " To a meetingof the African Institution, previous to talking withdifferent ministers about stopping Portuguese SlaveTrade Bissao. To Lord Castlereagh on gettingBissao from the Portuguese. To Lord Liverpool andYorke, getting more naval force on the African coast."The Registration Bill, with which it had been' settledto proceed, required much consideration. " To LordGrey with William Smith, by appointment, aboutRegistry Bill for West Indian slaves. He not decided,on grounds of interfering with the coloniallegislature. Saw Lord Grenville about register ofslaves in the West Indies. He received me kindly. 5 'On the 6th of April he had a consultation at therooms of Mr. Perceval with him and Lord Liverpool,which he afterwards reports to Mr. Stephen.20 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1812.Monday afternoon.My dear Stephen,Perceval was very fair to-day, and declaredthat if we should bring the business forward he wouldsupport it as well as he could, but that he thought itwould be more prudent to wait till another year inorder to see how the engine should work in Trinidad,and rectify any errors, supply any defects, &c. whichexperience should suggest. Again, should it fail inthe House of Commons, our measure in Trinidadwould start under great disadvantages.We should have a meeting and settle our opinionone way or the other when you can come to us.My sister waits for this, so I must not be slowor full.Yours ever affectionately,W. WILBERFORCE.James Stephen Esq."I told Perceval frankly," says his Diary, " thatmy strongest reason for immediate action was, that ifa dissolution should take place this year and we shouldlose Stephen, the loss would be irremediable." Thehearty, unsuspecting confidence with which the Abolitionleaders fought their common battle was onegreat secret of their strength. " Should we loseyou," writes Mr. Stephen to Mr. Wilberforce, " beforethe present difficulties of our cause are vanquished,neither my efforts nor the credit that may beattached to my information are likely to be of any importance.I should perhaps turn my mind and pento less impracticable objects."1812. RELIGIOUS SOCIETIES. 21Your letter," Mr. Wilberforce replies at onetime to the announcement of a step gained by Mr.Macaulay, " calls forth contradictory emotions. Onthe one hand, I feel averse to coming out of my ; yet on the other hand, I long to be amongyou. I seem to be leaving it to others, and especiallyto .yourself, to labour through the heat and toils ofthe day ; you really however are rather to be enviedthan pitied, considering the happy issue of your lateexertions. I recall my word ; I might perhaps haveenvied some persons, but you and Stephen I cannever envy, be your successes what they may in theAfrican fields, considering how well earned yourlaurels will be, let them be ever so umbrageous. Believeme to be,Ever yours affectionately,W. WILBERFORCE."Another cause to which he freely gave his timeand thoughts, was the welfare of the different religioussocieties. Most of them he had seen arise aroundhim since his entrance into public life ; for they owedtheir origin to the increased attention to religion,which was in great measure the fruit of his exertions.When he' was most occupied this spring, he stillfound time to attend the " general meeting of theChurch Missionary Society for Africa and the East."A grand assemblage I spoke with acceptance. Itwent off well." 35 " To Perceval's, talking with himabout the business of Africa and the East, also the35 Diary, April 24.22 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1812.East Indies he very pleasing." " May 5th. Bartlett'sBuildings by special summons on East India Christianizingvery full meeting Archbishop presiding.John Gifford (Anti-Jacobin) properly spirited. Appointedcommittee to prepare a report and resolutionsfor Perceval and Lord Buckinghamshire, meaning inChurch of England way. African and Asiatic Society'sdinner took the chair. Then House, wheresat late. May 6th. British and Foreign Bible Society,annual meeting all went off admirably. Immensemeeting I spoke with acceptance several bishopspresent."The meeting of the Society for Promoting ChristianKnowledge led to some important consequences.To the committee then appointed, Mr.Wilberforce transmitted Dr. Buchanan's sketch foran ecclesiastical establishment in India, which theyembodied in their resolutions ; and thus the first greatsteps were taken which led to the appointment of ourIndian bishoprics. Of the progress of this business heheard afterwards from Archdeacon Pott.Dear Sir,I take the liberty of sending you a sort ofchild that may claim to be laid at your door, for certainlyit owes its birth to you, though it would behard to make you responsible for its manifold defects.**##*#*#*I reduced to an abstract the chief points of thedocuments you sent me. That abridged statementwas read to the last East Indian Committee, and a1812. PERCEVAL'S MURDER. 23vote of thanks passed to you. I have enclosed theresolutions. Another Committee meeting is calledfor the purpose of considering them further, and inorder to give the archbishop and bishops time toread them, and attend the next Committee. I fearthey will not satisfy my friend Gifford's ardent spirit,who is for giving no quarter to the East India Company; he will think the resolutions very tame ; butperhaps the next meeting may infuse a little more lifeinto them.I hope you will excuse the trouble thus given toyou ; and I am, my dear sir, with sincere acknowledgments,Your much obliged and very faithful servant,J. H. POTT."In the midst of these peaceful occupations he wasstartled by a shock which was felt throughout thekingdom. On Monday, May 11th, some friendshad been breakfasting with him to talk over theEast Indian question, and then " considering thequestion of sinecures preparatory to the third readingof Bankes's Bill for their abolition. Late in townStopped to dine at Babington's at half-past four.Babington (who was chairman of the Committee onthe Orders in Council) at the examination, which beganat four, when he returned to us (Henry Thornton,Mrs. Babington, &c.) about a quarter to five,greatly agitated, stating that Perceval had been shotdead in the lobby. We could scarce believe it. Iwent, after calling at Perceval's and Arbuthnot's, who24 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1812.quite overwhelmed, to the House, to the Prisonrooms, where the poor wretch Bellingham [was, theywere] examining him. I carefully perused his facefor some time, close to him a striking face : at timeshe shed tears, or had shed them ; but strikingly composedand mild, though haggard. Called WilliamSmith's, who close to Perceval when he dropped, andwho thought it was myself, till he looked in the face.Smith, with another, carried him into the Secretary'sroom. Poor Lord Arden quite wild with grief f No,I know he is not here, he is gone to a better world."The next day he went " early to town to the Speaker's,by whom summoned about the proposition to bemade for the provision for poor Perceval's family."Palace Yard, Tuesday, May 12, 1812.My dear Sir,Pray be here to-day at three precisely tomeet some parliamentary persons of all descriptions,whom I have requested to consider of recommending(in consequence of yesterday's sad and atrocious event)Mr. Perceval's family to the gracious protection ofthe Crown. If it is proper to do such a thing, it isbest to have it previously concerted, that the manner,as well as the measure, may be right.Believe me everMost truly and faithfully yours,CHARLES ABBOT.William Wilberforce Esq."The Speaker stated that he feared he might be1812. MR. PERCEVAL'S FAMILY. 25blamed for not having asked more persons Castlereaghand Ryder, Ponsonby and Whitbread, Bathurstand Vansittart, Bankes and myself, Sir William Grantand Scott ; and he added that any one who wishedmight bring more. Lord Castlereagh stated that thePrince had ordered a message, desiring the House toenable him, &c. and that government had thought of50,000 for the children, and 2,000 per annum forMrs. Perceval for life all agreed. House all wentoff quite well." On the 13th the question came beforethe House ; and he was most anxious that no oppositionto it should tarnish the grace and honour of thegrant. " I strongly urged the importance of unanimity; for Burdett having laid in a claim to oppose,(though he expressed his horror of assassination,)I feared a debate, and urged any one who could notagree, to retire if he could do it consistently withduty. He went away, and the vote for the two propositionswas unanimous." Full of these high andgenerous feelings, he was grieved at the proposition ofa larger grant than that which had been named byministers. He approved indeed of the increase andvoted for it, and spoke as well as voted for a publicmonument to Mr. Perceval ; but he would have farpreferred the honour of an undivided vote to anymere increase of its amount ; and he comments withsome indignation upon the opinions which he met withat a private party. " Lady C. for getting all the moneythat they could. How very low and mercenary peopleare ! I see plainly that they think getting ever solittle more money, to be got, if at all, with a struggle,VOL. iv. c26 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1812.and as the triumph of a party, worth all the handsomeand the honourable in the world ; forgetting allthe invidious constructions which will be put upon itin the present state of the country." 35Meanwhile he took a forward part in the honourrendered to the late minister's memory. " May14th. To the Prince of Wales with the wholeHouse to take up the address about poor Perceval.Then to Stephen's, who had yesterday beentaken very ill, quite overcome with distress at Perceval'sdeath." His own feelings were deeply wounded." Perceval," he says in his private Diary, " hadthe sweetest of all possible tempers, and was one ofthe most conscientious men I ever knew ; the mostinstinctively obedient to the dictates of conscience,the least disposed to give pain to others, the mostcharitable and truly kind and generous creature I everknew. He offered me at once a thousand pounds forpaying Pitt's debts, though not originally broughtforward by Pitt, and going out of office with a greatfamily." " Oh wonderful power of Christianity" headds upon the following Sunday ! 36 " Never can it havebeen seen, since our Saviour prayed for His murderers,in a more lovely form than in the conduct and emotionsit has produced in several on the occasion ofpoor dear Perceval's death. Stephen, who had at firstbeen so much overcome by the stroke, had been thismorning, I found, praying for the wretched murderer,and thinking that his being known to be a friend ofPerceval's might affect him, he went and devoted35 Diary, May 13. 3/5 Journal, May 17.1812. STATE OF THE COUNTRY. 27himself to trying to bring him to repentance. Hefound honest Butterworth trying to get admittance,and obtained it for him and Mr. Daniel Wilson, whomat my recommendation he had brought with him.The poor creature was much affected, and very humbleand thankful, but spoke of himself as unfortunaterather than guilty, and said it was a necessary thingstrange perversion no malice against Perceval.Poor Mrs. Perceval after the first grew very moderateand resigned, and with all her children knelt down bythe body, and prayed for them and for the murderer'sforgiveness. Oh wonderful power of Christianity ! Isthis the same person who could not bear to have himopposed by any one ? "This shock coming at a moment when positive distresshad stirred up great disturbance in the countrylowered for a time his usual tone of spirits. " Thestate of the West Riding manufacturing districts isdreadful next to rebellion, smouldering rebelliongreat military force sent down, and now, but too late,vigorous measures taking. The aspect of affairs isvery gloomy. Who shall say whether poor dear Perceval'sdeath may indicate evil to come, or that a reversionof his counsels is needful for our safety ? Yet Iown the loss of a man so truly good, and so favourableto all religious plans, wears an alarming aspect. . .Alas ! I fear that Mr. Henry Ryder's being a bishop,as humanly speaking he soon would have been, willbe prevented." 37Yet though in some degree depressed, he took a3 7 Diary, May 16.C 22S LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1812.calm and reasonable view of the troubled face ofthings before him. To Mr. Hey he opened at thistime his mind.London, May 15, 1812.My dear Sir,Alas ! into what times are we thrown ! I cannothelp thinking I see the source of that savagespirit which prevails so much. The reverence forauthority, and law, and rank, and high station, hasbeen effaced from the minds of the lower orders; andwhere the fear of God has no place, the consequenceis that all control is withdrawn from the bad passionsof men. To this cause I think may be added themodern system of making expediency the basis, ofmorals and the spring of action, instead of the domesticand social affections and the relations of life andthe duties arising out of them. Not that the lowerorders understand this generalizing abstract way ofthinking and feeling ; but the opinions and emotionswhich are taught and imbibed in this school, receivingtheir stamp in the mint of the higher orders if Imay so express it;, obtain a currency throughout theinferior classes of society. I trust we are introducingthe true remedy, indeed the only remedy of our diseasednature, by teaching the mass of our people theknowledge of the Scriptures. Surely it is an indicationof the favour of the Almighty, that we have beenenabled to spread so extensively the system of education.I must also ascribe much to the seditious publicationswhich have been circulated so industriously.1812. NEW MINISTRY. 29It is no small pleasure to me to believe that Mr.Perceval had an habitual desire to please God ; andI doubt not he looked to Him with unfeigned humiliation,through the Redeemer. It is really an honourto our House, that his private virtues were so generallyrecognised among us. How much I wish thatI may not hear that in our county the account ofMr. P.'s death, and of the horrid circumstances whichattended it, was received with joy and exultation, asin Nottingham, Leicester, and I fear other places !Well, my dear Sir, ' there remaineth a rest,' andpray for me and mine, that we may enter into it afterthe short voyage of this stormy and tempestuous life.With kind remembrances to all your family,I remain, my dear Sir,Ever your sincere friend,W. Wilberforce.William Hey Esq."But though for a moment, to the honour of allparties, the strife of politics had been hushed over thebier of the departed minister, it was not for long thatthe busy stream of life could be chained by such acharm. " I hear," says Mr. Wilberforce upon the16th of May, 38 " that the ministers left are trying toget Wellesley to act without being at the head, andVansittart as Chancellor of the Exchequer, and ofcourse Canning as one of the Secretaries of State.20th. A discussion at Thornton's about a meeting forthe poor about which the opposition cold, who it is68 Diary.30 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1812.probable wish to have it supposed that the true way ofserving the poor would be to rescind the Orders inCouncil. Nicholas Vansittart made Chancellor of theExchequer. Lord Liverpool to be First Lord of theTreasury. Wellesley and Canning refused their cooperation,it is said on the ground of not giving uptheir opinion on the Catholic Question. I own I donot see how the ministry can stand the battering ofthe House of Commons. Perceval himself did it veryill the first session from Mrs. Perceval's illness."It was clear that the new ministry would not enterpeaceably on office. Upon the 20th Mr. Stuart Wort-leygave notice that he would, on the following day,move "An Address to the Regent for a strong andefficient Administration," in the hope of thus stoppingthe formation of the ministry. On the 21stMr. Wilberforce communicates to Mr. Bankes theexact state of things.London, May 21, 1812.My dear Bankes,We want you here most sadly. You must haveseen, before this reaches you, the motion which StuartWorsley is to make to-day. The opposition say fairlythat they regret it. The truth probably is that theyall remember the transactions of 1784, and the dangerof calling into action the spirit of loyalty in the Houseof Commons ; yet the Prince of Wales is not belovedas the King was, nor is there a Pitt to stand thebrunt of the assailants. For my own part, under allthe circumstances of the case, I cannot think we are1812. STUART Worsley's MOTION. 31warranted to agree to such a motion as Worsley's.The general constitutional principle of the right ofthe Crown is clear, and I think it is not to be got overby the consideration of circumstances, which howevernotorious, by being in the newspapers, to us who livein London, form no parliamentary ground of proceeding.I believe that both Wellesley and Canningoverrate their weight in the country, though letthe latter have the opportunity of exhibiting himself,and he would gain it. Really your being forced awayjust now is very unfortunate for others, though notperhaps unpleasant to yourself. Let me have a linefrom you.Yours ever,W. Wilberforce.P. S. Lord Liverpool sent to desire to see meto-day, but I had a fair excuse for not going, and sodeclined it."On these grounds he opposed Mr. Stuart Worsley'smotion. " Spoke too soon after dinner for me, butwell. It was to the same effect as our argumentabout the previous negative in 1784. But when justgoing to a division Ryder got up, and most unwiselycalled up Canning and even forced him, quod Ithacavelut, to refer to a theological paper of the Cabinet's.Canning very clever, and Worsley's motion reallymade for him and Wellesley, though carried by thenumbers of the old opposition. 39 The division lost byministers, by 172 to 176, but foolish arrangement39 Diary, May 21.32 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1812.about presenting the Address. 2Gth. I hear thatLord Wellesley, who sent to, had conferred withLords Grey and Grenville, and had got them to concuron principles so as to be accessible ; but on makingreport to the Prince Regent, it would not do. Ihear even worldly people take offence at 's loosecharacter for the head of the administration of thecountry. Poor dear Perceval, how much his loss isfelt ! How much they who talked slightingly of him,now acknowledge his merits ! 27th. Wellesley, it issaid, could not make a government, so Earl Moiracalled to the Prince Regent. 28th. Nothing settledabout the ministry, certainly the Prince has seen allkinds of people, and is very nervous and distressed ;Sheridan told me this afternoon that the several partieswere farther off from agreeing than ever. Others saidthat Lord Sidmouth was then with the Prince. LordMoira certainly was with him yesterday ; and a goodauthority told me that the Prince was quite friendlywith him, and would yet show what are his own realfeelings about the Roman Catholics. Pitt (this evidentlypointed to me as Pitt's friend, and to justifythe Regent) had told Fox that he never would forcethe King intimating, that the Prince is acting witha view to his father's peace." The same day he forwardsinto Dorsetshire the last accounts.Thursday, May 28, 1812, five o'clock.My dear Bankes,It is strange, but true, that nothing is yet settledat Carlton House. At this moment I hear fromMr. Howard that Lord Sidmouth is with the Prince1812. POLITICAL ARRANGEMENTS. 33Regent ; I really believe that no arrangement is consentedto. If I hear any thing which can be dependedon, before the post goes out, I will send it you.The mere rumours of the House, like your westernfish in summer, being far from good when fresh willnot bear the carriage into Dorsetshire. I have putoff the Bill to the 5th ; the call you see is deferred forafortnight.Yours ever,W. Wilberforce.P. S. I have since heard, and I believe it is true,that Perceval's friends will be divided, and above allthat is to stay in. This will indeed show a tenacitywhich does not like to lose its hold."The obstacles to all arrangement still continued toexist. On the 31st, " no ministry" was " yet formed."On the 1st of June, Mr. " Canning declared thatLord Wellesley was authorized to make a ministry."40 On the 2nd all was " said to be off becausethe Prince wishes to preserve a predominance in theCabinet for the old ministry ; but this" he judged tobe " impossible. " At length upon the 8th he " wentdown with Bankes to the House, and to our astonishmentfound that Lord Liverpool was first Lord of theTreasury, and empowered to form an administration.Canning not to join him, but only the old set and theSidmouths. How striking is Canning's example !Had he fairly joined Perceval on the Duke of PortDiary.c 334 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1812.land's death, as Perceval offered, he would now havebeen the acknowledged head, and supported as such.But his ambitious policy threw him out, and he sunkinfinitely in public estimation, and has since with difficultykept buoyant. Our House stormy but allput off till Thursday, Worsley's motion to condolewith the Prince Regent. I went to House of Lords,and heard part of the debate Lord Wellesleycharging upon the old government, Liverpool, &c.the dreadful personal animosities. Lord Grey declaredwith unambiguous clearness, that he broke offthe treaty with Lord Moira on account of Lord Yarmouth&c. continuing in the household." Yet uponthe 11th, in the debate upon Mr. Worsley's motion,it appeared to our astonishment from Lord Yarmouth,that they had told Sheridan that they (LordsHertford and Yarmouth) meant to resign. I once uptospeak and fully prepared; but abstained afterwards,because I remembered Lords Grey and Grenville'sgood service about Abolition, and would not condemnthem now when so pulled down." Upon the 17thhe was at the " House to hear Sheridan's explanationhe taken ill and stopped." Upon the 19th thisexplanation was renewed, when it is called by Mr.Wilberforce, ee most twaddling." It amounted tolittle more than a compulsory confession, that in hisconduct of the late negociation he had suppressed thisimportant concession. Thus the ministry enteredupon office. " It would have been far the bestcourse' in Mr. Wilberforce's judgment, " to havemade the Speaker, Premier ; under him Canning1812. ORDERS IN COUNCIL ABANDONED. 35might fairly, and would, act. And so all the independentpart of the House and of the country wouldbe combined with known talent and habits of business."All however were " astonished at the firstdivision, (June 11th,) many thought that ministrywould scarce have carried it, whereas 289 to 164.Yet in spite of this apparent strength, governmentdid not dare to face the storm which the distresses ofthe country had raised against the Orders in Council.It was immediately whispered that a change of theirpolicy might be reasonably looked for. I heard itfrom good authority to-day, that the chief is quiteundecided ; but from the Duke of Norfolk I amassured that they will be at an end almost immediately.He had been with the Prince Regentbetween 11 and 12, when it was so understood."Upon the 16th, Mr. Brougham brought on his motionfor their entire repeal, when to his " astonishmentgovernment gave way, and completely gave them up,yet most awkwardly." " They allege shabbily theFrench decree, and when at a meeting at Lord Castlereagh'swe urged that the decree was a forgeryAye, said Castlereagh, but one does not like to ownthat we are forced to give way to our manufacturersStephen inexpressibly grieved at ministers' concessions,and wanting to go out of parliament keptin by my advice." 41The manufacturing districts were still in an alarmingstate of ee smouldering rebellion," caused in greatmeasure by extreme distress, but fomented by face"Diary, June 24.36 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1812.pious and designing men. " I had a good deal to do,"he tells Mr. Roberts, " with originating the Associationfor Relieving the Distressed Manufacturers ; andthe plan would have answered all the ends we had inview hut for the vile breath of party, which (mixingwith every thing, and spoiling all it does mix with)tainted our project in the bud by a perfectly false reportthat it was intended to prevent the necessity ofrescinding the Orders in Council. This operated somuch against us that our funds have been far lessample than might have been expected." " Battlingin the secret committee," he says, (July 8th,) " aboutinserting in the Report a passage as to seditious language.Tierney and Whitbread got it out. Castlereaghsaid not a word to support me . . that the diseasewas of a political nature which I had suggestedin the most moderate language . . how shabby and ill-judged! " " It makes my heart ache," he tells Mr.Butterworth, " to think of a country like this, sohighly favoured by the Almighty, and containing somuch good, yet likely to be plunged into so muchmisery by the arts of the factious and the follies ofthe weak. It is not enough in our circumstances formen to be quiet and neutral, they must be active andzealous." He suggests therefore " that an impulseof this nature should be given expeditiously to thewhole body of the Methodists." " The state of thelower orders in the manufacturing districts is such asI can illustrate only by the figure of the confluentsmall-pox on a human body ; it is breaking out allover,and pains are evidently taken to interest the1812. CANNING. 37agriculturists. My notion therefore is, that thereshould be a general association among the friendsof law and order for the security of persons andproperty."In this state of feeling he saw with deep regret theviolence which politics engendered amongst some ofhis own friends. " is taking a most violent andfactious part ; talking of packed committees ; attackingthe magistracy : surely as unwise as mischievous."With such difficulties gathering round them, governmentwere naturally anxious to strengthen their effectiveforce ; and negociations were again commencedwith the hope of bringing Mr. Canning into office.With these he was immediately made acquainted,being anxiously consulted through their course byMr. Canning. " Without the slightest overture fromme, or even my beginning to talk politics with him,he took me aside and asked my opinion on the negociation.I told him very frankly, that I wished itto be so managed as to leave Nicholas VansittartChancellor of the Exchequer, believing that he wouldbe a far better man for the situation than either LordCastlereagh or himself. I told Canning, that I wouldgive him an opinion as a juryman on the case whichhe submitted to me." The issue of this negociationwas for some time doubtful ; and upon the 29th heheard from Mr. Canning. " It ended yesterday. Ithas failed. The letter which you saw, and which Isent as you saw it with only a few verbal alterations,did not produce a satisfactory answer. You haveseen enough of my disposition in its course, to be sure38 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1812,that I have gone far enough, perhaps too far, in concession."This was not exactly his impression.Canning on negociation failing," is his docket onthe letter. " Not wise on either side ; but far morefoolish on the other." This opinion he gave frankly ;and Mr. Canning's answer " justifying failure ofnegociation' throws great light upon the actual stateof parties. " When I found that the determinationwas to keep the substantial management of theHouse of Commons in the hands of Lord Castlereagh,I was no longer anxious to save appearances.I had wished to provide for the public good, not forpersonal feeling.Many people say, and you seem inclined to adopttheir reasoning, e The lead after all is merely a feather,what signifies it in whose hands it is ? ' Others say,Why not let Lord C. have it nominally? It willin effect devolve upon yourself.' Such has beenthe language of the Regent ; and such that of manyother well-meaning common friends. Now to thefirst of these arguments, I answer that it is foundedin a mistake. To the second, that it is (unintentionallyno doubt) a suggestion of dishonesty."1. Is the lead a feather? What is the definitionof it? It is that station in the House of Commonswhich points out him who holds it as the representativeof the government in that House, the possessorof the chief confidence of the Crown and of the minister.Its prerogative is, that in all doubtful questions,in all questions which have not been previously set* Right Hon. George Canning to William Wilberforce Esq. July 29.1812. THE LEAD IN THE HOUSE. 39tied in Cabinet, and which may require instant decision,he is to decide upon communication with hiscolleagues sitting by him undoubtedly, if he becourteously inclined but he is to decide, with orwithout communication with them, and with oragainst their consent.Now is this a feather ? Or is it substantial authority? But perhaps this is mere theory, and thecase never occurs. Look back a few weeks only tothe debate on the Orders in Council. Recollect thatit might have happened that I should have been sittingby Lord C.'s side on that night. And I entreatyou to figure me to yourself in that situation, whilehe was giving up to Mr. Brougham's honour andglory, (not to peace with America,) by three or foursuccessive gradations of concession, a measure whichhad been for five years the standing policy of the administration.He might be right, and I wrong, in the view ofthe measure itself. It might be right to give it up.It could not be right to give it up in such a manner ;so spiritless, so profitless, and so senseless. But rightor wrong, the giving up such a measure in such away, was surely a pretty substantial exercise of apretty substantial authority. And it was that authoritythat I should have confirmed to Lord C. if Ihad agreed to serve under him, as leader or ministerof the House of Commons."2. If I had so agreed, it is not a mistake merely,it is a suggestion of dishonesty, to say that the stationin which I so bound myself to maintain him would40 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1812.have devolved upon me. I must not have suffered itto do so. I must have rejected and repudiated it.If the troops had wished to salute me Imperator inthe field of debate, I must have said, ( Nay, mygood friends, there is your commander. I have swornto maintain him such, like him as you may.' Andyet I will venture to affirm that no effort on my partto reject for myself, and to preserve to Lord C. thestation of command, would have prevented him fromsaying in three weeks that I was studiously labouringto deprive him of it. Pray therefore be not ledastray (nor let others where you can help it) by thenotion that I have been squabbling about a trifle.ff Nothing indeed is a trifle which by common consentmen think 'otherwise. But exercise of discretionupon great occasions in the House of Commons, iscertainly no trifle at any time. Much less in timeswhen great occasions occur daily, and when the governmentof the country is (too much perhaps, but is)essentially in the House of Commons.If I could have placed this power fairly in medio, Iwould have conquered, or endeavoured to conquer,all my other feelings of reluctance. But to place it,and to engage to maintain it, in his hands, in whoseit now is, and then to place myself under it, wouldhave been not only a sacrifice of pride, but an extinctionof utility.I am ever, my dear Wilberforce,very sincerely and affectionately yours,GEORGE CANNING."1812. LETTERS TO HIS FAMILY. 41He much regretted this conclusion, and " thoughtupon the whole that government was wrong, becauseCanning would consent to any terms which shouldplace him and Castlereagh on equal ground ; and consideringhis real superiority I think that was enoughto offer." 43 "" It is foolish," he tells another correspondent," in the government not to add him totheir number, for he really was not exorbitant inhis terms. * I cannot help thinkingthat if the negociation had taken place at thebeginning of a session rather than at the end of it,the issue of it would have been different." 44The session meanwhile was closing busily. TheToleration Act, the Distressed Counties' Bill, CatholicEmancipation, and the " Peace Negociation, when Canning'sspeech " was " beautiful," 45 were crowded intoits concluding weeks. In the midst of all this publicbustle and political contention, it is most refreshing toturn from the entries of his busy nights and hurrieddays to the record of his inner feelings. He wasnow again separated from his family, and his lettersto them breathe the simplest and most natural affection.The troubled gusts of politics never ruffled itspeaceful current. " I feel," he tells his sister, " as ifI were unkind in never writing to you, and I haveoften thought of doing it. But every day bringswith it claims upon my time far beyond my powersof satisfying them. Yet nothing can ever preventmy having at liberty for your use my kindest thoughtsand affections."43 To Henry Bankes Esq. To James Stephen Esq.Diary, July 21.42 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1812.For once," he tells Mrs. Wilberforce who wastravelling with his children to the coast, " I rejoice inan east wind, since I recollect that it will meet you andprevent your all suffering from the heat . In comesJohn Villiers, and he has released me only by myabsolutely forcing him out at half-past three, andI ought to have gone to town an hour ago . I havebeen sitting under the trees reading and writing.The only part of the garden which I did not enjoy,was one to which I went purposely to see how alllooked the children's gardens. Even the fullestexuberance of summer beauties could not supply thewant of animal life. Barbara's gum-cistus is in highbeauty, and the roses in full bloom. My own roomproduces something of the same melancholy sensationas the children's gardens ; but I am going to dine atBabington's to meet Mr. Robert Hall, (the Dissentingminister,) whose shyness is such that he could notbring himself to come to me, though, hearing that hewished to see me, I wrote him a long letter to banishall such feelings, and settle about our meeting."On the Sunday following he writes again fromBloomfield, where he was passing one day with Mr.William Hare. " After having dated my letter Ineed not inform you that the various rooms ofthis house, and walks of this place, call up manyinteresting recollections in which you all have theprincipal share. It was impossible for the main featuresof the place to be ever changed. The walk underthe oaks and the opposite close one the various rooms,&c. . I hope I do not look back on the past sceneswithout some of that gratitude which they justly1812. SUNDAY THOUGHTS. 43claim in overflowing measure. I am but poorly today,and have been robbed of. the portion of timewhich I value more in common than any other in thewhole week, that I mean which elapses between returningfrom church and dinner."His affections were naturally lively, but it was notto this only that he owed the preservation, all throughhis busy life, of their early morning freshness. Thiswas the reward of self-discipline and watchfulness ;of that high value for the house of God, and thehours of secret meditation, which made his Sundayscool down his mind and allay the rising fever ofpolitical excitement. Sunday turned all his feelingsinto a new channel. His letters were put aside, andall thoughts of business banished. To the closest observerof his private hours he seemed throughout theday as free from all the feelings of a politician, as ifhe had never mixed in the busy scenes of public life.O Lord, purify me, make me meet for the inheritanceof the saints in light. I trust that I have grown inself-abhorrence, and in longing for deliverance fromthe burden of sin. O Lord, quicken, cleanse, soften me.How differently, even to a man who is used to religiousviews, do all things show when we are on a sick-bed !How little one can think at all in earnest in such circumstances! Oh what a business must it be to thosewho are on a sick-bed to have their attention first calledto the subject, or their views corrected ! Oh may Istrive to tread in the apostle's steps, and forgettingthe things that are behind, to press forward. O Lord,supply all my need out of Thy riches. Alas, in my44 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1812.feelings and sudden impulses, if not in my settledtemper, I am too solicitous about the praise of men.I abhor myself for this vileness ; though at the verytime when I hope I abhor myself, it is as if therewere two men, two principles struggling within me.Lord, to Thee I fly for refuge ; O cleanse, soften,quicken, and glorify me. I have been much affectedby hearing old Scott of the Lock for the first timethese many years. The beginning of his sermon . .6 1 have been young, and now am old ' . . that twenty-sevenyears ago he preached for the first time in thatchapel, was remarkably applicable to me; for then1 first heard him at the beginning of my Christiancourse. Oh how truly may I say, that goodness andmercy follow me ! And may I not hope that my beingthus humiliated is a sign that the Saviour is knockingat the door of my heart, and that I am ready toletHim in ? Mr. Sargent preached, and pleased us allgreatly simple seriousness, and consequent pathos,the character of his preaching."These are samples of his Sunday thoughts ; andto these was joined a constant guard over his temper." What a blessing," he says, " is a cheerfultemper ! I felt most keenly 's behaviour aboutBowdler, and his not coming to me ; but for hissake, and I hope from Christian principles, I resolvedto struggle against bad temper about it, and nowall is over." Thus was his spirit kept unruffledby all the exasperating influences of the life heled; whilst he walked safely, with a cheerful seriousnessand disengaged affections, in the heated and1812. JOURNAL. 45infectious air of public life in the world, but mosttruly not of the world ever remembering the end.How will all this busy and tumultuous worldappear to have been all one great bedlam when welook back on it from a future state ! " 46 " Heard'he says this spring, "of the death of ,"whom he had known intimately in the prodigal enjoymentof youth, and rank, and wealth, and beauty.She died about 3 o'clock to-day. All the lowerparts had been dead some time, but she would notbelieve she should die, (that way madness lies,) andreproved her daughters during her illness for lookingas if they were going to a funeraL I heard that shewas very irritable, and had no idea that she would seeme; however I did call on Wednesday, and againyesterday, when she must have been dying." 47 " Iwas much affected last night after seeing poor S, inan agony of pain, with thinking what hell must bepain without hope." " With all my defects and unprofitableness,I humbly hope that it is my main desireto please Thee. Oh may I walk softly, deeply feelingmy own unworthiness, repenting in dust and ashes ;guarding against self-deception, lest I lose the preciousopportunities of communion with God." 48*<> Better to James Stephen Esq. <8 Journal. < 9 Ib-CHAPTER XXVII.JULY 1812 TO FEBRUARY 1813.Summer at Sandgate Occupations Approaching dissolutionof parliament Retires from Yorkshire County resolutionVisit to Leicestershire Antelope Letter to LordMuncaster Returns to London life Parliament BuonaparteRussian meeting Owen of Lanark With his childrenPrivate thoughts.THE summer was far advanced before Mr. Wilberforcegot off from London, " holding it a duty to staytill the last." l He reached Sandgate upon the 29thof July, and resumed his usual summer occupations.My first employment must be writing to clear awayan immense arrear of unanswered letters and unreadpapers," which he tells Mr. Bankes " like yourDorsetshire shingles accumulate every season sorelyto my annoyance, though I believe to the benefit ofyou Dorsetshire landholders. I hope to finish themthis week." "Besides the mass of trash, I have lettersfor Europe, Asia, Africa, and America."As soon as the claims of duty were at all appeasedhe turned to the more pleasant task of writing to his1 Letter to Dr. Coulthurst, 2 Diary, Aug. 2.1812. HIS LETTERS. 47friends, and some of these letters give a lively pictureof the scene around him. To one Yorkshire friendhe writesSandgate, near Folkstone, Aug. 11, 1812.My dear Osborne,Would that you could have seen the terrificmass of unanswered letters which I brought with meto this place. I happen unfortunately to have just nowan amanuensis who reminds me, as to his powers ofletter writing, of the celebrated stanza, ' O reader, ifthat thou canst read.' The consequence is thatduring the sitting of parliament, whenever I belongto a morning committee which meets early, it is nextto impossible for me to keep down my correspondence ;and at this moment, though I have daily written muchmore than agrees with my health, (it is not that Isuffer now in my eyes, but in my breathing,) I amstill a deep defaulter, though not of unaccountedmillions. In such circumstances it is rather a complimentto a friend not to be too eager in writing tohim, inasmuch as it shows that your correspondencewith him is not regarded as a mere matter of account.But somewhat too much of preamble. Mrs. Wilberforceand my children had been waiting for summerat this place, and here I hurried the moment we werereleased from our parliamentary attendance. Sand-gateis one of the creations of modern English opulence.A number of very comfortable houses forwarm or even moderate weather, with a library, awarm bath, and other appendages. The country by48 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1812.far the most picturesque of any sea coast I have seenin the south of England. The hills so thrown about,and sometimes so fringed with wood, that you arealmost reminded of the inferior (but quite the inferior)valleys in Westmoreland.Near us, there are also indications of our opulencewhich are not quite so indicative of our understanding.About a mile from us begins a canal which was formedwhen the alarm concerning invasion was the mostgenerally prevalent. It runs parallel with the shore forabout twenty-five miles ; but I never yet talked with anymilitary man, who conceived that it would oppose anyserious obstacle to an enemy, who, besides the easewith which it might be crossed by portable bridges,might tap it without difficulty. Certainly its merits arefar too deep to be discerned by unmilitary eyes. Seriously,I am told that two millions sterling must havebeen expended in fortifying this part of the coast, Andyet I firmly believe all has been done with good intentions; but one is reminded of the principle on whichDean Swift, in his Directions to Servants, 'prescribesto them to act, and in which, to say the truth, theycommonly are very ready scholars, that each servantShould form the best judgment he can of his master'sfortune, and then for his master's honourspend freely in his own particular department. Thebutler may say, Why, so much per annum will affordto be liberal in wine ; the coachman may say the sameof the stable, and so on for the rest. The number ofMartello towers is very great ; but unfortunately, insteadof being composed of such massy blocks of1812. TO ROBERT OSBORNE ESQ. 49stone or marble, as defied our attack and returnedthe fire of our ships with interest in Corsica, for thatwas our model, they are built of brick, and I amassured the first cannon shot would beat a hole inthem, and the centre being broken down or weakened,the twenty-four pounder would fall through withits own weight, and would bury itself in the ruins. Idid not mean to give you this long history of our precautionsagainst the landing of the enemy. Reallythe French coast appears so near, that I can scarcelywonder at our being somewhat excessive in our preparationsto receive an enemy who was said to have100,000 men within four hours' sail of us.All the public news you have from the newspapersat least as fresh as any private authority cangive it you.I must say farewell. I am summoned to a walk,and my children being absolute strangers to meduring the session, they have a fair claim to me in therecess. Believe me always, my dear Osborne,Yours very sincerely,W. Wilberforce."To Lord Muncaster he writes a few days laterSandgate, near Folkstone, Aug. 15, 1812.To be inattentive to you, my dear Muncaster,must be to be ungrateful, for I am sure if there be anyonewho can, as of right, set up a claim to my constantrecollection it is yourself; but you always allowVOL. IV. D50 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1812.for me. . I had letters to write to all the four quartersof the globe.Perhaps you may not have heard of this littlehamlet. I did not think there had been such aone on the Kentish or Sussex shore. The coast forthree or four miles fronts full south, and the groundis thrown about in quite a fanciful way. In yourcountry indeed you would not dignify our elevationswith the name of mountains, but where everythingis on a scale their appearance is very respectable; and in the crevices between them there arepretty villages, and woods climbing up the slopes,which for the sea coast, generally so barren, are quitepicturesque. From our chamber windows we cansee the French cliffs quite plain, and the sight, whenthe mind begins to ruminate on the utter contrarietywhich there is in the two countries separated fromeach other by such a little strait, gives much matterfor interesting and I am sure for thankful consideration.We have with us here a niece of Stephen's,and two or three young men absent from Cambridgeduring the vacation.You will not surely suspect from my havingbeen all this time an egotist, that I have not bornein mind the residents of the Castle, nor the interestingevent, which we have reason to expectabout this very time if I mistake not. May theAlmighty bless you, my dear Muncaster, with a happy,and they cannot be happy without being a good raceof descendants. I remember before Mrs. Noel wasmarried, Sir Charles and Lady Middleton's one child1812. TO LORD Lancaster. 51seemed a slender stock for the maintenance of thefamily name, and now there are thirteen or fourteenliving saplings. They are all likely to be thehonour and delight of their friends and family. Inever saw so large a covey of such excellent birds.Do, my dear Muncaster, let me know how you aregoing on. I can well conceive how your affectionateheart must be interested in your present circumstances.Once more, may the Almighty carry LadyL. safely through her approaching confinement, andbless you with a healthy grandchild.Of politics it is saying very little, to say I can tellyou only what you already know, for you know, I doubtnot, much more than I do. I was sorry I own that thenegociation with Canning failed ; the government certainlywants him in the House of Commons. Whatdo you think of the probability of a dissolution of parliament? Do let me know your surmises, if you haveany ground for an opinion. For my own part I own Inever at all expected the event this year, till the veryfailure above mentioned, I now think it probablethat a dissolution may be resorted to with the hope ofweakening Canning's party ; yet that would be a badpublic ground. Farewell, my dear Muncaster.Believe me everyours very affectionately,W. Wilberforce."P. S. If Lord and Lady Lindsay are encasedamong the mountains, I beg my kindest remembrancesto them."D 252 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1812.At Sandgate he was exposed to few external interruptions,and was therefore able to devote more timethan usual to his children ; whilst he indulged in " alittle miscellaneous reading. Sometimes parts of theReviews or poetry, Hebe's Palestine, The Lady ofthe Lake ;" and took part in " the general reading ofthe family Rolling and Shakespeare. This afternoonin walking I ran over for an hour The Vicar of Wakefield.What an utter ignorance does it indicate of trueChristianity ! Morality is its main vital principle ; yetthe story, though strangely unnatural, is beautifullytold and inimitably interesting." 3 " You will bepleased," he tells Mr. Roberts, " with a very liberalbut really just critique on your friend Montgomery'sPoems in the British Review. There is a great dealof good in that work, though in some things I differfrom its principles. I do not know whether you areapolitical economist ; but there is an excellent counton Malthus and his conclusions." " ReadingParke's Journal for two hours to-night. Mostwonderful man ! What astonishing vigour of mind,but for what a cause, alas ! "To these employments must be added attempts tobenefit his temporary neighbours. It was one of hisfirst cares to form an accurate estimate of the moraland religious state of the surrounding population. AtSandgate he found much to regret. (f It is grievous,"he laments to Mr. Stephen, " to see this place hotand cold sea baths, library, billiard table, ponies, donkeys,every thing but a church, or chapel, or any thing3 Diary, Aug. 18.1812. SUMMER EMPLOYMENTS. 53of the kind, though it is a sort of preserve of the Archbishop's.There is not even a Sunday school. We aretrying to get something of the kind set on foot." Hewas almost disqualified by feeble health from personalexertions in visiting the poor ; yet what he could hedid, even in this way ; stopping often in his solitarywalks to drop some word of wisdom for those who casuallymet him ." Thursday : walking early, met aboy aged fourteen, John Russell, who cannot read, andutterly ignorant of religion did not know what wouldbecome of us hereafter may this meeting be forgood " 4 . . . while upon those whose circumstancesmade it possible, he continually pressed the happinessand duty of thus ministering to their wants. " MissE." he says this spring, " now going on admirably.Her health and spirits improved, and she very activeamongst the cottagers, doing them good. A mostuseful lesson taught by this; that the best coursewhen any one is low-spirited and distressed withanxieties, is to set them to action in doing good toothers. Trust thou in the Lord, and be doing good." 5But one important subject now pressed for instantdecision. Lord Sidmouth had privately informedhim that an immediate dissolution was at hand ; andthe time was therefore come, when he must make uphis mind to retain or to resign the representation ofhis county. " I shrink," he says, when weighing allthe arguments upon the subject, " from absolutely decidingto resign my situation as from annihilation.Yet my judgment commends it more and more ; and4 Diary. 5 Ib.54 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE 181^it is not annihilation if I stay in the House, thoughnot for Yorkshire. May the Lord guide me aright.The urgent claims of my children upon my thoughts,time, and superintendence, strongly enforce my relinquishment,and are the deciding consideration.My declining health and memory seem improved;but I ought not to be an occasional attendant on parliamentif M. P. for Yorkshire. O Lord, give mewisdom to guide me rightly. I mean to spend a dayin religious exercises, and to make this with mychildren the great objects with God." 6 His decisionwas soon made, and was announced two days afterwardsin the following letter.TO CHARLES Buncombe ESQ. 7 Buncombe PARK,YORKSHIRE.Sandgate, near Folkstone, Sept. 8, 1812."~ My dear Buncombe,After much serious consideration, I have atlast made up my mind on the important point onwhich I wrote to you some time ago I have resolvedto resign that high station with which the kind partialityof my Yorkshire friends has so long honouredme, and in which you have yourself so kindly, andactively, and perse verily contributed to place me.The truth is, that I find I must either continue toallot less time and thought to my family than it justlyclaims, or that I must cease to be a constant and6 Diary, Sept. 6.7 Mr. Buncombe (now Lord Petersham) had been chairman of hiscommittee at the last election.1812. NO PROSPECT OF A CONTEST. 55assiduous member of parliament, which I am sure Iought to be if I undertake so serious and weighty atrust as that of the representative of the county ofYork.Yet I will fairly own to you that it is not altogetherwithout difficulty that I have brought myselfto form this determination ; but my judgment beingclear, and that after much and long reflection, (for itis more than a year that this plan has been in contemplation,)and my own opinion being confirmed bythose of several j)f my best friends, I ought no longerto hesitate ; and having come to a decision, you arethe first person to whom I communicate it. Theprobability of a dissolution of parliament in the ensuingautumn is so strong, that it seemed right for meto make up my mind ; and I will own to you that Iwish it to appear clear that I am not influenced inmy judgment by the fear of an opposition, of which, ifI were to offer myself, I am clear there w r ould be noprobability. The higher orders are not liable to suddenchanges of their opinions in cases of this sort, andI have every reason to believe (some which no onealmost knows but myself, but which would be of verypowerful operation) that I should be warmly supportedby the great body of the clothiers. I hopeyou will not suspect me of not estimating at their dueamount the trouble and expense which another contestwould occasion to my supporters ; but I own, thatif I believed there were in a certain quarter any designto oppose me, that very circumstance would producein me so strong a disposition to stand my ground,that I should find it very hard work to force myself56 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1812.to retire, if I could do it at all not, believe me, frompersonal motives, though I dare not affirm that theywould not mix, but because I should no longer thinkit my duty so to do ; for believing that four-fifths atleast of the freeholders are friendly to me, I could notbear the idea of a member, be he who he may, beingforced upon our great county by the one-fifth of thefreeholders, against the sense of the other four parts,merely by the dread of the expense of a contest ;which our experience in 1807 proves may be carriedon for a sum by no means difficult to be raised in ourcounty, without pressing too heavily on the candidatehimself.But it is in confidence that to your private ear Ithus whisper my secret feelings, and as strictly secretI beg you will consider what I have said. Though Ihave consulted none but very particular friends Icannot but suspect that there has been some leakyvessel, and that hence has arisen that abominable reportof a compromise between Mr. H. Lascellesand myself, which would have been highly dishonourableto us both, though far more so to me than tohim. Several friends however on whose judgmentsI place great reliance, are so earnest with me not toquit parliament altogether, that I have agreed to acceptthe very kind offer of a dear friend, and throughmarriage a near relation, which will probably placeme in a seat in which my occasional attendance in theHouse of Commons will not be inconsistent withother claims. But let this also be strictly entre nousat present. I am doubtful as to the proper time ofannouncing my intended resignation publicly, and shall1812. RESIGNATION ANNOUNCED. 57be glad of your opinion on that head, on which Imean also to consult Creyke and another friend ortwo. If the dissolution of parliament should seemreally likely, or pretty certainly to take place, it might,and I conceive would, become right for me to declaremy intention without further loss of time ; but if weseem likely to live through another session, the declarationmight this year be premature. I cannot concludewithout thanking you most cordially for all thekindness which I have experienced from you duringmy connexion with York ; for though I am not vain,or rather foolish enough to ascribe your support topersonal motives, which indeed would be a suppositiondishonourable to yourself, yet I should be void of allgratitude if its emotions were not called forth by thelong course of continued good offices with which youhave favoured me. Let me again however earnestlyrequest, that all I have said may be at present consideredas strictly confidential.ts Let me beg you to present my own and Mrs. W.'skind remembrances to Lady Charlotte, who, with allthe family, I hope is well, and to believe me, my dearD. with real regard,Yours very sincerely,W. Wilberforce."His intentions did not long remain a secret. Onthe 21st, hearing from good authority that parliamentwas about to be dissolved, he sent " his resigningadvertisement." On the 24th, he was " verybusy writing letters, announcing my retiring. MyD 358 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1812.advertisement in the Courier to-day. Lascelles hasnotified to Wentworth House that he did not meanto offer. I humbly trust that I have done right;but I cannot say that I do not feel a good deal.Surely it is much to quit such a situation with ahigh character, and with the wishes of friends thatI should retain it. I go to prayer. My heart is deceitful,I scarcely know myself what it wishes, stillmy judgment is for Bramber." To different friendshe entered at more or less detail into the reasons ofhis conduct.Sandgate, Sept. 25, 1812.My dear Stephen,You have probably seen by my advertisementthat the Rubicon is passed. I cannot but own that Ifeel more than I expected from the sacrifice, and yetreally it is very little that I feel. I mean it does notweigh down my spirits at all, or materially vex me.But it will be curious if, from Lord C.'s being out ofEngland, there should be any illustration of the oldadage, f Between two stools,' &c. Kindest remembrancesto my sister. I scribble in extreme haste.Ever affectionately yours,W. WILBERFORCE."To Mr. Roberts he wrote upon the 24thSandgate, Sept. 24, 1812.My dear Sir,I am pressed for time to-day, but I must sendyou a few lines because I should be sorry you should1812. REASONS FOR RETIRING. 59first learn from the newspapers that I have at lengthmade up my mind on a point on which I have beenfor some time deliberating, by resolving to resign thehigh honour (for such I really account it) of representingthe county of York in parliament. The truthis, I begin to find that I have incompatible duties toperform ; and I must either to the House of Commons,or to my family, allot less of my time andthoughts than they both (so long as I continue M. P.for Yorkshire) would justly claim. I therefore haveno other course to pursue than that which I have resolvedto adopt, and which by the way has been undermy consideration ever since the first commencementof our confidential correspondence.If indeed I could be satisfied with attending ascounty members in general do, I might still continueyour representative. But it appears to me, that professinga stricter religious creed (if I may so expressit) than the world in general, I ought to be proportionablystricter in my practice also. There is notone precept which is more frequently repeated in theNew Testament, no principle of conduct which is morestrongly enforced on our practice, than that of walkingworthy of our Christian calling : and I have hadno better way of showing my attention to this injunction,than by discharging the duties of my parliamentarystation with more than common diligence. Ishould be ashamed of all these egotism if you and Ihad not agreed to be unreserved in our communications.I have however to acquaint you further thatmy friends have been, in general, so decided and strong60 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1812.against my quitting the House of Commons altogether,that I believe I shall still continue in it, at least for atime, though in a seat which will not impose on me theobligation of such constant attendance. I can trulyassure you, (and I beg you will take any proper opportunityof stating this, because I should be sorrythe motives of my retiring should be misunderstood,)that I have not been in the least influenced in my decisionby the fear of an opposition, for I never conceivedthat there would be any. Mr. H. Lascelles,who was talked of, had been as I knew canvassingPomfret, and giving recent indications of attention tothat borough. But I must break off. Indeed I havebeen drawn on much more than I meant.I will enclose an advertisement which I will thankyou to get inserted in the Sheffield newspapers.Believe me, with esteem and regard,Yours sincerely,W. WILBERFORCE."To his old brother "Independent" Bankes, he thusannounces his intention.Sandgate, Sept. 26, 1812.My dear Bankes,I have been intending day after day to writeto you before I received your last, but I have beenmuch interrupted lately, and not able to keep downmy letters ; so that an accumulation took place likethat of the coaches in the Strand on a stop at highnoon. But my object in taking up my pen at this1812. SATISFACTION OF HIS FRIENDS. 61late hour of the night . . for such it is, and Mrs. Wilberforce,&c. all gone to bed . . was to satisfy the kindsolicitude which from long experience I know you willfeel on my account, in consequence of the advertisementwhich you will have seen or heard of, announcingmy resignation of my seat for Yorkshire. You willI know be glad to hear, and would probably conclude,that I am to occupy a seat which will allow me tospare more time and thought to my family, and to bealess constant attendant in the House of Commons.My advertisement really states my true reason.I did not in the least expect a contest. Farewell, mydear Bankes. Believe me, with kind remembrancesto all your family,Ever affectionately yours,W. Wilberforce."This unexpected announcement was very variouslyreceived. Those who had witnessed the amount oflabour which his sense of duty had long imposed uponhim, and compared it with the powers of his slightframe and tender health, rejoiced in his decision.Such was Mr. Bankes's judgment.Sandgate, Sept 29, 1812.My dear Bankes,It gives me real pleasure to find you approvingof the step I have taken, on the supposition of itsbeing associated with that which does actually accompanyit. I am not quite clear whether or not I toldyou in my last, though I think I did, that Lord CalcLIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1812.thorpe, a near relation through Mrs. Wilberforce, anda particular friend, had in the kindest manner possiblepressed me to represent Bramber, and to considerit quite as my own which, brought in by him, I reallycan do. I believe on the whole also that I am pleasedwith your own determination not to contest the county;though it is a growling sort of satisfaction toothat I must express, for it really is a shame thatsuch a competitor should be preferred to you. But Istill think that I shall see you M. P. for Dorsetshire.I should have thought Morton Pitt would have hadenough of it.I am a little doubtful whether or not to godown into Yorkshire to take my leave. It seemsthe natural course ; but a friend tells me, that someof the oppositionists throw out that I am wishingto be invited to continue in my seat. This impressionwill however be counteracted by my beingknown to have been elected for Bramber. How doesthis strike you ? I must break off.Ever yours,W. Wilberforce'*His Yorkshire friends, almost to a man, lamentedhis decision. " You cannot be ignorant," writes oneof them, " that by the nation in general you arelooked up to as the advocate of religion amongst thehigher orders of society, and particularly in thatlegislative assembly, of which, happily for this country,you have so long been a conspicuous and efficientmember." County reasons too increased this feeling.1812. REGRET OF HIS CONSTITUENTS. 63After mentioning the general grounds of his regret,Mr. Morritt adds his fear " lest it should throw thecounty into the permanent possession of the two nobleEarls who alone possess length of purse sufficientto command it, or should perhaps lead to anothergreat and fruitless contest."Many were wholly unable to comprehend hismotives. " Are you not surprised' Mr. Smithof Heath asks Dr. Coulthurst, " at Mr. Wilberforce'swithdrawing when he could have walked overthe course without the least show of opposition. Ihardly understand it." In other places to which thefame of his great contest had extended, and where itwas not known that no opposition was now threatened,he was naturally thought to have shrunk from a repetitionof its ruinous expense. " I find I have beenuniversally misconstrued. My advertisement notclear enough when doing an unusual thing. It issupposed that I retired from apprehension of a contest,so I resolve to publish a new advertisement.Pressed to stand for Westminster, also for Lewes, andDover." 8 " Would you believe it, R. really andgravely asked me to stand for Warwickshire, on theBirmingham interest, and be the business member.I am not yet quite insane." 9 " Several have toldme that I must stand for Yorkshire, and many evensensible men supposed that I could be persuaded tocome in for it, and did not give me credit for thesincerity of my resignation." 10The same idea had been current in Yorkshire, whensDiary, Oct. 7. 9 Letter. w Diary, Oct. 8.H64 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1812.a fortnight before his death Sir George Savile retiredfrom its representation. It now led many of his old supportersto express to Mr. Wilberforce their earnesthopes that he would not decline the trust which on theday of nomination would be forced upon him. " Suchmistakes," he says, " have this good in them, thatthey bring real friends about us, and cause us to receivefresh proofs of their affectionate solicitude."His new advertisement was now published. " It tellsa plain tale to contradict the idea that I was retiringfrom a contest. It is rather bald, but it will answerits end. Perhaps I did not enough bear in mindthat my mode of acting and principle of conduct wereboth unusual, and therefore that my first addressshould be unambiguously clear. The fact is that Imeant to explain more fully in person. 5 ' 11 This resolutionhe reluctantly abandoned. " In announcing Iwould return my personal thanks, I acted," he tells Mr.Babington, <( from the impulse of the moment. Butit appears to me that my taking leave would tend toincrease my personal interest, and give me a sort ofpersonal hold on the affections of the people ; especiallyfor instance my going to the Cloth Halls atLeeds, and talking with the trustees, might tend toprevent their becoming the dupes of democrats. YetI have just received a letter from honest Gray ofYork, telling me that the oppositionists of Yorkthrow out that I am fishing for an invitation tocontinue M. P. for the county, or it may appearlike asking for a vote of thanks."Letter to James Stephen Esq.1812. INTENDED VISIT TO YORK. 65To these reasons he gave way, and listenedfrom his quiet retirement at Sandgate to the dinof distant elections. " Babington's contest still continues.Henry Thornton's election secure. Boththe Grants' ditto. Honest Butterworth's success remindsme of ( Them that honour me, I will honour ; 'he was quite the popular candidate, and the crafty,roguish counsel of his opponents was made to recoilon themselves. I feel somewhat like an old retiredhunter, who is grazing in a park, and hearing thecry of the hounds pricks up his ears and can scarcekeep quiet or refrain from breaking out to join them ;but this is mere animal spirits. I still conceivemy having gone down into Yorkshire might havedone good in various ways. It would give far moregrace to my retiring, and tend to confirm my influencewith the middle ranks. What I should saywould have somewhat of the solemnity of a death-beddeclaration." " You allude," writes one of his constituents,"12 to a player taking leave. That simileshocks me. Upon the stage ' et plaudits' was alwaysattended by a f valet.' I should not like to thinkthat you were bowing to box, pit, and gallery ; for Icannot help judging," adds the East Riding squire,"of an attendance on a Cloth Hall, as very muchlike looking to the shilling gallery."The applause which he feared to seem to seek, followedhim into his retirement. The county at largeon the day of nomination recorded solemnly theirjudgment of his character in an enthusiastic vote of12 Colonel Creyke.66 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1812.their unanimous thanks ; and his own town of Hullfollowed with a similar memorial of affection. Thesetwo testimonials to independent merit are well worthpreserving.At a meeting of the gentlemen., clergy, and freeholdersof the county of York, assembled at theCastle of York on Monday the 12th of October, 1812,for the purpose of nominating proper persons to representthis county in parliament : Resolved unanimously,that the freeholders of this county, in themost grateful manner, return thanks to Mr. Wilberforcefor his services during more than 28 yearsas their representative in parliament; for his unremittingand impartial attention to the private business ofthe county ; and for his independent and honest performanceof his trust upon every public occasion.They request that he will ever be assured of theirwishes for his health and happiness."His townsmen, at a meeting held by requisition atthe Mansion House, (Oct. 20th,) unanimously wroteSir,Although the thanks of the freeholders of thiscounty for your eminent public services have beenvoted by a most numerous and respectable meetingheld at York, we trust the intimate connexion whichyou have ever maintained with the place of your birth,will justify a claim to the privilege of expressing ourpeculiar approbation and regard. In common with alarge portion of Yorkshire freeholders, we deeplyregret the necessity of your retirement to a station of1812. VOTE OF THANKS. 67comparative leisure ; still some consolation is derivedfrom the assurance that the benefit of your talentswill not be withdrawn from the country at a period ofunprecedented danger and difficulty. It were on ourparts a vain attempt to review the important events ofyour political life, or to express an opinion upon each ;but we can truly assert our firm conviction, that yourconduct on all occasions has been regulated by principlesof true and honourable independence.We cannot however pass unnoticed your indefatigableexertions to effect the abolition of an execrabletraffic, alike inconsistent with British feeling andChristian principle exertions which have enrolledyour name among the illustrious benefactors of mankind,and the latest posterity will pronounce it withthe reverence due to exalted virtue. To your perseverancethrough a series of years, this country isindebted for a practical application to others of thosegreat principles of liberty, which are its pride andboast. The stain upon its character has, throughyour means, been effaced : for this, Britain owes a debtof eternal gratitude.As freeholders of Yorkshire resident in and nearHull, we indulge in the grateful feelings of an honestpride ; we exult in the reflection that the illustriousnames of those incorruptible patriots Marvel andWilberforce adorn our records and shed a lustre onthis the place of their nativity.Among other subjects of praise, it is not theleast that on retiring from the representation of thiscounty after a faithful service of twenty-eight years,68 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1812.and possessed of the influence which such a stationmust necessarily command, you have not during 'thatperiod accepted of place, pension, or rank, and haveacquired no other than the distinguished title of the< Friend of Man. 5 "All parties indeed concurred in bestowing this well-earnedapplause on the retiring member. " Thereare great panegyrics on you now in all the papers."What shall I say," he answers such a communication,to your friendly enclosure ? I really am embarrassed; yet in the epithet of ' friendly,' which I give it,I say much, when it is given with sincerity. But forgiveme if I add that I was reminded of a passage inaletter from Archbishop Seeker to Dr. Doddridge,who had expressed to the Archbishop (who was indeeda truly good, and therefore a great, man) hisrespect for his Grace's character in warm terms, ofthe sincerity of which the Archbishop had as littledoubt as I have of yours. But your kind partialityhas led you into a commendation of me, which I fearpeople in common will say brings to their recollection,that love (and why not friendship also ? ) is blind. Iwill not affect a greater degree of humility than Ifeel, or deny that I have been a diligent and uprightrepresentative ; but when I take into account all circumstances,and more especially the natural effect ofthe newspapers (almost all of them more or less hostileto me) on the opinions which persons at a distanceform of public men, I can only ascribe it to thekind providence of Him who turneth the hearts of1812. Mss. MEM. 69all men according to His good pleasure, that I havepreserved so long, and still continue to preserve, thefavourable regard of all ranks of my constituents."This letter may be aptly followed by the insertionof a fragment of his own dictation, in which this longand singular connexion with the county is reviewed.Surely if I cannot but look back upon the circumstanceswhich attended the first formation of myconnexion with the county of York without recognisingthe traces of providential guidance, neither can Iforbear to acknowledge the same gracious favour inmy having so long continued in my honourable station.May I not well wonder that in a county accustomedto so much attention from its members, so much thatwas likely to give offence should be endured in mewithout the slightest expression of disapprobation.My religious character and habits might alone be expectedto produce disgust. My never attending thecounty races, or even the assizes ; my never cultivatingthe personal acquaintance of the nobility andgentry (an omission which would have been culpable,but for the expenditure it would have occasioned oftime which I wanted for important purposes) ; my seldomvisiting the county, sometimes not going into itfor several years together; all these might fairly havebeen expected to have alienated from me the goodwillof the freeholders ; yet it never produced this effect,and I have every reason to believe that I nevershould have experienced another opposition. But Ibegan to perceive traces of infirmity, which, from considerationsalike of duty and prudence, determined70 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1812.me to retire from my dignified station, and to acceptthe friendly offer of a seat in parliament which wouldabsolve me from the obligation of constant attendance.Several of my Yorkshire friends were for the firsttime dissatisfied with me ; and the letters which I receivedfrom various quarters were such as could notbut be gratifying to any liberal mind. And here Icannot forbear mentioning a trifling anecdote, whichis not without importance in the proof it affords thatthe general course of a public man may be approvedby many who may not concur with him in his politicalopinions. On my way to the House of Commonsone day soon after my having exchanged my seat forYorkshire for the borough of Bramber, I met Mr.Sheridan. After we had exchanged salutations, ' Doyou know said he, ' that I was near writing to yousome little time ago ? ' On my asking the occasion ofhis intended letter, ( Why,' said he, ' I read in thenewspaper your farewell Address to the Freeholdersof Yorkshire, and though you and I have not muchagreed in our votes in the House of Commons, yet Ithought the independent part you acted would renderyour retirement from parliament a public loss. I wasabout therefore to write to you, to enforce on you thepropriety of reconsidering your determination toretire, as I supposed, from public life, when I wasinformed that you were to come into parliament forBramber; this information made me lay aside myintention.' ' :His Sandgate retirement was now interrupted bythe conclusion of his children's holidays; as he1812. TO MRS. WILBERFORCE. 71wished himself to place one of his boys with a newtutor in Leicestershire. " On Friday last," hetells Lord Muncaster, " I set out from Sandgatewith my two boys, to convey them to their respectiveplaces of education. I am now writing at the parsonageof Mr. Stephen's eldest son, in one of the mostrural villages in Oxfordshire, secured almost to thepoint of being impregnable by the badness of theroads, but surrounded with beech woods, and trulycrucifying to the mind, as Burke would have said,when soured and fretted by the bustle and the businessof life." " Yesterday," he tells Mrs. Wilberforcefrom the same place, " I was fully occupied until theevening, when it would have been almost sacrilegeand ingratitude not to walk for half an hour at leastenjoying one of the finest sun-settings and moon-risingswhich my eyes ever beheld. Then my dearboys were with me for some time, and we had someserious talk together. But though I was not occupiedin writing to you, I was thinking of you all. Alovelier evening for meditating I never remember,and this is one of the finest mornings that eyeever beheld. We had a verypleasant evening at Harrow, and in the morningthe gradual accumulation of visitors at breakfastwould have reminded you of Kensington Gore, bothas to matter and to manner; and the KensingtonGore precedent was completely followed, for wesome of us retired to have a consultation. But I mustbreak off. I am delaying Stephen and the boysfrom a stroll in the woods ; I will therefore only add aline or two. But I must tell you how delighted I was72 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1812.with Lord Teignmouth's and all that I saw at Harrow.You would also have been gratified to see how Mrs.Samuel Thornton, always overflowing with benevolence,seemed to enjoy Kensington Gore, 13 especially,she says, the verandah. I do not think that Ihave had so much pleasure a long time as from havingbeen able thus to contribute to the comfort ofsuch kind friends at a time when they needed it.Young Perceval is a sweet young man, and in someof his features and motions so like his father that itwas impossible for any one, who like me had knownand valued him, not to be affected by seeing the son.Poor Perceval ! You know the boys at Harrow speakpublicly once a year, and all the parents arid oldHarrow men attend. Perceval, a week or ten daysbefore he was murdered, had bespoke rooms at theinn that he might give a dinner to some friends andrelations who were to hear his son speak CardinalWolsey's affecting speech in Henry VIII. ( In themidst of life we are in death.' I commend you allto God's protecting care, and to our gracious Saviour'sgoodness."This journey is a good illustration of his parentaltenderness. " I had resolved," he writes to Mrs.Wilberforce from Leicestershire, te to set my facetowards Cambridge this very day ; but at length Ithought it better, (after a rumination on my pillowwhen I lay awake against my will thinking of dearwho lay in a little bed by my side fast asleep,and whom I conceived I was about to leave for good,)to return southward. I feel so nervous about leaving13 His house now lent to these friends.1812. PARENTAL FEELINGS. 73him, that but for shame I think I should bring himback again." tf After having prayed with , andhad a tete-astute with Mrs. , I set off for Leicester.Poor dear boy, he was much affected at partingwith me, turning round and bursting into tears, firstquietly, and afterwards with sobs. I was near cryingtoo as I said to Mrs. , ( I must get off, or else 'but she I trust will watch over him with Christiancare." 14Another incident on this journey must stand in hisown words. " I am much grieved at having yesterdaypassed by, without stopping, a man in a ditchby the road-side between Barnet and London, whomtwo or three gentlemen were attending to. TheLeeds coach with the back seats empty was justbehind, and multitudes of passengers, so that helpcould not be wanted ; yet it was wrong in all respectsto pass by. It is an adjudged case since the goodSamaritan parable at which I should have been instinctivelyprompt. It was not hardness of heart Ibelieve either. I was busy hearing Bowdler's paperupon Dugald Stewart, and I was flurried by the Leedscoach, on the outside of which were people who Ithought knew me ; yet if so it was worse riot glorifyingGod, &c. Lord, forgive me, forgive me ! I felt(and now condemn it) more, that to-day is the anniversary(Oct. 25th) of my escape from drowning in theAvon, by a most providential suggestion." 15 So littlehad thirty two years of public life hardened his affections,or blunted a most tender conscience. As heDiary, Oct. 25. Ib.VOL. IV. E74 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1812.drew near London, he wrote to Mr. Macaulay thefollowing playful letter on the temporary housing ofa grateful offering made by one of his unnumberedclients.Woburn, Oct. 23.My dear Macaulay,I am come thus far on my way southward, andI mean, if it please God, to pass through London tomorrowto Battersea Rise, if the Henry Thorntonare there. I hope you will be able to meet me.If the antelope will not molest the residents inDowning Street, which by the account I conceive tobe the case, it will be a kindness if they will keep ittill we arrive at Kensington Gore, for it might notfare so well till then, very few of our servants beingat home, and those few not understanding antelopes.I do not ask its consent to this arrangement, becauseI am sure there can, even from Africa itself, feramonstrous as it has been called, be no civil-conditionedcreature which would not be glad to havedear Matthew for a patron ; and I see not why f loveme and love my antelope,' should not hold true, as wellas ' love me and love my dog ;' and as I am sureMatthew loves me, Q. E. D.Ever yours affectionately,W. WILBERFORCE."On the 26th of October he was again at Sandgate,and purposing to " set apart a day for devotional exercises,in which my main objects will be Divine1812. TREATY WITH SWEDEN. 75guidance and blessing as to my children, and for ablessing on my new plan of life. For guidance andstrength to walk in the right path. Oh what causehave I for gratitude !" 16His short London visit had brought before himAbolition matters, and the day after his return hewrote to Mr. Stephen.Sandgate, Oct. 27, 1812.My dear Stephen,I ought to let you know that I have this daywritten to Lord Castlereagh, to urge on him the addinga supplemental article to the treaty with Sweden, bywhich we should agree mutually to combine our exertionsfor the Abolition of the Slave Trade. I have notseen the newspapers at all regularly during my ramble ;and therefore had not heard of our having made anytreaty with Sweden, till Macaulay told me of it on Saturdaylast at Henry Thornton's. I mentioned to LordCastlereagh that you were on the point of returningto London if he should wish for your advice. Indeedafter the joint address of the Lords and Commons afew years ago, ministers themselves ought to haveanticipated our application. Macaulay will tell youthat St. Bartholomew's is quite a mart for the SlaveTrade, whence, he adds, the poor creatures are distributedamong our own islands and those of otherpowers. As we shall meet I hope in less than a fortnight,we may then talk over Abolition topics ; butas we can never expect the state of parties or of parsDiary.E 276 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1812.lament to be more favourable to our cause, I ownmy judgment will be decidedly for our trying to carrythe Register, if we can make any thing of Lord Grenville; I had almost said whether we can or not.I am ever yours affectionately,W. WILBERFORCE."On the same day he sent Lord Muncaster hishearty congratulations on the birth of a grandson.Sandgate, Oct. 27, 1812.My dear Muncaster,I returned to this place last night after anabsence of three weeks, in which I was moving fromplace to place on calls of business or of friendship,and never pausing above two or three days at onehouse. On my way homeward, I received youracceptable postscript ; and it is one of my first occupationsafter my return to send you our best congratulationsand kindest wishes. I can conceive grandchildrento be sources of more unmixed pleasure thanchildren themselves, because in their case we feelless responsibility, and consequently less anxiety. Ican see you dancing the bantling in your arms, andbeing as young as old Agesilaus is reported to havebeen."you must have heard all that passed at the Yorkshireelection. This is too long a theme to enter uponnow, for you may well suppose that after my lettershave been accumulating on me for near three weeksI have a terrific mass before me. But before I plunge1812. RESIGNING YORKSHIRE. 77into the mare magnum, as poor old Dundas used toterm it, I was determined to sail up the river Desk,and pay my respects to the new-born future occupantof the ' Luck of Muncaster.'Shall you come up before Christmas ? I scarcelyexpect you. I hope government will not propose themeasure which was talked of before the dissolution,by which we were to provide against our own possiblemortality. 17 Surely this would be a very impolitic measure.I passed through London, but so quietly asto have heard no political intelligence which will notlong ago have reached you. From Stanhope's 18 notcoming into parliament again, I fear his stamina aresuspected to be more affected than I had imagined.If so, I own I think he has judged rightly, and forthe same reason I am glad our worthy old friendHawkins Brown has retired, for age is not to be measuredby years, but by bodily strength ; for instance,I account myself full ten years older than most menof my own age, though by care I may, through God'sblessing, and calculating according to human probabilities,attain to the ordinary duration of the life ofman. In truth, if I could have been sure that thisparliament would have died in three years, I mighthave consented to a renewal of my lease. But sixyears was a longer term than I durst venture to engagefor. Indeed, as we grow nearer the great change,it is well to make still ampler preparation for it;though it is not necessary that we should for this>' In the event of the King's death.18 W. Spencer Stanhope Esq.78 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1812.end retire altogether from public service ; but tolive under a more abiding impression of the uncertaintyof life, and with dispositions better fitted forthat condition of being into which we are probablyere long to enter, must certainly be right. For thisend I find nothing more effectual than private prayer,and the serious perusal of the New Testament. ButI am reminded that it is time for me to lay down mypen. So once more congratulating you, and beggingyou to give my best remembrances to Lord and LadyLindsay, I am ever, my dear Muncaster,Yours very sincerely and affectionately,W. WILBERFORCE."To the eye of a stranger he appeared at this timefull " ten years older" than he was; but more intimateacquaintance removed this impression. Delicacyof health had indeed set on him already some of theexternal marks of age, and a stoop which he contractedearly, and which lessened his apparent stature,added much to this effect. But the agility of hisstep, the quickness of all his senses, (though he onlyheard with one ear,) his sparkling eye, and the compassand beauty of his voice, contradicted all these firstappearances. And those who listened with delight tothe freshness and exuberance of thoughts, sometimesdeeply serious, sometimes playful and humorous,which enriched his conversation, could hardly believethat he had long borne the weight even of manlyyears. At the breakfast table, and again from thesetting-in of evening until midnight were his gayest1812. ABOLITION INTERESTS. 79times"; at the last, especially, all his faculties were in 'the fullest exercise ; and when being read to in hisfamily circle, which was his delight, he poured forthall his stores, gathering around him book after bookto illustrate, question, or confirm the immediate subjectof the evening.On the last day of October he left Sandgate, andhalted with his family for near a fortnight with hisold friend Lord Barham. Ever watchful of Abolitioninterests, he wrote hence to Mr. Macaulay.Barham Court, Nov. 4, 1812.My dear Macaulay,I entirely concur with you in opinion concerningthe Swedish Treaty topic ; and before I heardfrom Stephen, I had written to Lord Castlereagh onthe subject. I hope Stephen will not, I dare say hewill not, express to Lord Castlereagh any of the doubts,or more than doubts, which he has stated to me, andwhich I confess surprised me. I am persuaded that,besides the particular benefit to be derived in eachparticular instance from ministry's compliance withour wishes, we serve the cause instead of injuringit by applying to them on all fair occasions, becausewe show them that our attention is wakeful! y directedto the subject, and therefore that they also must beawake. Farewell.I am ever yours,W. Wilberforce.Zachary Macaulay Esq.P. S. My little girls are in love with the antelope80 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1812.from Matthew's description. As we shall probably gohome by Downing Street, I shall have hard work tokeep them from calling on Friday to gratify theireyes."On the day following he wrote to Mrs. HannahMore.Barham Court, Nov. 5, 1812.You really provoke me, my dear friend, whenyou begin your letter by saying that you are alwayssorry to break in upon me. As if you did not know,that to hear from you is always to me like a piece offine smooth-shaven down to a horseman who is almostworn out by plodding his weary way through deepclayey roads, or picking his steps among stony paths.The very animal he rides is revived by the change,and instinctively sets up a canter. I suppose myreader is the animal's archetype ; though he, lesslively than the four-footed performer, does not seem topartake of the animation. Or rather, to speak thetruth, he would not, for I need not assure youthat I do not commit your epistles to his perusal.The idea was suggested by his being at this momentat my side, in a state not unaptly described by myrepresentation.To see so little of you is a standing grievance ofmy life (I speak seriously). But you possess a firstplace in my heart. May the Almighty support andbless you. I am concerned for poor Patty also. Butthis vile body is to be the exclamation here below.By and by it will be, Thanks to God, who hath1812. RULES OF CONDUCT. 81given us the victory through Jesus Christ ! Farewell.Let me hear from you occasionally, and neverbe so affected again as to talk of breaking in uponme.Mrs. Wilberforce desires me to send her kindestremembrances ; give mine to the sisterhood, and believeme,Ever your sincere and affectionate friend,W. WILBERFORCE."P. S. Alas ! alas ! this sad war with America ! Inever felt any public incident so deeply. Yet on thewhole I thank God I can lay my head on my pillow inpeace, for our government is not chargeable with theblood-guiltiness ; but Addison, Jefferson, &c."In the quiet hours which he could now command,he was looking forward to his London life, and resolvingon such rules as he thought would then be usefulto him. Above all he now determined, " when not unavoidablyprevented by company or House of Commons,to take an hour, or at least half an hour, forprivate devotions, including Scripture reading andmeditation, immediately before family prayers. Besidesother benefits, one will be to send me back intosociety with a more spiritual mind, and to help me topreserve it through the evening, and to make the conversationmore edifying and instructive. How can Iexpect a blessing otherwise ? Oh let me reform here ;it has been my standing sin of late : I must thereforeremember that I shall find it difficult to adhere to theE 382 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1812.reformed system. The best hope will arise from mybearing about with me a deep impression of the difficulty,and of my own weakness, and of the urgentneed of Divine help. Also aim at universal holiness,guard against self-indulgence, and love of humanestimation. Oh how that vile passion will creep in !Even now it is at work fold within fold. Lord,Thou knowest me ; I cast myself on Thy pardoningmercy and sanctifying grace'* 19Upon his return to London, he set apart a day formore especial private devotions. " I have had seriousdoubts, whether or not it is right to do so when Ihave so many important subjects to consider, and somuch to do ; yet the examples as well as writings ofgood men, and above all, the Holy Scriptures, takingthe precepts which directly treat of fasting and comparingthem with others, warrant it. N. B. Christ'swords about the demons, which expelled only by fastingand prayer. Then as to my being now extremely occupied,Owen's remark in some degree applies, (inferencefrom Malachi,) that we should give God if needfulour best time. O Lord, Thy blessing can renderfar more than a day's time as nothing even in myworldly business, and if the main-spring's force bestrengthened, and its working improved, (cleansedfrom dust and foulness,) surely the machine will gobetter. Lord, what I do I trust is pleasing to Theeaccept and bless my service."The next day was devoted to this purpose, and hisJournal is full of his usual entries upon these occa-9 Diary.1812. PLAN OF LIFE. 83sons of humiliation for whatever sin a carefulsearch detected in himself ." I put these thingsdown, that I may fix, and ascertain, and re-considermy own corruptions and the deceitful working of mymind and passions. There are two souls within me ;Lord, help me to expel the fleshly occupant " .of thankfulness ; of prayer ." that I mayplan my system of life wisely, and execute it properlyin the new circumstances in which I am placed " .of intercession . . . " for my dear children,now main and special objects with me ; for privatefriends, and especially my god-children.As to my plan of life, I conceive that my chief objectsshould be First ; My children. Secondly; Parliament.Thirdly ; When I can spare time, my pen tobe employed in religious writing. Hints and thoughtsfor my intended book. Oh with what humiliation andthankfulness should my Practical View fill me ! As Ihave certainly begun to find my faculties, especiallymy memory, (perhaps my imagination but it maybeonly my memory,) decline, I should strive to makeupfor the declension by more pains ; and now that Ishall not be a constant attendant, and shall not haveYorkshire business, I must prepare more. I conceiveit to be my duty to attend to this object ; yet, O Lord,enable me to do it from first to last with a simpleeye to Thy favour and Thy glory, and with less love ofhuman estimation."let me look over my ( grounds for humiliation,'my ' company regulations.' How sadly apt am I tolose all recollection of these, and of keeping my heart84 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1812.when I ain in society ! Lord, strengthen me withmight. Let Christ dwell, not merely occasionallyvisit, but dwell in my heart by faith. Let mecultivate more an habitual love of God Butler andBarrow habitual gratitude. Let me try some memorandumanalogous to the phylactery. See Numb.xv. 38, 40."With such resolutions he returned to London life.Upon the 24th of November " the House met and wechose a Speaker. Dined General Calvert's to meetSir Howard Douglas ; fresh from Lord Wellington atBurgos above 2000 men lost there." 21 The day followinghe took the oaths as member for Bramber ; andon the 30th the business of the session opened withWhitbread's amendment to the Address, recommendingpeace. We all against Henry Thornton,Babingtou, and I thought the general tone too warlike.Dec. 1st. House I meant to speak rather forpeace, but expressed my meaning imperfectly, andthe newspapers putting in only what is calculated, asthey conceive, to make me unpopular, and leaving outall the rest, I am made to be far more warlike than Iam, or should have been supposed to be, if I had beensilent. They omitted all I said about my thinkingit a favourable time for treating, and that I hopedthey would take every fair opening ; but that givingthem credit for this intention, (mentioning Lord Sid-mouthin the ministry,) I would not hamper them, andprobably injure the country's cause by instructingthem to treat by a parliamentary direction ; when20 Journal. 21 Diary.1812. DESIRE OF PEACE. 85they would feel bound to obey, and the enemy ofcourse conclude that he might treat on terms proportionablymore favourable." 22I am made to appear' he writes to Sheffield,an enemy to peace, to which I have long lookedforward with eager and earnest expectation." Highas are the interests on which two opposing ministersnegociate in treating for a peace ; they in factare governed by the very same principles which decidetwo men who are but joining in the commonestintercourse of human life. It is the old question ofdemand and supply ; and if the one party knows thatthe other must have his commodity, whether it bepeace or a bushel of potatoes, (both melancholy subjectsnow, though in different degrees,) he knows toothat he can have his own price be it ever so exorbitant;therefore parliament should never interferefor this object, except when it has good reason toknow, first, that ministers will not otherwise endeavourto obtain it ; and secondly, that on the whole,the benefits from peace on any terms, will be such asto render the loss likely to result from the circumstancesin which the instructed minister will negociatea matter of no comparative importance.I congratulate you on the intelligence yesterdayreceived. May the Almighty be pleased to prove tothe warrior of the present day, as He did to a predecessorof old times, that he is but an instrument toaccomplish the Divine purposes, the rod of Hisanger, and that when sufficient chastisement has beenreceived, he can be at once checked in his career."22 Diary.86 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1812.All eyes were now fixed upon this dawning of abetter hope for Europe. " Grand news' says theDiary of Dec. 4th, " from Stockholm, about Frencharmies. Buonaparte so surrounded that he can hardlyget through hemmed in, as wild beasts in the East,by different armies. Lord Bathurst not so sanguine,but still thinking the news excellent. Riley Addingtonquite yields to it. I hurried over the bulletin,but had not time to examine it." These favourabletidings he hastily transmitted to the north.London, Friday, Dec. 4, 1812.My dear Muncaster,I have used you scandalously, but had I usedyou ten times worse by my long silence, I shouldmore than make up for my fault by my present intelligence,if you can read a paper I have just scribbledin Wharton's room how rapidly scribbled youmay judge, when you hear that he was standing by,waiting my having done. Really, really, the Almightyhas brightened our prospects beyond theutmost hopes we ventured to indulge. I don't liketo be too sanguine, but really I do not see how Buonapartecan get away, for Broken, who knows thecountry and climate, says that the country is onewaste of snow except the great roads, which are allblocked up by the enemy. I shall scarcely have timeto go to Henry Thornton's, eat my morsel and go tothe House ; but many thanks for your kind letter. Imeant to return poor Llandaff's letter, but mustwait till I write next, not having it with me. I(we) rejoice in Lady Lindsay and Co's going-on,1812. BUONAPARTE'S RUSSIAN DEFEAT. 87and with every friendly wish, and best remembrance,I am,Ever affectionately yours,W. Wilberforce."Attended the House with unwillingness, (GermanLegion business,) not from opinion against it,but ignorance. Put off, and home early. Stephencame in at night and quite damped us, having examinedthe bulletin, and says it is only the old news,and that Buonaparte may in all have lost about 20,000men. I hoped God had been pleased to dash thisproud man at last to the ground through the naturalconsequences of his own ambition and injustice."23 Yet in spite of Mr. Stephen's apprehensionsthe favourable news were soon confirmed. " Lettersfrom Beauharnois intercepted, giving a wretched accountof Buonaparte's situation travelling back in acarriage with Bertie and Murat. Plato very successful.Buonaparte is returned to Paris leaving hisarmy in the lurch. He owns what fully implies itscomplete ruin. What scenes of horror has the ambitionof this one bad man produced ! Hammondtells us that when General Winzingerode was broughtin prisoner with Nariskin, the latter ordered to becivilly used, and the former qu'il soit fusiHe* tout desuite, as a rebel of the Confederation of the RhineBut the officers would not obey." 2 *His time was now so fully occupied by importantquestions in the House of Commons, and pressing23 Diary, Dec. 4. 2 * Ib. Dec. 588 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1812.business out of it, that as yet he found little increasedleisure from his change of station, though he stilllooked forward to it in the spring, when the businessof the " county had hitherto most engaged him." HisDiary shows the nature of his present occupations.Dec. 7th. Breakfasters numerous, and not clearfrom company till time to go to British and ForeignBible Society's monthly committee meeting, to get agrant of Testaments for the West Indies ; 2000willingly granted. To Babington's and wrote letters.Met Butterworth fresh from Ireland . . hiscommunications show sad hostility of mind betweenProtestants and Roman Catholics . . then House.Moving for papers about Slave Trade at Cape, andMauritius. Lord Wellington's grant of 100,000to buy an estate, in debate Burdettwas Cobbett, andWhitbread took a different line. After the House adiscussion at Henry Thornton's with Babington, theDean, and Stephen. At night home with the Dean.8th. Fuller of Kettering breakfasted, and talked muchabout East Indian Gospel Communication plan. Thentown, Manufacturers' Committee Duke of Kent inthe chair, and very civil. Then Hatchard's, lettershome to dinner Stephen, Simeon, the Dean, andothers the House engaged on Lord Stanhope's BullionBill, a most intricate question we are trying tostir up a spirit to relieve the poor. 12th. Forced todine with Duke of Gloucester. One of his mixed partiesLord Sidmouth Vansittart Hastings, quite aged.All splendid Lord Sidmouth clever. Sheridan saidof a person whom Lord Sidmouth does not like, O he1812. RUSSIAN SUBSCRIPTION. 89has an iron heart, but Lord Sidmouth has a finespirit. 14th. To town to find out about Dr. B fromYarmouth, who had written for 20, without whichhe with his wife would be ruined could learn nothingso sent it doubtingly. African Institution, andhome. Voice not well to-day. Duchess of York tookmy antelope. 18th. Letters and callers till two.African Institution. House on grant to Russia200,000 23 spoke but middling. 23rd. To townabout twelve to meet Brougham at Lord Bathurst'sabout Parke's Journals. Heard of Russian meeting,and that Duke of York in the chair. Went to Crownand Anchor, and found Lord Liverpool, Duke ofYork, Lord Castlereagh, N. Vansittart, Lord narrowly,Lord Buckinghamshire, and several undersecretaries, and four or five Russian merchants-samuelThornton speaking sixty or seventy commonpeople meeting utterly unknown tried to get it putoff; but being desired to speak, did shortly ratherpressing adjournment, but they had not presence ofmind for it. Brougham had sent to know if any Whig,and then he would come. I pressed him to write toLord Holland to make a second meeting. I fear thefolly, if not worse, of not taking pains to have a fullmeeting, (perhaps for fear of having the businesstaken out of certain hands,) prevented more notice ;and now there is danger of its being considered as25 A sum of 200,000 was voted for the relief of the sufferings broughtupon the Russians by their gallant resistance to the common enemy.The meeting of the 23rd, was to raise funds for the same purpose byprivate charity.90 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1812.cooked up between ministers and a few interestedRussian merchants sad, so to spoil a noble workwhich would have taken admirably,, and have given riseto a noble testimony of national admiration, esteem,benevolence, and gratitude. 24th. Town read Report,corrected from Allen's draught at Freemasons' Hall-distressed manufacturers Duke of Cambridge inthe chair he had never heard of Russian meeting,nor Stephen. So vexed at the folly of its managers,that after talking with Brougham and Lord Bathurst,I wrote to Lord Liverpool and S. Thornton to getthe meeting stated as a preliminary one before Christmas.26th. To Lord Liverpool's by half-past eleven,to confer about undoing the evil done by the Russiansubscription management. Lord Harrowby, Vansittart,S. Thornton came. Agreed upon notifyinganother meeting acting on my advice. Still I fearall or a hundredth part of the mischief cannot be undone.Thence to secretary of Russian embassy, totell him that the manufacturers wished to give suppliesof manufactures.30th. Owen of Lanark, Dale's son-in-law andpartner, breakfasted with me, and staid long talkingwith me of his plan of education, and of renderingmanufactures and morals compatible." Thisvisit was renewed soon after, and Mr. Grant andHenry Thornton met Mr. Owen by appointment.When Mr. Owen was proceeding to detail his schemes,he gently hinted that the ladies present might besuffered to retire from a discussion which mustprove beyond their comprehension. Mr. WilderOWEN OF LANARK. 91force eagerly dissented from the proposition ; and itwas well for Mr. Owen that he yielded, for he hadnot read long before " Grant, Henry Thornton, andI were all fast asleep, and the despised ladies werehis only real audience." " One of my great principles,Mr. Wilberforce," said the schemer, " is, that personsought to place themselves in the situation ofothers, and act as they would wish themselves to betreated." " Is that quite a new principle, Mr. Owen ? "was his answer, with that look of suppressed humour,which gave his countenance an archness of expressionwhich no description can convey. " I think I haveread something very like it in a book called the NewTestament." " Very possibly it may be so," gravelyanswered the imperturbable philosopher. Yet suchwas his universal kindness, that Mr. Owen left himto tell others that Mr. Wilberforce was charmedwith his discoveries. " Owen of Lanark," says hisDiary, "with a new view of man strange, fancifulspeculations, and practical success amongst Dr.Dale's children. Grant and I fell asleep ; but Ikept his paper and ran over it afterwards. Strangethat the Quakers, even the sensible Allen, admires it.So do the Socinian, or half Socinian."Christmas had now brought his children roundhim, and he was again joining in all their businessand amusements. " Being read aloud to" by oneexamining " another " in his history watchingcarefully over all their tempers taking them" oneday " to the British Museum," and on another " to seethegreat fish, and to toy shops running races with92 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1812.them in the garden;" or a still greater pleasure,reading aloud through the long evenings. " Rokebylent to me in quarto I wait to buy the cheaperoctavo. All earnest for reading it, and interested init beyond measure ; but chiefly for the story. Left oiFand locked it up during Sunday, and did not read itmyself after the general reading, knowing that I couldnot finish it without sitting up late."I must put down," he says, amidst these variousengagements, " that I have had lately toolittle time for private devotions. I must take atleast an hour for them in the morning. I can sadlyconfirm Doddridge's remark, ' that when we go onill in the closet, we commonly do so every whereelse.' I must mend here; I am afraid of gettinginto what Owen calls a trade of sinning and repenting.Yet where can I go else ? Thou only, Lord, canstpardon and sanctify me. Oh what unspeakable comfortit is to cast oneself on the Saviour as a guilty,weak sinner in myself, but as trusting in the graciouspromises of God through the Redeemer ! Let himthat is athirst come. Lord, I must flee to Thee, andcleave to Thee. Be Thou my All in All." 26 Attimes too, in these secret struggles of his heart,he laments that he was " unable to realize the presenceof God. It was as if there had been a wall ofseparation that I could not penetrate or see over;and my heart dead and cold. Surely it is not enthusiasmto notice these sensations, as David does.Lord, renew and quicken me." But this was not his26 Journal,1812. JOURNAL. 93common state. His secret entries testify that habitualpeace, combined with the deepest humility, werein him the blessed fruit of keeping God's watch carefully.They are well expressed in an entry at thistime. " I am just returned from a highly impressivesermon by Mr. Dunn. I hope that my sensibility isin some degree the effect of the Holy Spirit, theknocking of Christ at the door of my heart. I mustnot spend any of my few minutes before dinner inwriting ; but let me just record my feelings of deephumiliation, yet of confiding, though humble faithlooking to the Saviour as my only ground of hope.I cast myself at the foot of the cross, bewailing myexceeding sinfulness and unprofitableness, deeply,most deeply aggravated by the infinity of my mercies.1 plead Thy precious promises, and earnestly pray toThee to shed abroad in my heart more love, morehumility, more faith, more hope, more peace, andjoy ; in short, to fill me with all the fulness of God,and make me more meet to be a partaker of theinheritance of the saints in light. Then shall I alsobe better in all the relations of life in which I amnow so defective, and my light will shine before men,and I shall adorn the doctrine of God my Saviour inall things." 2727 Journal.CHAPTER XXVIII.FEBRUARY 1813 TO DECEMBER 1813.Session opens Catholic Question East India Company'scharter Efforts for Christianizing India Petitions DebatesDeath of Lord Barham of Mr. Venn RegistryBillPortuguese Slave Trade Lord Castlereagh With hischildren Letters Sir John Sinclair French privateerLord Muncaster's death Visits Barley Wood.A BUSY session was now opening on him. " I am reading,"he says, (Feb. 5th,) "on Catholic Emancipation,and thinking too. I grieve to see so much prejudicesthe question over with friends ; one, though amost able man, not knowing that Dissenters may sit inparliament." This question now agitated all the country,and there were "meetings against Roman Catholicsin all parts of England." * " I am very doubtful whichway right." This was his only question; general popularityand party principle were no rule for him to steerby; and though he suffered keenly from shocking,upon such a question, the conscientious scruples ofthose whose principles he most esteemed, yet eventhis feeling could not for a moment bias his decision.i Feb. 10.1813. ROMAN CATHOLIC QUESTION. 95Lord, direct me," he prays on this question ; " allthe religious people are on the other side, but they aresadly prejudiced." (( It grieves me to separate fromthe Dean, and all my religious friends ; but consciencemust be obeyed. God does not direct us to use carnalweapons in His cause." He displays at this timethe exact balance of his mind in a letter to WilliamHey.Near London, Feb. 22, 1813.<f My dear Sir,I have been and still am longing to devote mytime and thoughts to the Roman Catholic Question ;yet pamphlets and other documents lie unopened onmy table. My opinion is far from made up on thatmomentous subject ; and I heartily wish I could employa few weeks in quietly studying and consideringit. It is not however on this head that I now takeup the pen to address you, though mindful of your latekind communications, I begin with a few words on it ;and having touched on it, I will go on to add, that I amquite decided against granting to the Roman Catholicseligibility to all civil offices. My chief doubtsare concerning their admissibility into parliament ;and there is one consideration which I do not seethat even you yourself, who to do you justice haveconsidered the question more maturely than nineteen-twentiethof those who write or speak on it, haveduly borne it in mind. The Bishop of Lincoln'scharge, which is otherwise able, entirely leaves it out,and even proceeds on a supposition of there being nosuch consideration. It is that whatever the Roman96 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1813.Catholics, if admitted into the House of Commons,could effect through the medium of law for establishingtheir hierarchy and injuring that of the Protestantsin Ireland, they can do just as well (in oneimportant respect better) through the medium ofmembers of parliament, called Protestants, but whobeing elected by Roman Catholic voters, and havinglittle or no real religion themselves, are implicitly subservientto their constituents' purposes. I say, theycan serve the Roman Catholics even better in one respect,inasmuch as they do not call into action theopposite Protestant spirit in the same degree.But while the Roman Catholics thus possess parliamentaryinfluence, they do not possess it in such amanner as to render it a personal privilege, or gratificationto them ; and therefore so as to give them an interestin the existing legislature, and to connect them tothe Protestant system by the various ties which unitemen who act together in parliament, and which wouldrender it improbable that they would join a foreignenemy in separating Ireland from Great Britain ; andwhere can be the wisdom of retaining the prisondress, when you have set the men at liberty ? I mustbreak off. I remain, my dear sir, with cordial esteemand regard,Your sincere and affectionate friend,W. WILBERFORCE."Under this view it was a mere question of politicalexpediency. The principle had been long since conceded.Political power the Romanists possessed1813. ROMAN CATHOLIC QUESTION. 97already, and the only object was to provide for itsbeing most innocently exercised. He was now almostconvinced that this end would be promoted by achange of system ; for that " the actual state of thelaws' as he told Mr. Charles Butler, " so far fromaffording any security to the Established Church, or tothe Protestant cause in general, augmented theirdanger ; and so far from lessening or weakening theinfluence of the Roman Catholic church over itsmembers, maintained and extended its force."The Question was now coming before parliament.On the 23rd, he " dined at Bankes's with Canning.The former agreeably to his own amendment will voteagainst the Roman Catholics on Thursday. Canningwishes only to print the Bill this year." Upon the25th came on " Grattan's motion for a Committee onCatholic Question, according to Canning's motionlast year. Bankes spoke early against Plunder excellentlyfor. House till half-past two. 26th. Tookan hour for private devotions, then time spent chieflylooking over Roman Catholic pamphlets. House.The debate not renewed till nine, so sat till half-pastone, chiefly hearing Irish members. March 2nd.Preparing for debate on Catholic Question. Canningcalled, and I took him to town. House till four.Question carried 264 to 224." 2As yet, though he " had prepared" himself " uponthis question," he " had found no opportunity fortaking part in the debate. Lord, direct me. Somethingsaid to me, though by a strange man, Sir2 Diary.VOL. IV. F98 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1813.J. Flood, shows that I have real weight in theHouse. ' Your opinion he said, * has more weightthan that of half the House besides.' This extravagant,but it showed what he thought the tendencyof things. I have been reading some of theEast Indian charter documents, which are immenselyvoluminous ; and on Catholic Question. Howdifficult it is to attain to truth in these complicatedcases ; and therefore with what moderationshould we hold our own opinions, and with what candourallow for those of others ; whereas in both, theexact opposite prevails ! Alas ! Lord, guide and blessme. Blessed be God, they cannot be finally wrongin Thy sight who obey conscience, having taken duepains to inform themselves and judge rightly. 9th.House till half-past two. Grattan's resolutions in committeecarried by a greater majority. Speaker spokeagainst Roman Catholics, though allowing still greaterconcessions the honours of the bar, and army, andsomething imperfectly explained about the Roman Catholichierarchy. I spoke. I was well received; indeedtold by many who did not mean to compliment, thatmine very good ; and by one, the most useful speechyet made. But I did not feel at home, and ratherlost the thread of my argument. I had a little usedFinale's plan, but had not studied enough to befamiliar with it, and preserve my presence of mind insuch circumstances. I chiefly contended for RomanCatholics' admissibility into parliament now that theelective franchise is given to them." " Politicalpower, sir," he said, " you have given them already,1813. SAFEGUARDS FOR THE CHURCH. 99it is vain therefore to attempt to stop where you noware ; but the present is a golden opportunity in whichyou may accompany this concession with the necessarysafeguards : for even if the consciences of theRoman Catholics should not be bound by the oathwhich they will take, where can gentlemen be found,who after swearing not to disturb or endanger theEstablished Church would dare to rise and proposeany measure to its detriment?" " I can remember'he often said, " the recognition of Irish independence,and how those who had talked of it as almosttreason made no attempt to oppose it ; while if anyobjection was suggested, there was a general hush ;and it was whispered, ' they have 40,000 volunteers inarms.' My experience of parliament and of the countryconvinces me that when some alarm arises inIreland, a war, or an insurrection every thing willbe given up at once, as it then was, without those securitiesfor ourselves, or that benefit for Ireland, whichmight now be provided."Yet though he openly professed these grounds,it was easy to foresee that his conduct would offendmany conscientious men. " Mr. Wilberforce'sspeech in the committee on the Catholic claims,"wrote Dr. Buchanan at the time, " will producesome sensation among religious men in England.I am of opinion that he has judged rightly." 3 Whenhe next visited his friends the Mores, he saw thata storm was lowering over him. " I was thereforeon my guard ; and when the subject was first3 Vid. Life of Dr. Buchanan, by Dr. Pearson, p. 387. edit. 1834.F 2100 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1813.broached, I looked very grave, and immediatelyassailed them with the declaration ; ' How shocking itis that you who know so much of the misery whichPopery has brought on Ireland, should advocate asystem which perpetuates its galling yoke ! Patty,who was especially warm upon the subject, and wasready to attack me, was confounded by this suddenthrust; we had no dispute, and my visit passed offas happily as ever."But this great question was far from having anundivided hold upon his thoughts. Besides manyother minor matters ." Feb. 11th. Long debateon Vice Chancellor project. Canning inimitablein wit and sarcasm. Bolus Smith spoke firsttime promisingly. How unfair the House to Stephen,and still more so to Weathered, who alsofirst time in House ! The American war address.Public meetings for the next four days of thisweek, and the distressed manufacturers' committee. . ." besides these and such other matters, thegreat business of the session was pressing on histhoughts. He had perfectly resolved to fight to thevery last the battle of Christianity in India, and themoment of the contest now drew near. Though hehad been long making preparations, he had notsatisfied himself. " I sadly fear," he says on the 16thof March, " that we have been too negligent aboutthe grand question of communicating Christianity toour Indian fellow-subjects. We have heard of excellentMartin's death in Persia, on his way to theMediterranean homewards. It is a mysterious .CHRISTIANITY IN INDIA. 101evidence. Alas, when the interior is opened, the missionaryand religious party in India are not so muchat one, nor so free from human infirmity, as I had supposed.Oh did the world see into the hearts of religiousprofessors, how much would it triumph overthem ! Yet they are better as well as worse than theworld suspects. It confirms old Baxter, f Good menneither so good, nor bad men often so bad, as theworld supposes "It was evident that the struggle would be arduous.The great mass of Anglo-Indians were convinced thatthe attempt to Christianize the East must infalliblycost us our dominion ; and though they mightreluctantly assent to the scanty ecclesiastical establishment4 for the English residents in India, whichgovernment had been persuaded to propose, theywere determined to abate none of their hostility tomissionary efforts. They proposed therefore that theentire regulation of the subject should be left for thenext twenty years to the East India Company, whohad unequivocally shown what would be their rule ofconduct. On this point then the contest was to turn.Upon the 22nd of March, " Lord Castlereagh openedupon the East India Company's charter three hours.Then Robert Thornton. Sparring about East Indiareligious interests. I, Stephen, and Thomas Thompson.Castlereagh not told by his colleagues whatwe had pressed, and bad work from it. We foretoldpetitions."The temper of the House of Commons could4 One bishop and three archdeacons102 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1813.not be mistaken, and it was only by bringingforcibly to bear upon it the religious feeling of thecountry, that he could hope to carry through thismost important measure. And now that he was inthe strife, he set about the necessary steps with anenergy and resolution which had never been exceededeven in the vigour of his early manhood, when hefought the Abolition battle. " The truth is," he tellsMr. Hey, " and a dreadful truth it is, that theopinions of nine-tenths, or at least of a vast majority,of the House of Commons would be against any motionwhich the friends of religion might make ; butI trust it is very different in the body of our people ;and petitions are to be promoted with a view to bringtheir sentiments and feelings to bear upon the oppositetenets and dispositions of the members of parliament.Surely there can be no doubt that all who arezealous in the cause of Christ would do their utmostto enlighten our East Indian fellow-subjects. I musthave sent you a letter which I drew up last year forgeneral circulation : I would send a copy but that itis out of print. It was composed too hastily, but itcontained such arguments and motives as I think noChristian could resist."Not a day was lost in calling to his aid the expressedreligious feeling of the country. On the dayfollowing this first debate he wrote a multitude ofletters to all his leading country correspondents, inthe following strain.1813. APPEAL TO THE COUNTRY. 103TO MRS. HANNAH MORE.My dear Friend,Let me beg you to exert yourself in your circlefor the great purpose of preventing the key of thedoor, through which alone any religious or moral lightcan obtain access into the East Indies, being committedfor twenty years longer to the Court of Directors,who by their past conduct have proved their determinationto keep that door close locked and barredagainst all that might disturb the profound moraldarkness of those vast regions.Did you see a hasty letter signed A Christian,which I scribbled last year, when the questionwas expected to come on, and which was afterwardsinserted (not by me) in the Christian Observer? But you do not need it, or any other composition,to inform or animate you you have readBuchanan. You will agree with me, that now theSlave Trade is abolished, this is by far the greatestof our national sins ; and it is prodigiously aggravatedby its being affirmed confidently by LordTeignmouth, Mr. Grant, &c. that prudent, and grasdual, and successful endeavours to improve and Christianizeour East Indian population, would strengthenour hold on that country, and render it more securelyours. But all this is to lead you to stir up a petitionin Bristol, and any other place. The petitions forabolishing the Slave Trade were very general, and veryuseful ; why not on this occasion also ? I must break104 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1813.off. Farewell, and believe me, (with kind remembrancesto Patty and the sisterhood,)Ever affectionately yours,W. Wilberforce.Mrs. Hannah More*To another friend he writesLondon, March 25, 1813.My dear Sir,I wish I had an hour or two which I couldgive to writing to you, but I have scarce as manyminutes. The subject on which I wish to open mymind to you is the pending renewal of the East IndiaCompany's charter, and the opportunity it offers ofdoing away that great national crime of committingthe control of the only entrance for religious light andmoral improvement into India to the Directors, whoare decidedly adverse to every attempt that can bemade to Christianize, or raise in the scale of being,our East Indian fellow-subjects.I beg you will attend to these last expressions; forgreat as is the importance of the subject in a religiouspoint of view, it is only less important in that of humanity.It is a shocking idea that we should leave sixtymillions of our fellow-subjects, nay of our tenants, (forwe collect about seventeen millions sterling from therent of their lands,) to remain in a state of barbarismand ignorance, the slaves of the most cruel and degradingsuperstition, lest they should not be so easily1813. STATE OF INDIA. 105governed by a small number of Europeans ; though itis the opinion of many of the ablest East Indian statesmenthat this doctrine is as false as it is wicked j andthat by gradually and prudently proceeding to Christianizeour East Indian population we should greatlyadd to the stability of our Oriental empire. Now Igrieve to say, it is intended to commit, as before, tothe Court of Directors the uncontrolled power ofgranting licences, without which no one shall be permittedto go to India ; indeed to leave them the exclusivedirection as to religious and moral concernsin all that regards our East Indian dominions. Mr.Stephen, I, and others, loudly exclaimed against theproposed system of barring out all moral and religiouslight from the East Indies, and declared that we wereconfident the friends of religion, morality, and humanitythroughout the kingdom would petition on the subject.Now you I trust will make good our words.You petitioned in the case of the Slave Trade, andthose petitions were eminently useful ; so they wouldbe now ; and what is more, after having been talkedof, their not coming would be highly injurious ; so loseno time. The petitions should be from each placeseparately.To you I will confess I feel another considerationstrongly. The Methodists and Dissenters will,I doubt not, petition ; but let it not be said that theyonly take an interest in the happiness of mankind,and that the members of our Church are not as zealouswhen there is a real call for such exertions. I can3106 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1813.not write to-day to Huddersfield, or Bradford, butdo you exert yourself.I remain ever sincerely yours,W. WILBERFORCE."This application for petitions was received butcoldly, from his friend's supposing that the appointmentof a bishop and archdeacons implied, of course,that India was henceforward to be open to the missionarylabours of the Church of England. To correctthis misapprehension he soon wroteMy dear Sir,It is a grievous disappointment to me to beprevented writing to you to-day ; but the post shall notdepart without one line at least, to say that you mustpetition parliament if you would remove all obstaclesout of the way of the clergy of the Established Church.Lord Castlereagh in his opening speech gave not theslightest intimation of having the East Indians inview in his bishop and archdeacons ; they were solelyfor the Europeans. And even if there were threebishops, they would each, says Dr. Buchanan, have adiocese as large as Great Britain, and far more soulswithin them. And can you venture thus to add yoursanction to the opinion which in direct terms (though alittle varied in the phraseology) 5 has been expressed5 " What was said to me was, ' It may be shocking, Mr. W. to say so,but I do believe Hindooism is a better religion for them than Christianitywould be.' "1813. STIRRING UP PETITIONS. 107to me in private, that our East Indian empire is saferunder the protection of Brahma with all his obscenitiesand blood, than under that of God Almighty ? And canyou think it right to leave all those enormities to themselves? I am persuaded, my dear friend, you will hereafterregret your inactivity. Farewell with kindremembrances to Mrs.Believe me ever sincerely yours,W. Wilberforce."He was now " excessively busy stirring up petitions,"feeling that it was " the greatest object whichmen ever pursued." " The spirit of petitioningscarcely spreads as one could wish." Yet the leavenwas at work, and he soon adds, that " already Bristol,Hull, Glasgow, (excellent resolutions,) and Birminghamhave spoken out." His own personal effortsmeanwhile were incessant. Upon the 24th of Marchhe went " early to town to Freemasons' Hall for committeeof annual meeting of the African Institution.After business over, consulted about East India charter'sreligious bearing, and agreed on a public meetingfor Monday, March 29th." Two days later he wasagain " off early, and after calling at Lord Liverpool'sand Buckinghamshire's, to Seeley's. Meeting ofcommittee on the religious bearing of the East IndiaCompany's charter. Long discussion. The Lords(Liverpool and Buckinghamshire) acceded to formerconcession, that the Board of Control should beauthorized and required to grant licences to fit andproper persons to go to India as missionaries. House,108 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1813.Romilly's Bill foolishly did not speak, though ready.Kensington Gore late stopping to discuss East Indiamissions in council at Henry Thornton's." The nextday, " the deputies on East India charter business,Gladstone (Liverpool), Macadam (Bristol), Scionsand Bradley (Hull), R. Spooner (Birmingham),breakfasted " with him ; and on the Monday following,March 29th, " an effective public meeting on thesubject was held at the City of London Tavern."On the next day began the examination of the witnessesbefore the House of Commons. " Mr. Hastingsand Lord Teignmouth. The House exceedinglycivil to Mr. Hastings ; sufficiently so to Lord Teign-mouth."This was now his daily business. "Writingalmost all morning about East India charter examinations,sharp work extreme ignorance andbigotry. We examine daily from half-past fourto near eight before other business." The object ofthe enemies of missions may be seen from the generaltenor of their questions. "Would not," they inquired," the appearance of bishops encourage a fearamongst the natives that force would ultimately beused to establish Christianity amongst them ? ""Would it be consistent with the security of theBritish Empire in India, that missionaries shouldpreach publicly that Mahomet is an impostor, orspeak in opprobrious terms of the Brahmins andtheir religious rites ? " In such an examination theyhad clearly a perilous advantage. Few or no witnessescould be produced to prove the safety of whathad so rarely been attempted ; whilst almost every1813. HOSTILE WITNESSES. 109Anglo-Indian was ready to come forward and swellby his separate evidence the general cry of danger.This made the issue of the question most uncertain :yet " government' he tells Mr. Hey, " is well disposedto us ; but it is highly probable that they maybeoverborne by the sense of parliament, especiallyby that of the House of Commons, if the feelings ofthe public be not plainly expressed. So it was in1793, when the resolutions had been agreed to byMr. Dundas, but for want of any support from withoutwere afterwards negatived. I should not muchwonder if unless the sense of the religious part of thepublic is expressed by petitions, both the ecclesiasticalestablishment for India, and all security forpreventing the door from being barred against theadmission of religious and moral light, should be altogetherabandoned. Now this conduct it appears tomewould be one of the most crying insults that evercalled down the vengeance of Heaven. While we aregoing so far in favouring the Roman Catholics, shallChristianity be the only religion which is not to betolerated in India ? "The examinations were evidently tending towardsthis result; and something must be attempted toprevent a fatal impression of the risk of all exertionbeing fixed upon the House. No time was to be lost ;and as the examination by the Lords was to commencethe following day, a meeting was summoned onSunday, the 4th of April, at Henry Thornton's, PalaceYard, at three " Stephen, Grant, Henry Thornton,Babington, and I, to discuss about the Lords' LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1813.action of witnesses on religious business agreed thatI should call tomorrow on Lord Grenville and LordWellesley, and settled one or two other points.Dined there, which I had not done on Sunday sinceI lived there." " 5th. Called Lord Grenville's, andtalked with him."To Lord Wellesley he wrote upon the following day.(Private.) No. 1, Poets' Corner, Tuesday, 6, 1813.My dear Lord W.Notwithstanding your obliging permission tometo break in upon you to-day, intimated to melast night by Mr. Wellesley, yet knowing that justnow when your time and mind must be so fully occupied,it must naturally arise rather from your friendlydisposition to comply with my request than be yourown desire I have resolved not to intrude on your Lordshipin person ; but merely to send you a few lines,which cannot, like a conversation, draw on into alength that was unintended. That I may trespasson you as shortly as possible, I will confine myself towhat requires immediate mention, and is indeed indispensable.I know not whether your Lordship has heard ofthe unreasonable clamour that has been raised by theAnglo-Indians in the House of Commons, against all,even the most prudent, attempts to convert the nativesof India; and more especially against missionaries.Now let me hope, a hope which I share with, I amglad to say, a considerable number of men in theHouse of Commons, and with many more out of it,1813. TO LORD WELLESLEY. 11.1that your Lordship will tomorrow use your just authorityin putting to flight these vain fears. . . . The ratherbecause the alarmists are enemies of the system whichyour Lordship certainly established, and which Itrust you will confirm and revive, that I mean ofdiffusing useful knowledge of all sorts among thenatives of India ; and I confess for my own part thatI have always held, and still retain, the opinion thateducation, the translation and diffusion of the Scriptures,and advancement in general knowledge, wouldbe by far the most powerful agents in the great workof Christianizing the natives of India. Your weightthrown into the right scale will make it preponderate.I will only add that your Lordship can scarcelyconceive (if I may judge of the House of Lords fromthe general condition of the members of the Houseof Commons) how ignorant your Lordships in generalare likely to be respecting India, and therefore howlittle they are qualified to ask questions in the committee.When your Lordship can attend, I hope youwill now and then look in, and there also prevent theexamination from being rendered the excuse for condemningthe population of India to ignorance anddarkness, so long as they continue under British rule.I remember my assurance. I break off, assuringyour Lordship that I am, my dear Lord W.Your Lordship's very sincerely,W. Wilberforce."Such applications as these to Lord Grenville andLord Wellesley rank high amongst his varied services.112 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1813.You know enough of life," he tells Mrs. HannahMore, " to be aware that in parliamentary measuresof importance, more is to be done out of the Housethan in it." In this peculiar line he occupied a postof usefulness which he could share with no one else.The House agreed," he continues in his Diary, " thatreligion should be left out of the examination." Inthis resolution the Lords concurred a few days later,and upon the whole he esteemed it the best arrangementhe could hope for. " Nine out of ten of thewitnesses who will be called to give evidence are hostileto us. The House of Commons in general isdisposed against us, and the newspapers are still morehostile to us than the House. Consequently it is farbetter for our cause, to rest it on the notorious facts ofthe case, and on the plain undeniable obligations whichit involves, than on the evidence to be delivered atthe bar. The public has access as well as we to thedocuments which are before the world, and I confidentlyhope that its respect for religion will counterbalancethe neutralizing efforts of the Anglo-indians."6He was so convinced that his cause could only becarried by this influence, that although one Anglo-indianwitness had declared " the resolutions of therecent meeting in the city likely to excite a generalferment amongst the Hindooss, and favour an ideawhich (once obtained) would, cause our expulsion fromBengal and India," 7 he determined on appealing to6 To William Hey Esq. April 6.7 Evidence of W. Cowper Esq. before the House of Commons,March 31.1813. DISSIMILAR ALLIES. 113another. On the 13th, therefore, he was " early inthe city, at the general meeting of the Church MissionarySociety for Africa and the East. Made thereport of our deputation, and agreed to a petition toboth Houses, for introducing Christianity in India."When I woke," he says, " early the next morning,the idea of this business struck my mind so forciblythat I could not sleep, and got up fagged and feeble.To the House, where I wished to speak before the recess,but had no opportunity." As the best meanshowever of supplying the defect which was occasionedby the omission of all evidence upon the subject ofreligion, he " moved for sundry papers to illustratethe moral character of the Hindooss, and the shockingpractices prevalent there." 8The Easter week now for a short time interceptedthe proceedings of the House of Commons,and he had long been engaged to spend it withhis family in visiting Lord Gambier. " Our goingput off once or twice already, but after asevere struggle I resolved to give it up entirely.I cannot spare the time now, when it is so muchneeded for East Indian religion and seeing peopleon it." 9 This was one great branch of his exertions.All had access to him, and he could enterevery where. He was the link between the mostdissimilar allies. Bishops and Baptists found inhim a common term. " After breakfast Messrs. Gutbridge, Weymouth, and Shaw, three Baptist committeegentlemen, called on me about East India BaptistDiary, April 14. * Ib. April 21.114 LIFE OF Wilberforce. 1813.missionaries. Called on the Bishop of St. David's,and tried to stir him up. Called Earl 's, aboutEast India religion business, found him full of prejudiceand ignorance. How sad that so noble a mindas his should be rendered so indifferent to the happinessof our fellow-creatures ! Talked to him some time.Got him to say he would read Lord Teignmouth's andMr Grant's pieces, and perhaps move for the productionof the latter," 10 " Dean of Wells breakfastedwith me, and met Andrew Fuller and Mr. Ivied.Much talk of East India missionary affairs. DinedLambeth public day little company all engagedat grand public dinner for celebrating Sir JoshuaReynolds's fame; and the whole rooms of BritishInstitution filled with his pictures. Archbishop verycivil, but talked with me about Roman CatholicQuestion, which coming on. I tried to get him onEast India business. As I came back, called for anhour at British Institution Rooms to see pictures.Fine assembly. Prince of Wales came up to me andaccosted me very handsomely, and spoke a minute ortwo. Poor Sheridan took me up to his first wife'spicture, and stood with me looking at it affectionatelysome time. All the lovers of the arts there." 11In the midst of this engrossing struggle, he wasthreatened with a serious attack of sickness, and forone day was very ill. The temper of his mind underthis distressing interruption, is a striking proof of thedegree in which the prayer with which he entered onthe cause had graciously been answered. He had asked10 Diary, April 27. " Ib. May 8.1813. ILLNESS. 115for simplicity of purpose, and his cheerfulness whenlaid aside, shows how pure had been the motives ofhis activity. " April 24th. A blank day ; and really 1could do nothing but think of God's goodness to meinthat even when I am ill, I suffer no pain. GeneralCalvert told me of Col. 's most painful operation,(twenty minutes long,) after great previous sufferingundergoing immense fatigues, and unable to spare himselfwhen suffering agonies. Oh ! how much will menbear for a corruptible crown ! Poor fellow ! it is veryaffecting. May God touch his heart. How thankfulought I to be for having been spared it all ! Here, asusual, God most merciful. My Saviour spares me."A very fine day, after excessive rain'* he continuestwo days later. " All the trees in leaf. Lilacs comeout. Heard the nightingale a little the first thisyear. My children around me, my wife in health,and all most beautiful and comfortable about me.What cause have I for thankfulness ! Pretty wellin health myself ; and for two or three hours doingbusiness in the garden. East India religion-lordT.'s pamphlet, and thinking." 12The hidden safeguard of this happy simplicity ofpurpose, may be found in the record of his secret hours.Secured," he says at his busiest time, ee an hour forprivate devotions this morning and yesterday, andfound the effects of it." 13 " This East Indian object,"was his declaration when he undertook it, " is assuredlythe greatest that ever interested the heart, or engagedthe efforts of man. How wonderful that a private manDiary. Ib.116 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1813.should have such an influence on the temporal andeternal happiness of millions; literally, millions onmillions yet unborn ! O God, make me more earnestfor Thy glory ; and may I act more from real love andgratitude to my redeeming Lord." " Oh how doesthis little check of sickness," he continues after hisrecovery, "impress on me the duty of working while itis day; the night cometh when no man can work !Let me not take my estimate of myself from otherswho do not know me, but from my own self-knowledgeand conscience. Oh what cause have I for contrition! What misspent time, what wasted talents,what means of grace (no one so many and so great)with how little profit ; what self-indulgent habits ;what softness, instead of the hardness of a good soldierof Christ ! It may be shown in any improper want ofself-denial. O Lord, may my faith and love be moreactive, bringing forth more the fruits of the Spirit." 14In this temper he resumed his work. " My mind,"he says, 15 is <( most deeply impressed with the importanceof this East India subject. Lord, blessus ; pardon our past lukewarmness and slothfulness,and make us more diligent for the time to come. Ihave not myself been duly attentive to this great subject."The next day he was " consulting about it withGrant and Stephen, and looking over the list of theHouse of Commons, to see whom we severally oughtto speak to," and soon after he was " presenting EastIndia petitions ;" and after " moving for many EastIndia papers, talked over the mode of proceeding in14 Journal. " Diary.1813. APPLICATIONS TO GOVERNMENT. 117the question in cabinet council with Grant, Barrington,Stephen, and Henry Thornton." Its conductneeded great address. All the feeling of the morereligious classes of the nation must be brought effectivelyto bear, for political assistance he had none.Even Lord Grenville was " dry and cold upon thematter," and Mr. Tierney was one of his most obstinateopponents. Government indeed were disposedto make some favourable changes in the system ; andthe Resolutions he had recorded twenty years beforewere ground gained from which to work : but noministry could carry such measures by force ; least ofall in the teeth of such an opposition as that of thewhole Anglo-Indian body. They were thereforelittle likely to go to the utmost limits of their owninclinations, unless some counteracting force could bebrought to bear upon them. It was the especialcharge of Mr. Wilberforce to call up this force in thereligious feeling of the country, and then to regulateand guide its action. A deputation from the Baptistswas next to meet Lord Liverpool, and he determinedto wait the issue of their application. Itproved unsuccessful, and on the 21st of May he calledhis cabinet together for further consultations.Kensington Gore, May 2.My dear Macaulay,We ought now without delay to settle ourcourse as to the Mission business. The Baptists aswe predicted have got nothing from Lord Liverpoolbut fair words, and the same condition in substance118 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1813-which was before mentioned, except that, perhapsmistakingly, Andrew Fuller represents that the poweris to be wholly with the Board of Control.The East India examination closes to day, sothat no time should be lost.Yours ever affectionately,W. WILBERFORCE."The fresh application upon which they now decidedhad a more favourable issue. May 26th, he says,Lord Buckinghamshire acceded to our terms ; " andon the following day when he " visited the public offices,Lord Castlereagh agreed to Lord Buckinghamshire'sand our arrangement for East India Christianizing Resolutionsfar surpassing my expectations." 16 " Letme express my humiliation," he adds upon the followingSunday, " and my gratitude to God, for enablingus to agree with government as to the conditionsfor sending out missionaries, and in general asto improving, moralizing, and Christianizing India.I humbly hope that God has great designs in view forthe East, and that they will be executed by GreatBritain." *But though the government had yielded to hiswishes the battle was not over. The Resolutionswhich they had adopted, the House of Commonsmight reject ; and in the House of Commons lay thestrength of the Anglo-Indian party. The day oftrial was approaching; upon the 22nd of June LordCastlereagh moved the adoption of the 13th ResoluteDiary. n Journal.1813. DEBATE. 119tion. " The appearance of the House at the beginningof the evening was as bad as could be,, but LordCastlereagh opened the subject very discreetly andjudiciously. 5 ' 18 He referred the House to the Resolutionswhich at Mr. Wilberforce's motion had beenadopted in 1793, and declared it to be impossible totake a lower tone upon this subject than had thenbeen set. Cautiously proceeding upon this ground, heendeavoured to allay the exaggerated apprehensionswhich in some degree possessed the House. To thisSir Henry Montgomery endeavoured to reply, and hewas followed by Mr. Douglass, who spoke shortly infavour of the Resolution. Then came Mr. Wilberforce.Two days previously Mr. " Stephen" had " urgedhim to prepare good advice but I know not how, Icould not contrive to practise it." The morning ofthe 22nd had been given up to preparation, and hewas now at his post, with his mind full of his subject.Never did he speak with greater power, or producemore impression. Twenty years before, he had appearedin the same place, the eloquent advocate ofthis same cause. He had beyond all expectation beenspared to lead the onset in a new engagement ; andhe told the House that his silence during that longperiod was not because the subject had faded fromhis recollection, but because he had meanwhilebeen devoted to the payment of another debt tohumanity which was even yet but imperfectly discharged.He went through the whole subject atlength, proving the degraded character of the Hindoosuperstition, and calmly reasoning out his ownis Diary.120 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1813.conclusions; yet relieving the unavoidable prolixityof such a speech by occasional flashes of the brightesteloquence. " He who knows my heart 5 he said inclosinghis account of the Hindoo superstitions,knows that I have not drawn this melancholy pictureto exult over its blackness. It is with grief andshame I view it ; mourning, sir, over my own country,which for fifty years and more has left so many millionsof our fellow-creatures in this state of miseryand vice. I am not bringing a bill of indictmentagainst the Indian race but I have lived long enoughto learn ' that flatterers are not friends.' I am thetrue friend of this people, who am willing to allowtheir present degradation, that I may raise them to ahigher level."te It was late," he says, " when I got up; but D.G. I was enabled to speak for two hours, (thoughcurtailing from fear of being tedious,) and with greatacceptance. I spoke better than of late. Bankeskindly said to me, I had got into my old vein, andthough the matter was unpopular, yet admirablyheard. Only a little afterwards from opponents, andwe carried it, about 89 to 36, beyond all hope. Iheard afterwards that many good men had been prayingfor us all night. Oh what cause for thankfulness ;yet almost intoxicated with success." His own speech,and that of Lord Castlereagh, had largely contributedto this result ; but the impression of nine hundred petitions,a number then wholly without precedent onsuch a subject, could not be mistaken. " Let no manthink," was Mr. Wilberforce's warning to the House,that the petitions which have loaded our table, have1813. SUCCESSFUL RESULT. 121been produced by a burst of momentary enthusiasm ;or that the zeal of the petitioners will be soon expended.No, sir, it will be found to be steady as thelight of heaven. While the sun and moon continueto shine in the firmament, so long will this object bepursued with unabated ardour until the great work beaccomplished." The success of this great effort hecommunicated on the following day to Mrs. Wilberforce,who with his children was now in the country.House of Commons, Wednesday.Blessed be God we carried our questiontriumphantly about three, or later, this morning. Asit happened, I do not believe we lost any thing from itsnot coming on till between ten and eleven, as we werespared many long speeches of our opponents, and Iwas able, thank God, to speak at length. I was quitesurprised that my voice held out so well, as I musthave spoken above two hours, and I do not find itworse this morning. I slept well and am as well asusual to-day."But great as had been this triumph, the opponentsof the measure were not disposed to yield withoutanother struggle. During a day's absence from London,he writes to Mr. Samuel Smith.Barham Court, Friday night, June 25.My dear Friend,Excuse my stating to you, in consequence ofhaving heard from Mrs. Smith accidentally yesterdayVOL. IV. G122 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1813.that you and Abel were thinking of being at WoodHall on Monday next . . . that we shall certainly havea strong conflict for the clause concerning the religiousand moral improvement of our East Indianfellow-subjects ; and Lord Castlereagh told me thismorning that he thought the struggle would be onMonday ; certainly I conceive, either on Monday orTuesday. It is of extreme importance for us to carryour question with a high hand ; but really it is notwithout cause that I am afraid of losing it altogether,because so many people are gone out of town, whilethe East Indians, our enemies, will assuredly stay.I will detain you no longer, indeed I am myselfextremely pressed for time. I am come here on amelancholy occasion, and have just been attending tothe grave the remains of my old friend, Lord Barham,having been desired so to do by his daughter. It isan affecting scene, but after all, it is only the vilebody we commit to the grave, but the immortal spiritis not so confined, but I doubt not, is waiting in ahappy intermediate state the full consummation of itsfelicity. May this, my dear friend, be our lot, andthat of those whom we most love and value. Excusethis effusion, which is drawn forth by the scene Ihave been witnessing, and believe me, with kindestremembrances,Ever affectionately yours,W. WILBERFORCE.P. S. Do try to get us all the attendance you canonMonday."1813. DR. CAREY. 123The measure continued to advance in spite ofevery opposition. When direct resistance failed, itsopponents endeavoured to defeat it by a side-wind,moving on the 16th of July, that the declaratoryclauses of the Resolution should be omitted; thuswhilst it gave the power of licensing the missionaries,making it imply that the privilege should never beexerted.On this motion he again came forward, speakingalmost as much at length, and full as ably, as before.One great argument of his opponents was groundedon the enthusiastic character which they imputedto the missionary body. India hitherto had seenno missionary who was a member of the EnglishChurch, and imputations could be cast more readilyon "Anabaptists and fanatics." These attacks Mr.Wilberforce indignantly refuted, and well had thenoble conduct of the band at Serampore deservedthis vindication. " I do not know," he often said,a finer instance of the moral sublime, than that apoor cobbler working in his stall should conceive theidea of converting the Hindooss to Christianity ; yetsuch was Dr. Carey. Why Milton's planning hisParadise Lost in his old age and blindness wasnothing to it. And then when he had gone to India,and was appointed by Lord Wellesley to a lucrativeand honourable station in the college of Fort William,with equal nobleness of mind he made over allhis salary (between 1000 and 1500 per annum) tothe general objects of the mission. By the way,nothing ever gave me a more lively sense of the lowG 2124 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1813.and mercenary standard of your men of honour, thanthe manifest effect produced upon the House of Commonsby my stating this last circumstance. It seemedto be the only thing which moved them." 19 Dr.Carey had been especially attacked, and " a fewdays afterwards the member who had made thischarge came to me, and asked me in a manner whichin a noted duellist could not be mistaken, ' Pray,Mr. Wilberforce, do you know a Mr. Andrew Fuller,who has written to desire me to retract the statementwhich I made with reference to Dr. Carey ? '4 Yes,' I answered with a smile, ( I know him perfectly,but depend upon it you will make nothing ofhim in your way ; he is a respectable Baptist ministerat Kettering.' In due time there came from Indiaan authoritative contradiction of the slander. It wassent to me, and for two whole years did I take it inmy pocket to the House of Commons to read it to theHouse whenever the author of the accusation shouldbe present ; but during that whole time he never oncedared show himself in the House." coOnce more, upon the 12th of July, the Resolutionwas contested, but passed, in spite of Mr. Tierney'sand the Anglo-Indian opposition. " The East IndiaBill passed, and the missionary, or rather the Christian,cause fought through, without division, to thelast. We were often alarmed. Lord Castlereagh hasmanaged it admirably coolly and quietly. The petitions,of which a greater number than were everknown, have carried our question instrumentally,19 Con. Mem. 20 ib.1813. HIS SPEECHES. 125the good providence of God really." 21 " To those whoobserve the signs of the times," he says to Mr. Hey,the prospect is very encouraging. We were mercifullyfavoured by Providence in our parliamentarycontest, and when I consider what was the state ofthe House of Commons twenty-five years ago, andhow little it would then have borne with patiencewhat it heard not only with patience but acceptanceduring the late discussions, I cannot but draw a favourableaugury for the welfare of our country."His own personal influence had been a powerful instrumentin gaming this result. Never had he beenable to bring forward in the House so openly his ownreligious principles ; never had they been more respectfullyreceived. " Last session," says a shrewd andeven caustic critic, 22 whose sentiments were whollydifferent, "when the House had been tired night afternight with discussing the endless questions relatingto Indian policy, Mr. Wilberforce, with a just confidencein his powers, ventured to broach the hackneyedsubject of Hindoo conversion. He spokethree hours, but nobody seemed fatigued : all indeedwere pleased; some with the ingenious artifices of hismanner, but most with the glowing language of hisheart. Much as I differed from him in opinion, itwas impossible not to be delighted with his eloquence; and though I wish most heartily that theHindooss might be left to their own Trinity, yet Ifelt disposed to agree with him, that some good mustarise to the human mind, by being engaged in a controversywhich will exercise most of its faculties."2' Diary. 2-2 Barnes's Political Portraits,126 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE, 1813.His friends were looking with some anxiety to theeffect which these great exertions might produceupon his weakly frame ; but he was, he tells one ofthem, " certainly less exhausted at the end of thesession, than at the close of the two or three precedingones ; and this, though I took a very activepart in that greatest of all causes, for I really place itbefore the Abolition, in which blessed be God wegained the victory that I mean of laying a ground forthe communication to our Indian fellow-subjects ofChristian light and moral improvement. The newspapers,as usual, gave a very short report of myspeeches on that occasion, for twice I detained theHouse for near two hours, and, to your friendly earI may tell it, with great acceptance. I have beenstrongly advised by several of our parliamentary coadjutorsto publish the substance of my speeches, 23 andI have been, and am, putting on paper what I can recall; but what is indited in this way is always flat aswell as imperfect. If I do publish, it will be for thepurpose of recording the authorities and extracts fromEast India papers on which our measure was grounded.Our opponents being men of talent, and literature,and high connexions, will probably be able aftera time to propagate the persuasion of our havingavailed ourselves of a temporary popular delusion, andtherefore it is very desirable that there should beprovided some antidote to this poison. The newspaperscontain scarce any report of what I said on theoccasion."This too was far from having been his sole busiedThey were subsequently published.1813. DIARY. 127ness in the last session. Almost every day hadbrought its separate burden. A few extracts fromhis Diary, with which it was impossible to breakthe chain of facts connected with his leading business,will show how closely the interstices it left werepacked with other matters.March 4th. Lock Hospital meeting. Then AfricanInstitution Duke of Gloucester. Dined HenryThornton's, and House. Cochrane Johnston's motion24 put off, owing to gallery clearing by Lyon*5th. Hudson and Smith, chemists, about Apothecaries'Bill. Then Murder and Osgood about latter's plan,,Wrote a little. Town Berbice meeting. Long talkwith Lord about the governor's ill usage of us.Poor Lord very unreasonable and positive.How calm one can be, when acting with real disinterestedness! Yet curious, that I only arguing with himfor his own interest and credit's sake. HouseCochrane Johnston's motion about Princess of Walesended better than could have been expected. 17th.House Whitbread's motion. Princess of Wales'sbusiness eloquent speech, but no restraint onopinions or feelings. 19th. Castlereagh showed mewhat he had told me before, Sweden's abolition andGuadaloupe surrender Edge. April 7th. JewsLondon Tavern. First stone laying at Bethnall GreenDuke of Kent, Lord Erskine and Dundas, &c.Dinner afterwards. Grand day, and above 1000 collected.Erskine's animated speech. Way's fire.Frey's pathos. 10th. African Institution meeting.84 As to H. R. H. the Princess of Wales.128 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1813.Lords Grenville, Lansdown, &c. about Registry Bill,and large meeting. 20th. Canning came to me aboutRoman Catholic Bill ; with him to Mr. Ponsonby byGrattan's desire. Mr. Elliot there. Sir J. Newport,Romilly, and Sir Ar. Pigott, besides Ponsonby andGrattan. Talked over the matter. 23th. Breakfastwith Canning. After talking over Roman Catholicbusiness, to Hatchard's, to meet Blair, Pearson,John Villiers, &c. to revive the Lock Asylum,29th. Forced to attend a meeting for Lock Asylumright, but an hour and half expended. CalledGrattan's, Lord Erskine's, and Donoughmore's.Lodgings and House. Then with Henry Thorntonto City of London Tavern anniversary dinner forforeigners in distress, Duke of Gloucester in the chairvery civil. Near 200 people, and excellent object,but no foreign minister. Near 1000 collected afterdinner.May 4th. Annual sermon, and meeting of ChurchMissionary Society for Africa and East. Healthy.excellent sermon. Meeting afterwards, and spoke.Late to Asiatic Society, where took the chair thenHouse. 5th. British and Foreign Bible Society-anniversaryfull meeting I spoke, and well received.Dined Lord Teignmouth's Bishops of Salisbury,St. David's, Cheyne ; and Norwich was to havebeen there, but prevented. 6th. Prayer Book andHomily Society spoke, after a sermon, which couldnot attend causa meeting at Gloucester House LordGrey, Lansdown, Stephen, Macaulay, Harrison,Vansittart, about Registry Bill. 7th. Jewish .WATCHFULNESS OVER HIMSELF. 129ing anniversary sermon yesterday, Randolph ofBath I spoke. 12th. Archbishop of Castel calledmorning much talk with him about Ireland. 13th.Morning busy. Dined hastily Henry Thornton's.House on Catholic Question. Charles Grant spoke,beautiful but too elaborately. I, alas, too strongafterwards ; as professing to act from higher principles,I ought to be more affectionate, and gentle, andmeek'This entry is a striking instance of the carefulwatch over his tongue which he so jealously maintained.Other members in the course of the debatedeclared that he had not spoken more severelythan the occasion fully justified. But he judgedby another standard, and in his next Sunday's meditationbeautifully adds " Having so little time Imust not spend any in writing. Let me only recordmy own grief and shame ; and all probably from privatedevotions having been contracted, and so Godlet me stumble. How much too strongly did I speakin the House of Commons, concerning Sir J. Hip-paisley! Alas, how little exhibiting the temper of themeek and lowly Jesus I Yet I humbly hope I havebewailed my sin with bitter contrition, and but forthe weakness of my eyes could shed many tears.Lord, I flee to Thee for mercy, and do Thou guideand direct me. Yesterday's decision to have a committeeof inquiry concerning the state and treatmentin law and fact of the slaves and coloured people inour West India islands, will bring on me an immenseload, if I undertake it ; greater I fear than I can bear.G 3130 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1813Yet, Lord, to Thee I look, for ' Thou delighted inmercy.' O soften, quicken, warm, and sanctify me."17th. Staid in town all night to consult whether toconstitute parliamentary inquiry, as Lord Grenvillehad decided hastily on Saturday. 18th. Meeting ofAfrican Institution called. Sad blunder to call a boardto negative such a committee's proceedings. Long talkthere. Sad bother about being forced into a long inquiryof state of slaves and coloured people in lawand fact, for which unprepared ; yet must not offendLord Grenville he behaved very handsomely. 19th.Busy all day about putting off the meeting of AfricanInstitution Committee tomorrow various lettersfrom Duke of Gloucester. 20th. Morning, LordGrenville's. Duke of Gloucester's committee meetingGrey, Romilly, Brougham, &c. agreed that toolate this year, but settled to try next session and getevidence. 24th. To Babington's East India consultation.House Catholic Question foolishly didnot speak, though the very point on which most clearand full."Amidst these occupations he found a moment tocheer the sick-room of a friend.TO THE REV. JOHN VENN, CLAPHAM.Kensington Gore, May 26, 1813.My dear Friend,I quite long to see you, yet I cannot contriveit. You know however how deeply I feel all in whichyou are concerned, and that I hear with cortesTO THE REV. JOHN VENN. 131spending emotions, the different reports, which fromweek to week, and almost from day to day, havebeen made to me of your state of health. I believeI should go over to Clapham, but that a hurryingvisit of a few minutes to you in your present stateof serious indisposition is so little in unison withmy feelings, as to be that from which I recoil withpain instead of contemplating it with pleasure. (Iam now writing on Monday, May 31st.) You probablyhave heard that we are in the state whichreminds us of the precarious tenure by which we holdour dearest earthly possessions, one of our childrenhaving had the Scarlatina, and it not yet being ascertainedwhether the others have caught the contagion.I myself should be the most ungrateful of men, if Iwere not sensible of the degree in which mercy andgoodness have followed me all my days.My dear friend, may your supports and comfortsbe equal to the need you may have for them. Oh whatwould it be to suffer the pain, and sickness, and sorrowsof life without these heavenly cordials, when evenwith them nature sometimes finds it hard work !May we meet, my dear friend, in that world where e theformer things shall have passed away.' Your ownsufferings do not, I dare say, make you forget yourfriends, and among them, I entreat your remembranceat the throne of grace of myself and mine.I am ever, my dear Sir,Your sincere and affectionate friend,W. Wilberforce.Rev. John Venn."132 LIFE OF Wilberforce. 1813,Mr. Venn's death shortly followed. " July 9th. DearVenn's funeral all his old friends and the Londonclergy. Afterwards African Institution. Duke verycivil. Granville Sharpe died on Tuesday last. Iagreed to attend his funeral, and by the Duke's suggestionthe African Institution to do the same. 12th,13th, 14th. House as usual, daily sitting on thelast I moved about Portuguese Slave Trade. OnFriday last no House I dined at Canning's, whohad collected a large party of influential men. Iasked to bring Bowdler, and Charles Grant, jun. Tonightwe adjourned ; all business done till Tuesday,when to be prorogued."Ever since the Abolition two important objectshad occupied the protector of the negroes . . . the securingin our colonies its legitimate effects, and theinterception of the trade of other nations. It wassoon perceived that the first great object must begained by a Registry of Slaves, which would preventillicit importation, and so compel the planter totrust to the increase of his actual stock. In thelast year an experimental Registry had been introducedat Trinidad, and it was with a view to ageneral measure to the same effect, that the full examinationof the condition of the coloured populationin our islands had been resolved on by the African Institution.This was now postponed until the followingyear. But the Foreign Slave Trade required incessantvigilance. Our maritime supremacy had forthe time destroyed the Slave Trade of our enemies ;and if we could by treaty secure the concert of our1813. " MONSIEUR FUNCHAL'S PROJET." 133friends, this scourge of Africa would be destroyed.Every new treaty therefore he carefully examined,and was ready to compel the government by friendlyviolence to insert the stipulations which this cause required.His intervention in the year before had succeededin the case of Sweden, and his closing motionthis session aimed at securing the same point withPortugal. On the faith of Lord Castlereagh's assurancethat the matter should be pressed on Portugal,he withdrew his motion till the spring ; and early inthe holidays " Monsieur Funchal's projet " was senthim by the minister, who wished for his " confidentialsuggestions on the plan before their next interview."A year before, he had (e tried to impress the Comtewith a sense of the danger of alienating all the religiouspart of our community from the cause of Portugal,by their continuing to carry on the Slave Trade,especially north of the Line ; " - 5 but he then foundhim obdurate, and the present scheme was most unsatisfactory.On the 28th of August he tells Mr.Stephen, " this day's post has brought me a long letterfrom Lord Castlereagh, who seems to be betterdisposed than I wish to the Comte de Funchal's projet.I own that I perhaps feel some prejudice againstthe man. Then I am persuaded that we should bringthe matter to a much better issue by employing someparticular individual to negociate on this businessseparately. Some few weeks ago I wrote to LordCastlereagh, recommending him to propose to JohnVilliers to undertake the business. As I had no au-diary,Sept. 11, 1812.134 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. , 1813.thirty from Villiers to propose it, I wish this to bekept secret. He when in Portugal cultivated an acquaintancewith the confessor of the Regent, andI know that he conceives that the string of religionwould be most likely to vibrate. But to enable youto judge of the advantages of this appointment, Imust state several particulars which I have not timeto specify. I scarcely saw one motive for acceding tothe Comte's proposals, until I read your suggestionthat we should by it obtain the right of seizure to thenorth of Cape Palmas.But the grand question is, whether we can properlyconsent to purchase an entire exemption fromthe evils of the Slave Trade for one part of Africa,by leaving Portugal in the uncontrolled possession ofanother part ? And I own, that on closing with thatproposition, there is something so shocking in it invarious points of view, that I scarcely know how tobring myself to consent to it ; but if at all, I am surethat the part exempted should be all which used tobe free from Portuguese visitation before we abolished,(there you see is a principle,) whereas their (Fun-charms)projet would put them in possession of immenseregions, from which they formerly scarcely broughtany slaves whatever. I really cannot but value at ahigh rate, though the precise amount of the sum cannotbe estimated, that increased and increasing abhorrenceof the Slave Trade which pervades ourwhole empire ; and I cannot but hope that in a fewyears we shall find the principle work, and possiblybe able to prevail on other countries to concur in a1813. PORTUGUESE SLAVE TRADE. 135general Abolition. Now, by stipulating, though witha benevolent view, that we will not interfere with theSlave Trade within the limits to be conceded to thePortuguese, we shall preclude ourselves from anymeasures which should involve the Abolition of theSlave Trade in that part of Africa, at least by compulsorymeans. And I think you will agree withme in not expecting any good consequence from theinternal duty on slaves imported into Brazil. Wemay let that hare sit, as the Dean says. Then surelythe Comte has a pretty share of modest assurancein beginning with requiring as a preliminary that weshould make full compensation, as a matter of state,(so Mr. Lucina sagaciously advises, not in the boldtechnical mode of legal adjudication,) for all thePortuguese slave ships seized by Captain Irby andothers. I cannot now go further. The Mozambiqueand Cape article wholly inadmissible.On the whole I think we must except against theComte's terms as audacious and even atrocious, inrequiring such a preliminary to entering into a treatyat all ; then instead of proposing to give us somethingconsiderable in addition to what was conceded by thetenth article of the treaty, actually calling on us tomake over to them far more than even what theyclaimed in the large and loose terms which they usedon that occasion. I recur to my old idea, of a separatetreaty by a special negociation. I would howevertreat Lord Castlereagh with great civility ; he behavesto us very handsomely ; and we must remember that hehimself was a high-duty Abolition man, and therefore136 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1813.allow for his assigning more efficiency to that proceedingthan you or I should do, I mention it toyou lest you should forget it, and say any thing whichmight appear uncivil to him. If I could believe thatthe plan would ultimately terminate in Abolition,though after many years, I should view it with farmore complacency. I own I cannot see that elysiumat the end of any vista however long."These objections to the project he laid before LordCastlereagh in a letter, for the length of which hesays " I really, my dear Lord, must-beg your pardon ;you have made me forget that I am addressing a Secretaryof State, and I scribble as loosely as if I werewriting to a private friend, It seemed the shortestway to discuss the question, as though it lay with meto accept or refuse the various conditions, but of courseI do not forget that I am availing myself of yourpermission to suggest such remarks as occur to meon the project of the Comte."He adds a few days later upon part of this proposalI hope that Corne de Funchal was not aware ofthe horrible consequences which would follow fromsuffering the slave ships to touch at the Cape, and ofwhich there were of late some most shocking instances.Really, my dear Lord C., when I consider howclosely we have been intertwining the interests of thePortuguese with our own, and how freely our bloodand treasure have been lavished to preserve them inexistence,I grow warmer if not more indignantthan I ought to be at such treatment, and indeed atsuch conduct considered in itself that with declaresMandate. 137tions in their mouths that they consider the SlaveTrade unjust and inhuman, and are aware also of theevils of a factitious population, they should bestriving for the right of availing themselves of theprotection of our flag, for the purpose of bringing onthe natives of Africa miseries five times greaterthan any from which we have delivered them ! Ihope I need not assure your Lordship, after our longacquaintance, that I should very unwillingly resort toharsher means of carrying our point, if it could possiblybe effected in good humour. But I do firmlybelieve that the people of this country might be-broughtto be willing to give up our Portuguese connexionaltogether, rather than be rendered her passiveinstrument (a reproach on our understandings aswell as on our principles) in enabling her to carryinto execution a project so full of hypocrisy, wickedness,and cruelty."He was now at Sandgate ; having escaped into thecountry as soon after parliament had risen, as somediscussions " would allow, in which with " Brougham,William Smith, James Stephen, sen. and jun. HenryThornton, and Macaulay," he had " decided that weshould all do our best to get information for our casenext session, but not send any one abroad." " Iquite feel for you, my dear Stephen," he writes afterhis own escape, " who are still stowed up in London.I long to see you climbing our hills. Do come downif for two or three days only ; an evening coach wouldbring you to our breakfast table, or a morning to oursupper. Would not such an excursion do you good ?138 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1813.You talk of spirits ; mine would sink from continuedunmitigated sewage in the great city." But in spiteof this affection for the country, he soon joined Mr.Stephen in Great Ormond Street to be present at ameeting of the African Institution, to settle WestIndian matters with Macaulay, Grant, and the interiorcouncil." 26His children now were much upon his mind. ( Theyhad all gathered around him at Sandgate, and hewatched over them as usual with the deepest interest.I can scarcely," he wrote to a friend, with an enclosurewhich had been sent for his perusal, " conceiveany earthly pleasure greater than that of receivingsuch a letter from a beloved son, who showsby his conduct that he writes the real sentiments andfeelings of his heart. I am conscious of my own extremelyinadequate powers in all that concerns the workof education, but I humbly trust that I can say withtruth that the spiritual interests of my children aremy first object, I mean that I wish to see them becomereal Christians, rather than great scholars, oreminent in any other way ; and I earnestly pray toGod for wisdom to direct me, and that His grace maybegiven in large measure to my children ; resolvingat the same time, since the Almighty acts by means,to consider thoroughly and after consideration topursue the dictates of my judgment. I own I amrather sanguine in my hopes of the result, on groundof the Scripture promises. Join your prayers, mydear friend, to mine, and give me also from time26 Diary.1813. STAGE-COACH JOURNEY. 139to time the benefits of your friendly counsel." In thesame tone he tells Mrs. Wilberforce " My besthopes for them rest on the declaration, that Godhears and grants the prayers of His people throughthe merits and intercession of the Saviour. Oh letus press on to a higher proficiency in the Christianlife as the surest expedient for their good. Wedo not even those who hold the truths of Christianitycorrectly we do not think enough or speakenough of the Saviour. I would gladly have Himcontinually before me. I find the sense of His presenceproduces a humble, calm, confiding dependence,making me ' walk softly.' To you I open all myheart. I feel very lonely without all of you, thoughnothing can be kinder than Stephen." Two dayslater he rejoined his family, going as far as Maidstonein the stage, and finding " much amusement inhis fellow-travellers."To Mr. Stephen he playfully describes his journey.Sandgate, Aug. 14, 1813.My dear Stephen,After the scanty specimen which even thewaiting to see me off obtained for you, of the powersof entertainment of one of my fellow-travellers, Iscarcely need assure you that we were at no loss forconversation during the whole of the journey, thoughI ought not to say during the whole of it, for the fairone alluded to . . who by the way assured us that shewas forty-five . . walking forward with two others ofour fellow-travellers . . we were six in all till then .140 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1813.took a wrong turn on Wrexham Heath, and consequentlywe saw and heard no more of them. I cannotsay the process was at all disagreeable to me. Icould not well make out whether or not I was known,and I almost think I was not ; they were all howeververy civil, and I am to send the Dairy-man'sDaughter to one poor girl the daughter of a RomneyMarsh farmer who resides at Tenterden, and whomher mother was bringing home after a long stay inLondon, where she had a brain fever, of which, andher treatment in it, we had a detailed account, withsome fears expressed by the mother, for which thelight spirits of the girl really gave fair occasion, lesther spirits running away with her should produce arelapse.f But I must not run on thus ; it is latish on Saturdaynight, and I must hasten to a conclusion. I thankGod, I found all the party here in good health. Mydear S. I feel all your kindness to me, though I saylittle about it. I am however praying God to blessand preserve you.Ever yours,W. WILBERFORCE.James Stephen Esq."Here his time was spent in his usual summer occupations." I get up about seven ; then serious timeand devotions for an hour ; then dressing and hearingone of the children read to me for three-quarters of anhour after breakfast, letters, and writing ; dictating,&c. We cline together early, and then some of the1813. SIR JOHN SINCLAIR. 141children read till we walk out, from about six tilleight ; then coming in I have an hour serious. Thenfamily prayers, supper, and bed about eleven. I musttry to see more of the children, and to obtain moretime for study ; hitherto I have done little but writeletters." ^ Some of these are a good sample of thenatural working of his mind amongst the commonincidents of every-day life.TO ROBERT OSBORNE ESQ. RECORDER OF HULL.Sandgate, Sept. 4, 1813.My dear Osborne,When your friendly letter reached me I wasat work upon a piece of business e8 I much wished tofinish before I should begin to pay off my epistolarydebts. But so much more slowly have I got on thanI expected, and so many have been my interruptions,that it is not yet terminated. I can however in commondecency no longer delay writing to you, and forthe past I must throw myself on the mercy of thecourt. You have at least a penitent criminal to dowith, babes confidence rem.You make my mouth water by your lively descriptionof rural pleasures and occupations. I speak seriouslyso far as the love of country is concerned, andin judgment and estimation I set a high value on thepursuits of a country life. I take it for granted youtook the opportunity which I understand has beenlatterly afforded you by the Right Hon. President ofthe Board of Agriculture being in Yorkshire, to furs7 Diary. 28 Dictating his Speeches on Christianizing India.142 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1813.nisi him with some fresh hints for perfecting the fermeornee. What was said of himself by Falstaff in respectof wit, may be said of that same Baronet in respect ofagriculture, (and half of it may be said in respect ofwit too, I don't say which half,) and a high praise it is,that he not only super abounds with it himself, but hehas been the cause of it in other men ; for what otherbenefits may have resulted from the Board of Agriculture(Sir John's cher enfant) I will not take itupon me to pronounce, but I have myself seen collectedin that small room several of the noblemenand gentlemen of the greatest landed properties inEngland, or rather in the British isles ; all of themcatching and cultivating an agricultural spirit, andgoing forth to spend in the employment of labourers,and I hope in the improvement of land, immense sumswhich might otherwise have been lavished on houndsand horses, or still more frivolously squandered ontheatricals. I have been much struck with the improvement,which, judging from the Hull packet, appearsto have taken place in Wilderness, since we werechildren ; I mean in the natives. If any judgmentcould be formed from their exterior, they were not thenmuch addicted to reading and writing ; whereas, I sawsome time ago an account of a very clever paperwhich was read, together it was stated with others,at an agricultural meeting at Heron a place, by theway, which used to be fertile only in members ofparliament, and the dirty manure, to carry on thefigure, by which alone in such a soil that crop can beproduced.1813. NATIONAL PROSPECTS. 143But I am entering on a topic, on which thereis much more to. be said than I have now timefor, I mean, when I begin to speak of the improvementof our country in intelligence, and I trust indeedin what is far more important, in religious andmoral improvement the best securities for nationalhappiness, and the surest antidotes against some ingredientsin our national cup, which are not of sosalubrious a quality, or of such beneficial effects.Our political prospects have certainly brightened oflate, and that considerably, but we have been so oftendisappointed in our foreign politics, that I scarcelydare indulge the hopes, which twenty years ago sucha state of things might have excited.I had inquiries to make, but have left myself notime for making them Paper I have in my drawer.But do remember I have few northern correspondents,and when you write, tell me what I cannot learnfrom newspapers, of Yorkshire men and things."With every friendly wish, I am, my dear Osborne,Yours sincerely,W. Wilberforce."His children remember the indignant feelings withwhich he witnessed the disgraceful capture of anEnglish vessel, related in the following letter.Sandgate, Sept. 6, 1813.My dear Macaulay,Captain Irby's impression of your letter isfundamentally erroneous ; but his calm justification of144 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1813.himself does high honour to his strength of mind.Few who had been led into the action by such a mistakeof signals, would have achieved in it this conquestof their feelings.I am reminded by my figure of speech of mentioningto you an incident which, if you had been inLondon, I should have communicated to you by thisafternoon's post. As it is this letter will not be sentoff till tomorrow, and as I fear it can tend to no good,I will tell you the substance instead of the particulars.A merchant vessel lying just under the signalpost in perfect security, because no indication wasgiven of an enemy being at sea, was boarded withoutresistance and carried into Calais by a privateer,which had been in sight for full four hours and wasknown all the time to be an enemy, because thecommanding officer at the signal post was absent partridgeshooting. He would not have been so muchto blame, but that he knew what all who residehereabouts know, that when the wind blows strongfrom the south-west, the ships of war which protectthis part of the Channel are forced to bear awayfor the next bay, between Dungeness and Beachy-head.Really it is too bad to think of several ofour poor fellows, or even if they were not English,(which we know not,) being carried to prison, &c.through the scandalous negligence of the officer,at the very time when he must have known hewas bound to be peculiarly vigilant. It struckme immediately that the underwriters should be setongovernment, and had you been in town I should1813. LORD Lancaster. 145certainly have named it to you. When the merchantvessel was boarded, a gentleman (who with two, orthree, or four hundred others was on Folkstone Pierwitnessing the whole) told me that there was suchan indignant groan. Also the officer who had chargeof the guns knew it was an enemy, and had all readyfor firing, (and if the merchant vessel had beenalarmed, she certainly would have got away,) butwould not fire, alleging from what passed on aformer occasion, that if they fired without ordersfrom the proper authority they would be reprimanded,if not worse. I am, my dear Macaulay,Ever your sincere Friend,W. Wilberforce."The conclusion of this autumn was spent in payingseveral long-promised visits of duty and affection inthe south and west of England. " How soon," hesays plaintively on entering one house, where thevoice which had often welcomed him was mute, " howsoon does the gap close, which the withdrawing of afriend occasions ! Yet was loved and valued."A letter from Lord Lindsay on the 9th of September,told him of another and a sudden blow LordMuncaster was gone. " It seemed," he tells theirmutual friend, Archdeacon Corbett, " almost an offenceagainst our regard for each other and for the lamentedfriend whom we had lost, not to breathe sigh for sigh,if I may so express it, on that affecting subject. Butas from a complaint in my eyes, I am obliged to writeby another hand, I will leave it to your own mind toVOL. IV. H146 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1813,suggest to you all I should utter in propria persona. 29If I had not heard from your co-executor at Lancaster,the affecting and characteristic language inwhich my legacy is left, I should have thought youwronged me in withholding it."I add these two bequests," were the words usedby Lord Muncaster, " in way of legacies, one to myvery early and much esteemed good friend HenryBuncombe Esq. of Congreve in the county of York,and one to my truly valued and much regarded friendWilliam Wilberforce Esq. member for the saidcounty, of 100 guineas each; as a small proof andtestimony of the very sincere friendship I felt towardsthem during the time I walked with them in this valeof tears and sorrowing."Amongst the visits which had been the longest promisedwas one to Barley Wood, and when the time ofpaying it was almost come, he wrote to HannahMoreOct. 6, 1813.My dear Friend,I take up my pen to tell you that our visitingStansted before we quarter ourselves on you will delayOur arrival with you three or four days longer thanI designed, or wished, or stated to you. But the factis, and I had not adverted to it, that when at Mr.Way's, we shall be within fifteen or eighteen miles ofthe 's. She almost my daughter. Her fathermy first cousin, who lived thirteen years under my29 The Diary was intermitted at this time.1813. TO HANNAH MORE. 147mother's roof throughout the period of my childhood,and who brought her down in his arms at three weeksold, to introduce her to me : and he dying a fewweeks afterwards I always regarded her as undermy special wing.Happily, blessed be God, I have been instrumentalin her uniting herself for life to one of the veryfirst Christians I know. Her friends, according tothe usual error even of well-disposed people, hadfallen into the absurdity of considering her havinga good fortune as a reason for her not marrying aman whose income was not also large instead offollowing the directly opposite, which is unquestionablythe just reasoning, that there being money enoughon one side, worth, and temper, and such otherpoints, might be more entirely the objects to be requiredon the other. Well, these same excellentpeople thus married, I repeat it, through my aidingand comforting (as the lawyers phrase it,) have beeninviting us to their house ever since their union ; yet.never did we, or I singly, set foot within it. Now ifwe could come into their neighbourhood and put upat the park and the chateau, and leave the parsonageunvisited, if ever the crime laesae militia? was committed,we should be chargeable with it in an eminentdegree. But our visit to them will be short. Ibeg kindest remembrances to the sisterhood, and inhaste amEver affectionately yours,W. Wilberforce."H 2148 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1812.It was seven years since he had seen Hannah More,except the single day that she had spent with him inthe summer ; and it was with no little pleasure thathe again found himself, his wife and daughters, beneaththe roof of the sisterhood. Death indeed hadvisited their dwelling, and taken one from the unitedband ; but she who was gone had died in Christianhope, and they who yet survived lived on in Christiancheerfulness. It was still, as it ever had been, thefavoured seat of intellectual and religious sunshine.You must have been greatly entertained at BarleyWood," Mr. Wilberforce wrote a few weeks before toMrs. Stephen, 30 " if your nerves were equal to the encounter,but you would miss the eldest sister. Therewas a place assigned to every one of the sisterhood,and not one of them could be spared without creatinga void. I almost envied you the being housed, as Iunderstood you were to be, with Mrs. Siddons."Here he spent almost a week > and felt no want ofMrs. Siddons. The sisters were all life, and he wascharmed with many of their guests. " 18th. DeanRyder came from Wells in the evening truly pleasingand much talk with him. 19th. The Dean andJ walked before breakfast, which late, because LadyMilford and her family expected to it. Talkedwalked read to them Baxter's Life (the changeof view and feeling). 20th. After breakfast MissPatty showed me her book of hand writing of eminentmen. Many of them written on purpose and very30 AH jr. 26.1813. BARLEY WOOD. 149curious. Edward VI., Queen Mary, (William III.)Pope, Swift, Bolingbroke, and Canterbury. All theAdmirals, General Wolfe, &c. All the politicians,Washington, Dr. Franklin, Prior, Priestley, Burke,Fox, Pitt. Sir Joshua Reynolds. A beautiful letterfrom Horsey. Voltaire, Rousseau, Blackstone.Bathurst and John Harford came, and his sweet wife.Lady S. and Mr. H. came over he too talkative andforward, yet his success I hear is great. What anumber of good people live at Clifton and Bristol !Met Dr. W. the true picture of a sensible, well informedand educated, polished, old, well beneficed,nobleman's * and gentleman's house-frequenting, literaryand chess playing divine of the best sort (netadulatory). I hope beginning to be serious. On the22nd of October we left our kind friends." And bythe 12th of the next month he was again in his winterquarters in the neighbourhood of London.CHAPTER XXIX.DECEMBER 1813 TO DECEMBER 1814.Successes of the Allies Christmas with his children LascarsGerman sufferers Society Madame de Stael Buonaparteabdicates Foreign Slave Trade Lord Castlereagh atParis Letter to Emperor Alexander French TreatyInterview with Emperor Amendment to the Address*National schools Blucher Cossacks Czartoriski BishopMiddleton Letter to Talleyrand To his son Congress ofVienna Correspondence with Duke of WellingtonSismondi Humboldt Madame de Stael Prospects ofFrench Abolition His private life at Sandgate Return toLondon Slave Trade abolished by Napoleon.PARLIAMENT had been sitting nearly for a fortnightwhen Mr. Wilberforce returned to town ; but noimportant questions had required his presence. Littlemore was done in the early part of the session thanto follow with votes of thanks the successful progressof our army. " The war " had " begun well after thearmistice, Austria having joined the Allies, and Buonapartebeing crippled in both flanks, and apparentlycentre too." * Every step of the Allies was nowwatched most anxiously. " We saw last night flashesof cannon on the French coast, which we fear is for1 Diary, Sept. 20.1813. CHILDREN OF RELIGIOUS PARENTS. 151some victory. Buonaparte however would make themost of a small one. St. Sebastian taken, but by aterrible loss of men in all to us and our Allies 5000killed and wounded." 2The triumphs of this scourge of God were over.The allied armies all through this campaign steadilyadvanced upon the retreating Emperor, and upon the25th of November the guns of the Tower were " firingat nine and again at four o'clock, for news of LordWellington's storming the French lines near thePyrenees. Also prodigious success of the Allies.Dresden taken, with 16,000 French. The gloriousnews from Holland better than all the rest." 3But though little was at this time doing in theHouse, his time was fully occupied. His childrenhad gathered round him for the Christmas holy-days,and he was giving his usual attention to them 'Chatting with them all the evening, and readingMiss Edgeworth's tales to them. I extremely wishto attend to them, but I sadly feel my incompetenceto discharge the parental office." These feelingswere quickened at this time by his seeing " in thenewspapers that poor C. N. was killed. Alas ! alas !I fear it will go hard with my good old friend hisfather. I used, I fear too sanguinely, to hope thatGod would hear the prayers of all who called on Himfor their children. Yet surely good old N. prayed,and so did she, for poor Charles. Oh what a lesson tousto give all diligence with our children as well aswith ourselves, and also to live closely with Him,2 Diary, Sept. 3 Diary.152 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1813.that our interest with Him may be greater 1 " " Ihave received by return of post a most Christian letterfrom my old friend. The degree in which thegood man is filled with a sense of his own sinsmakes him dwell less on his son's situation, andfor his own defilement the fountain stands open.S.'s interesting account of poor C. N. yet whileeulogizing him, said he had no benevolence or kindlyfeelings. S. thinks that he was over-dosed with religion,and that of an offensive kind, while young. Itis an awful instance, and well deserves the study ofall parents ; they should labour to render religion ascongenial as possible. It is worth inquiring whatthe failure was in poor N.'s case, if any; which itseems difficult not to suppose considering all his sonsto be such as they are."Many other matters soon claimed a large share ofhis attention. Amongst the most troublesome wasa long inquiry into charges brought by a governorof Sierra Leone against his friend Zachary Macaulay.Poor Macaulay, after all his sufferings, labours,and disinterestedness for Africa, in reality put onhis defence; and having the mortification of seeingeven well-disposed people (for A is a worthyman, though prejudiced) jealous, and taking up withidle and malignant tales against him what a lessonto us not to set our heart on worldly favour, even thatof good men ! Yet he will come pure out of the fire."Soon afterwards he gave another " morning toSierra Leone, examining M , whose inaccuracywould be laughable in contrast with Macaulay's .MR. MACAULAY. 153greatness, if the inquiry had not cost him so muchtime to hunt amongst old papers. Poor A madehis speech how weak ! His prejudice and errormanifestly originating from the N s. How sad tosee so fair and so kind a man so misled ! The Quakersare humane and active, hut often obstinate, and occasionallyabsurd from not knowing enough of the world,of the judgments likely to be formed by other men,,and the impressions to be made on them." Whenthe inquiry was completed he went " to the SierraLeone Committee to settle the Report. Broughamhad drawn it up, and though, as he said, he hadsoftened things in order to let down A and hisfriends easily, yet all favourable and honourable toMacaulay, and condemning N ." " It will, Ihope, keep us all together, if so it is from Macaulay'sChristian spirit, which truly honourable to him. Hadhe pressed for a more triumphant, and really thereforemore just vindication, A and the N swould have left us, and a mischievous rent have beenmade."His full London season was now begun, and he wasoften " worried by many morning callers upon business."" Breakfasters " too abounded ; while all hisrooms were occupied by various friends. " Dr. Buchanancame to stay with us a little. Dear Bowdleralso an inmate much pleasing talk." Yet howeverhe was occupied, he could not decline any pressingwork of mercy. On the 3rd of January, " we were,"he says, " a very large party at breakfast, Mr. Carcaseand several others, first time about the Lascars andH 3154 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE 1814.Chinese brought over in our East India ships ; and shallwe not provide for them, or for their return ? " In thiswork he called a few days later for Mr. Stephen's aid(Private.)My dear Stephen,I have but a few moments for writing, but if youwill be at liberty I will call on you between two andthree o'clock, that we may proceed together, if you liketo join me, to the East India House. At all events Iwish to let you know something of a case which hasbeen some time before me. But consider yourself ashaving promised not to divulge it, without my permission.Mr. Carcase some few days ago broughthither three or four Lascars. It appears that thesepeople, about 1500 in number, are quartered inRadcliffe Highway, the East India Company payingten shillings per head weekly for their board andlodging. Some neighbours reported that the poorcreatures were very hardly treated, and there hadbeen much private inquiry, and long and numerousdiscussions, before I was apprized of it.Attention was kept more awake through somebenevolent and intelligent young men employing theirleisure in teaching them English, and in learning fromthem Bengal, Hindoostanee, and Chinese. I wasexpecting almost daily to go into the city to inquire,when Mr. Carcase four or five days ago wrote meword, that the superintendents o f these poor creatureshad learned that some of them had been complainingof their treatment, and that they had therefore .LASCARS. 155solved to send the grumblers off by the first ship.Matters were in this state when about three quartersof an hour ago, surrounded by ten or twelve visitorsof various sorts and sizes, I received the enclosedletter, which you will concur with me in thinkingrequires immediate attention. I mean therefore toproceed to the India House immediately after aninterview with Lord Melville which is appointed forhalf-past one o'clock. Will you meet me at theIndia House ?I am ever yours, in extreme haste,W. Wilberforce."The singleness of spirit in which he undertook suchcauses, may be seen in the alacrity with which heresigned the leading part to others. " Grant," hetells Mr. Babington, " has been asking me to spendsome time with him tomorrow, to settle a plan forthe protection, and I hope instruction, of the Lascars :will you help him to form it ? It is a business justsuited to you, and it would be aiding the accomplishmentof a great act of humanity as well as of friendshipto Charles Grant, jun. who is to bring the businessbefore the House of Commons. I believe youknow some particulars about these people, to which Imay add their willingness and capacity to receive instruction.Mrs. Babington will laugh and say, I amat my old trade of bringing you into the harness."To put others forward was indeed his fe old trade."He had set on foot about this time another plan, towhich he found himself unable to attend as fully as156 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1814.he wished, and went down therefore to the committeewhom he had set to work, to " advise their putting itinto the hands of some other M. P. who could attendto it, and carry it through. It soon appeared thathad already made this, very application to two M. Pes.There could not," he continues with beautiful simplicity," be better men for a business of this kind ; andtherefore though it was not handsome in him towardsme who had first named the matter to him, I appearedunconscious of it, and truly declared I would help themin any way I could, and that I was glad it was insuch hands. It is a great part of time wisdom andChristian conduct to set others on good scentsinstead of following them oneself." In the samespirit he now acted; " I have been busying myselfabout the Lascars, but from thinking that mybeing prominent, would excite a mischievous prejudicein Directors' minds by associating the businesswith the subject of Christianizing India, Ihave kept and will keep in the back ground as muchas I can without injuring the cause. It is great practicalwisdom to set proper men at work on properbusiness, and for this end it is so useful and beneficialboth for this world and the next, to form connexionsqualified by talents, principles, dispositions, and habitsto be active and useful." 4He was at this time busy in another charitablework, in which he was thrust forward into an unwillingprominence. The destitution on the continent,for which he had last year done much toDiary, Feb. 9.1814. GERMAN SUFFERERS. 157obtain relief, was greatly aggravated by the ravagesof the last campaign ; and he was now most anxiousto obtain substantial aid for the German sufferers.On the 27th of January, he was " off early to theCity of London Tavern to the meeting for relievingthe distressed Germans. I moved the first resolution.The Duke of Sussex prevented attending bythe asthma. But a poor meeting as to our respectablepeople. Henry Thornton in the chair."Not satisfied with this attempt, he was soon afterwards" trying to effect a meeting in the West End ofthe town." " I have written to see the Archbishop ofCanterbury, arid called on Lord Sidmouth to get himto solicit the Prince Regent for a grant. The Archbishopconsented to attend, as did several others whomhe personally solicited ; and the 25th of March wasnamed for the meeting ; though he found some leadingnoblemen " refuse to attend all party feelingsad work. How disgraceful and unprincipled, thoughthey are not aware of it !" 5 When he reached Freemason'sHall, upon the 25th, he found " the Archbishopalready there, and the Duke of York soonafter. All in confusion from one ' contrary ' Lord, whohowever I am told is a benevolent, kind-intentionedman. Our fault was, not at once telling the Archbishopour plan of proceedings ; who to move and who tosecond, &c. ; but finding all alive and in motion whenI arrived, and fearful of appearing desirous of showingoff, I made no preparation, and consequently allconfusion. The Duke of York in the chair. The5 Diary, March 24.153 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1814.two archbishops and many bishops, but only LordHarrowby and Chancellor of the Exchequer (frommy last night's letter). All the resolutions movedand passed in a lump, and no speaking ; till afterwardsthe Archbishop said a few words ; then theDuke of Sussex, who has behaved nobly about cedingthe chair and then coming. He received me mostkindly when I called on him about it. Thoughhe had been led to consider himself as chairman, hegave it up most liberally, and said he trusted he shouldshow he was actuated by a better principle thanvanity. Sir James Mackintosh too has acted nobly incomingand being ready to speak, but we could notmanage it either for him or for Charles Grant. Iwas at length called forward to second Lord Buckinghamshire'smotion of thanks to the Duke of York, andmost kindly received. burst into tears at seeingme so applauded. Madame de Stael there. 6 Ohwhile this should humble me in the dust from theconsciousness how little I deserve their praises, howassiduous should it make me to use my influencewisely ! How graciously God's good providencefavours me ! I had scarcely thought at all before,and had no plan of speech, yet for a few sentenceswent on very well. My merciful Saviour has neveryet forsaken me. O God, what thanks do I oweThee!" 7 "The archbishops and bishops," he tells6 She has described this meeting in her Considerations sur la RevolutionFranchise, " Homme le plus aime, et le plus considered de touteAngleterre, M. Wilberforce, put a peine se faire entendre, tant lesapplaudissements convenient sa voix."i Diary.1814. GERMAN SUFFERERS. 159Hannah More, "have come forward for the firsttime in my recollection., to succour the poor Germansufferers. But how sad, not one opposition Lord, andthe only Commoner Mackintosh, and very few noblemenof any kind ; none but Lord Harrowby, Gambier,Kenyon, Buckinghamshire, and Walsingham. Howlittle do people consider the account they will have togive of their money, influence, &c.! "Besides these calls of charity and business, societyhad many claims upon him, and often occupied histime, though he watched more narrowly than everover his motives and conduct when he entered intoit. This spring affords some striking illustrations ofhis principles in this particular. " When attending,"on the 8th of February, " a meeting of the AfricanInstitution, Sir S. Romilly told me aloud thatMadame de Stael assured him she wished more to beacquainted with me than with any other person. TheDuke of Gloucester made me by her express desire fixaday for meeting her at dinner, chez lui Saturdaysennight. This is mere vanity, and perhaps curiosity ;and I felt my vanity a little rising too on theoccasion. Oh how full are we of this degrading passion; and how diligently should we counteract it bycalling up the ideas of what degrades us, and of thejudgment we should form of others in whom we sawthe same temper of mind ! Thus we learn to abhor ourselves,and to sit in judgment on ourselves as on others.Lord, enable me thus to scrutinize and condemn myselfmore and more. She told the Duke of Gloucesterthat I did not think how really religious she was.160 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1814.I must read her Charlemagne, in order not to exciteher prejudices. It will also enable me better to distinguishbetween her religion and the true, in conversingwith others. Feb. 9th. Off to to poorLady E. who has been very ill, and was, I heard, inbad spirits, and wrote to me that she wished for a littlereligious conversation. Dined and talked all the eveningwith her poor thing, how much to be pitiedabout her son and grandchild ! She has been mosttrying circumstanced, but seems to have sufferedmuch from not being more decided in opinions orpractice. 10th. Breakfasted as had dined alone, buttalked some time in the morning with her. Then totown, and City of London Tavern Refuge for theDestitute anniversary. Came back with Lord S. whomentioned his deceased wife in sweet terms he hadoften found her at prayer, and her eyes wet withtears, when he went to her roome(Castlereagh negociating at Cotillon with Allies'ministers and Agincourt the Duke of Vicenza. Icannot help believing that the ministers are not callingforth a spirit sufficiently strong, by not takingany clear line about the Bourbons. 11th. LordErskine asked me to dine to-day to meet T. ; butthere would be no good talk before them, so dined athome. 12th. Dined at Wayland's to meet R. thelawyer, editor of the British Review a very differentman from what I expected a great stout fellow butI forget; how could he otherwise get through thelabour he undergoes, educating children, a profession,editorship, and writing nearly all sometimes ? 18th.IS 14. MADAME DE Steel. 1G1The French have probably cut off a few thousands,detached parts of the allied army, but Buonaparteretires. Reports of differences in the Cabinet. Threeper cents once lately as high as 72, probably mightreach 75 if peace. 19th. Dined Duke of Gloucester'sto meet Madame de Stael, at her desire Madame,her son and daughter, Duke, two aides-decamp,Vansittart, Lord Erskine, poet Rogers, and others.Madame de Stael quite like her book, though lesshopeful complimenting me highly on AbolitionAll Europe,' &c. But I must not spend time inwriting this. She asked me, and I could not well refuse,to dine with her on Friday to meet Lord Harrowbyand Mackintosh, and poet Rogers on Tuesdaysennight. This would lead to an endless round ofdinners, but it neither suits my mind or body ; whenI dine late, the previous hours are worth little, andthe rest of the evening goes to society. I greatlydoubt about the doing any good by dining-out. Bygoing out now and then in the evening, when I havedined early, and am fresher and brisker, I shouldbe better fitted to adorn religion and seize occasionsof doing good : now I am often sleepy, and not havingduly cultivated the religious principle by private devotions,it is weak, and I grow worldly and useless.I may fairly assign weak health, and dine early, andso get more hours for business."I must secure more time for private devotion, forself-examination, for meditation, for keeping theheart, and even doing the duties of life, or the mostpressing claims will carry it, not the strongest. I162 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1814.have been living far too publicly for me e Notusmagis omnibus.' Oh may it not be ( ignores mortarsibi. J Lord, help me. The shortening of privatedevotions starves the soul, it grows lean and faint.This must not be. Oh how sad, that after trying tolead a Christian life for twenty-eight years, I shouldbe at all staggered by worldly company Madamede Stael, &c. I will not however, please God,enter and Jbe drawn into that magic circle into whichthey would tempt me. See my Diary for a newplan." Q " Lord, forgive my past unprofitableness,and enable me to bring forth more fruit to Thyglory. It is reasonable that now, when I find a manifestdecline in some of my faculties, I should requiremore study, and thus only it is to be secured : unlessI adopt some such plan, my giving up part of my parliamentaryattendance will only be to exchange it forsocial intercourse with the irreligious, which dissipatesand injures the mind ; not, as it ought to be, to barterit for family cares, and culture and more study andpreparation for public business. 922nd. Wrote to Madame de Stael with my books,for which she had almost asked. Then off for Kensington.Called on Duke of Sussex by his desire, andsat near an hour talking about German subscription,Roman Catholic Question, war, &c. He talking ofhis friends, meaning Grenville, &c. said he suspectedthe Emperor would play us false Swartzen-burg's debts seems to have a good library. Dinedat home, and being with me, I foolishly staids Journal, Feb. 20. 9 Diary, Feb. 20.1814. DIARY. 163reading loosely Burke, Cicero, &c. instead of writingletters, and getting to other business.""23rd. Breakfast, Mr. Barnett about the poor.Letters. Wrote to Madame de Stael and poet Rogers,to excuse myself from dining with them. It does notseem the line in which I can now glorify God. Dinnerquiet, and letters afterwards.24th. To K.'s to dinner, where S. and others. Ihad heard just before from Macaulay of his havingat a party strongly condemned my book and religion,and that G. who is just beginning to be earnest, wasmuch disgusted. Alas ! it is a pity ; yet I wish Ihad as much love of the Saviour as they have.25th. Colonel Burgess to dinner about lesseningoaths a pious man, and great labourer in the Britishand Foreign Bible Society cause. Was to go toMadame de Stael's to meet Harrowby and Mackintosh.I had refused to dine, meaning to go in theevening, but on reflection no good to be done, and itwould lead to precedents ; so though the carriagewas ordered I staid at home considered it withprayer. Will call tomorrow morning. No realgood to be done but by general effect j and for thatI must be better, not being well to-day. Also howcan I refuse my old friends, Harrowby, &c. if I go tothese new invitations ?27th, Sunday. Having a cold I staid at homeand read Baxter. Much pleased, and I hope edified.I know not when I spent two or three hoursso quietly. I must redeem more time I see. Howlean in spirit I become without full allowance of time1G4 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1814.for private devotions ! I must be careful to be ' watchingunto prayer.'March 4th. Introduced to Lady S. ; thinkingit would strengthen L.'s hands and give credit to herreligion to have them thus acquainted with persons ofrank and fashion. Much unpleasant doubting what Iought to do about Madame de Stael. Lady S. tellsme that there has been much discussion whether Ishould go, and wagers laid; but Madame de Staelsaid she was sure I should come, because I had saidI would. What care this shows we should take, becausewe shall be more closely watched, more strictlyjudged ! I must do away the effect of this in hermind, that she may not think I conceive I may speakconventional falsehoods, the very doctrine and crimeof the world, which so resents what it calls lies andthe imputation of them.10th. I have consented to dine with Madame deStael ; I could not well do otherwise. Soldiersaid much to persuade me. Let me try to speakplainly though tenderly to her. 18th. Dined withMadame de Stael her son and daughter, and twoother foreigners, Lord Harrowby, Lord and LadyLansdown, Sir James Mackintosh. Lord and LadyGranville Lesson were to have dined, but LadySpencer died that morning. She asked me to namethe party. A cheerful, pleasant dinner. She talking ofthe final cause of creation not utility but beauty-didnot like Paley wrote about Rousseau at fifteen,and thought differently at fifty. Evening, assembly,but I came away at half-past eleven. A brilliant1814. DANGERS OF SOCIETY. 16.5assembly of rank and talent." " The whole scene'was his next day's reflection, " was intoxicating evento me. The fever arising from it is not yet goneoff, (half-past 8, A. M.) though opposed by the mostserious motives and considerations both last night andthis morning. How dangerous then must such scenes(literally of dissipation, dissipating the spirits, themind, and for a time almost the judgment) be toyoung people in the hey-day of youth, and life, andspirits ! How unfit for those who are to watch untoprayer, to walk soberly, to be sober-minded ! Somethingin my own case may be fairly ascribed to naturalhigh spirits, and I fear, alas ! much to vanity, anda good deal to my being unaccustomed to such scenes ;yet after allowing for these weaknesses and peculiarities,must not the sobriety of my age, my principles,my guard, (prayer preceding my entering into theenchanted ground,) be fairly considered as abatingthe effect, so much as that I may be a fair averagesample of the effect of such scenes on young peoplein general of agreeable manners, and at all popularways and characters ? I am sure I durst not oftenventure into these scenes. Then the seasoning is sohigh that it would render all quiet domestic pleasuresinsipid. Even poor Paley used to say, (though Ihope jokingly,) 'Who ever talks to his wife?' Thisshowed even in him the danger of being fascinatedby social gaiety. O Lord, enable me to view lastnight's scene in its true colours, and shapes, andessences. I have not time to trace out the draught.May I remember that they and I are accountable,106 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1814.dying creatures, soon to appear at the judgment-seatof Christ, and be asked whether we avoided temptation,and endeavoured to preserve a frame of spiritsuited to those who had to work out their salvationwith fear and trembling." 10I am now engaged to many parties, yet I mustnot go on thus. It unfits my mind for private devotions,and makes me too late, steals me from mychildren, and even from my business, which from myweak health I must do by contrivance. O Lord, guideme; let me not do any thing contrary to the liberaland social spirit of Thy religion, but let me havewisdom to see what is really required from me, andresolution to perform it. My own soul should doubtlessbe my first object, and combined with it, my children,. . how much better might I serve them if I cultivateda closer connexion with God ! . . my business,and doing good to others. I am clear it is right formeto withdraw from the gay and irreligious, thoughbrilliant, society of Madame de Stael and others. Iam I hope thankful to God that I am not given uptothese pleasures. O let me labour that I may notbe merely gratifying an indolent spirit by staying away.Let me cultivate a spiritual mind, that if any be reallyin earnest I may then approximate and show themthat I can feel ; and oh may God touch their heartsalso. How surely is every one who is in earnestuseful to others ! Poor Lord G. ! Let me talk withhim, and guard him against the deception of beingsatisfied with the world's religion. Indeed he knows"> Diary, March 19.1814. HIS SOCIAL QUALITIES. 167too much for that. But O may I above all pray andstrive for a larger measure of softening, warming,quickening grace. Amen." uThis calm and self-denying judgment of himself isnot a little striking in one, whose past labours andlong-settled character would have exempted him inthe eyes of the most scrupulous from the necessity ofsuch rules of conduct. Nor was it that any touch ofage had damped the exuberance of his younger spirits ;and that he withdrew morosely from scenes in whichhe could not as of old give and experience pleasure.Mr. Wilberforce," was Madame de Stael's declarationto Sir James Mackintosh, " is the best converserI have met with in this country. I have alwaysheard that he was the most religious, but I now findthat he is the wittiest man in England." His socialqualities are about this very time thus described byhis friend Mr. Harford. " The first time I met Mr.Wilberforce was at the house of his friend, Mr.Henry Thornton. I had heard him speak in themorning, in a crowded meeting, at the anniversary ofa public charity, when elevated sentiments and touchingappeals, rendered doubly impressive by the finetones of his musical voice, had deeply affected thefeelings of the auditory. There was a dinner partyat Mr. Thornton's, and several of the guests wereamong the particular friends of Mr. Wilberforce.Mr. Thornton before we sat down to table expresseda hope that he would join us in a few minutes. Wehad not been long seated when he entered the room11 Journal, March 13.168 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1814.with a smiling, animated countenance, and a livelyvivacity of movement and manner ; exchanging as headvanced kind salutations with his friends, whosefaces were lighted up with peculiar pleasure at hispresence. From my earliest youth I had been taughtto reverence the name of Wilberforce, so that my delightwas great to find myself in his company. Hismanner and address throughout the afternoon weremarked by kindness and vivacity, and his style ofconversation was brilliant and easy.Those who never saw him till within eight orten years of his decease when his figure had becomea good deal bent, and his head depressed upon hischest by the weight of years acting on an extremelydelicate frame, cannot easily form a just idea of himat the period to which I now refer. Some tendencyto these infirmities, it is true, was already apparent,but the elasticity and spring of his movements, thecomparative erectness of his figure, and the glow onhis cheek, presented a strong contrast to the decrepitudewhich gradually stole upon him in his decliningyears. His frame was at all times extremely spare,and seemed to indicate that the ethereal inhabitantwithin was burdened with as little as possible of corporealencumbrances ; but from this attenuated frameproceeded a voice of uncommon compass and richness,whose varying and impressive tones, even in commonconversation, bespoke the powers of the orator. Hiseyes, though small, and singularly set, beamed withthe expression of acute intelligence, and of comprehensionquick as lightning, blended with that of1814. SUCCESS OF THE ALLIES. 169cordial kindness and warmth of heart. A peculiarsweetness and playfulness marked his whole manner.There was not a single handsome feature there wasscarcely one that was not in itself plain; hut themingled emanations of imagination and intellect, ofbenevolence and vivacity, disused over his countenancea sort of sunny radiance, which irresistiblyacted as a powerful magnet on the hearts of all whoapproached him. At this time, and till within a veryfew years of his death, he wore powder ; and his dressand appearance were those of a complete gentlemanof the old school." 12All this time the Slave Trade had not been forgotten; and preparations were in progress for introducingthe General Registration Bill, when greaterprospects opened upon the protectors of the negrorace. The progress of the allied armies promisedsoon to give peace to Europe. The negociations indeedat Cotillon were long protracted, and after oneor two slight successes, " Buonaparte " was ef swaggeringagain." "Almost all the nation" were "nowagainst making peace with Buonaparte." 13 No peacethey thought could be secure, and complete successseemed now within their reach. The negociationitself was unpopular. " Morritt showed me a letterfrom Marshal Beresford, having entered Bordeaux.All Gascony wild against Buonaparte calling themselvesEnglish showing the church and castle builtby Edward the Black Prince, and saying, ' It wasyours, why do you not retake it ? ' We are in a very12 Memoranda, by J. S. Harford Esq. 1? Diary, March 6.VOL. IV. I170 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1814.distressing situation from being in treaty with Buonaparte.All deprecating peace except the opposition,who are silent ? " 14 Yet four days later " LordErskine told" him "that" he was "a strong Bourbons,and Lord Grenville too. That Buonaparte isquite the creature of our manufacture, as much as anyBirmingham buckle or button." 15All fear of such a peace soon vanished. Buonaparterejected the proposals made to him, and on the4th of April " Vansittart stated that the negociationwas broken off, and that all the Allies are together,and have been and are of one common sentiment."The drama was hastening to its close. " How wonderful,"he says upon the 9th, "are the events of thelast few days ! After hearing that Buonaparte haddashed into the rear of the Allies it seemed doubtfulwhat would happen ; when suddenly we heard onTuesday that they were marching on to Paris. Thenwe hoped the best ; but how little expected that today,Saturday, we should hear of Buonaparte's acceptingthe Emperor of Russia's offer, renouncing thethrone and agreeing to retire to Elba ! " " Have yougood authority for believing that Toussaint perishedin Elba ? If so, and if Buonaparte himself selected it,he is harder-hearted than Shakespeare would haverendered his greatest villains." 16 " Yesterday eveningI saw in the newspapers that the Senate had declaredagainst him ; and, headed by Talleyrand, had pronouncedhis dynasty at an end. How nobly the Em-march23. 15 Diary, March 28.10 Letter to J. Stephen Esq.1814. BUONAPARTE DETHRONED. 171pero Alexander has behaved ! I am delighted thatParis is spared. Oh for the general Abolition ofthe Slave Trade." On the same day he writes toMrs. Hannah MoreLondon, April 9,My dear Friend,So the dynasty of Buonaparte has ceased toreign, as friend Talleyrand informs us. This hathGod done. How can I but wish that my poor oldfriend Pitt were still alive to witness this catastropheof the twenty-five years' drama (since 1789) ? But Irecognise (what indeed I must say I have often statedto be my expectation) the Scriptural principle ofDivine conduct, in selecting for the instruments of itsfavours not the most admired of human agents, butthose I doubt not from whom (Perceval only excepted)the voice of prayer has been most frequentlypoured forth for the success both of our counsels andarms e Them that honour me,' &c. The presentministry also has clearly been more favourable thanmost others to true religion. Farewell. Kindest remembrances.Ever yours,W. Wilberforce."The burst of joy which overspread the nation wasproportionate to the length and danger of the struggle,and the completeness of its ultimate success. Londonwas soon full of the triumphant conquerors, and foronce the whole land rejoiced with them. Not courtsi 2172 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1814.and cities only, but even the ancient rest of the Universitieswas disturbed by the universal exultations.Ergo omnis long solvit se Teucria luctu.II faut attendre que tout le bustle soit passe' writesDumourier, with whom he was corresponding on thesubject of the Slave Trade, " pour voir des hommessages et parler raison." But a deeper tone of feelingfilled the mind of the protector of the negro race. Onthe 11th of April he says, " Buonaparte abdicated,and to have six million livres in Elba. My wife andchildren went out to see the illuminations and staidtill late. Harrison 17 came over to me, and I stated tohim my ideas, that I must write a letter to the EmperorAlexander. I wrote to Lords Liverpool andBathurst, stating that Alexander's mind was doubtlessin full unison with all grand and humane proposals.How wonderful are the events which havetaken place ! I told Liverpool frankly that we shouldlook to government alone for not restoring any slavecolony without Abolition condition. There they hadno option. Lord Liverpool wrote me a very pleasinganswer, desiring a copy of my Abolition Letter forCastlereagh."To the congratulations of his friend William Heyupon the continental triumph he replies a few days later.Near London, April, 1814.My dear Sir,If I had not ' extremely occupied* to plead inmy defence, I should feel quite uncomfortable at haveSecretary to the African Institution.1814. PUBLIC Rejoicing. 173ing been, I had almost said churlishly, irresponsive toyour animated call. And I own I have been condemningmyself for not echoing back the songs ofgrateful acknowledgment. Never surely was thehand of the Almighty more strikingly manifested.Had not Buonaparte been absolutely infatuated, henever would have broken off the conferences at Cotillon.I like your verses much, and can imagine myold friend joining in chorus and singing with all hismight. I have been thinking how to convey them tothe hands of the Regent, but have not yet devised away. For I have been for some time, till two daysago, a close prisoner from an attack on the lungs, orrather trachea; for which a blister and silence wereprescribed to me by Dr. Bailie. I thank God I ammuch recovered, indeed nearly well again. I am justnow extremely occupied, both mind and thoughts,with considering about, and taking measures for, effectinga convention among the great powers for theAbolition of the Slave Trade. It would be indeed aglorious termination of the hurricane. But do nottalk publicly of this.I am so pressed for time that I can only furthersay, farewell, and that I am, with kind remembrances,my dear sir,Your sincere friend,W. Wilberforce."It appeared to be a most favourable moment forthis great attempt. " Since Great Britain abolished174 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1814.the Slave Trade," as Mr. Stephen sketched out theactual state of things in an eloquent appeal to Louis,she and France have not ceased to be at war, andthe United States of America have during this periodrenounced the dreadful Trade. France and Hollandhave wholly lost it by the war. Sweden has disclaimedand pledged herself never to engage in it. Denmarkhas abolished it by a voluntary and perpetual edict,Portugal has solemnly acknowledged its injustice andcruelty; has greatly retrenched its local limits inAfrica, and engaged by treaty with Great Britain,for its gradual abolition. The irresistible influenceof the colonists of Brazil under present circumstancesis perhaps the only impediment to the immediateperformance of that engagement. The delicate situationof the Spanish government, as to its colonialpossessions, may furnish a similar apology to thatpower for having delayed the same reformation.France therefore will have her part to take undercircumstances perfectly new and peculiar to herself;she has no establishments to break up, and no existingcommercial interests to surrender. The war hassuspended her share of that traffic ; she can only resumeit. Shall it be said that France by her sordidexample stood between the repentance of Europeand the deliverance of Africa ? "It would be too shocking," Mr. Wilberforce saysto Mr. Gisborne, " to restore to Europe the blessingsof peace with professions of our reverence for the principlesof justice and humanity, and at the same moment1814. HIS OWN OBJECTS. 175to be creating, for so it would really be doing whereverthe Slave Trade is extinct, this traffic in the personsof our fellow creatures. We are much occupiedwith the grand object of prevailing on all the greatEuropean powers to agree to a convention for thegeneral Abolition of the Slave Trade. Oh may Godturn the hearts of these men ! What a great and blessedclose would it be of the twenty-two years' drama ! "To Mr. Stephen he continues, 18 (e Besides preparingfor our future parliamentary measures, we have toconsider and act with a view to the general Abolition.I wrote both to Lord Liverpool and Bathurst, enforcingon them the importance of bringing the propositionbefore Alexander's mind while it should be inan impressible state; while he should be feeling thecomplacency which the Almighty has annexed to theperformance of generous actions, though some timemay elapse before the detail of the measures requiredfor carrying the proposition into execution can bediscussed. It happens quite providentially that theonly powers which are much interested in carryingthe Slave Trade on, are Spain and Portugal, andthey may surely be compelled into assent." Theseparliamentary measures " aimed at the projectedRegistry which was at this time in hand ; but so importantdid it seem to seize the present favourablemoment for obtaining a general Abolition of theTrade, that it was soon resolved to lay aside for aseason this domestic question. His first doubtsupon this subject are thrown out to Mr. Babington.18 Letter to James Stephen Esq. April 11.176 LIFE OF Wilberforce. 1814.Kensington Gore, April 19.My dear Babington,If I am pretty well I shall attend at GloucesterHouse at twelve tomorrow the West IndianCommittee. I have been careful of this attack onmy lungs, because I considered my voice as my workingtool, and requiring therefore peculiar attention.The complaint has stuck by me, but it is in itself verytrifling.I am deeply humbled under a sense of my owninefficiency, that I have not done more or better witha view to our present circumstances in relation to theSlave Trade. What a consolation under such circumstancesis the idea of our merciful Saviour, whocan be touched with a feeling of our infirmities ; whileat the same time, this consciousness does not lull intoinaction, but stimulates into sober and calm energyaccording to our powers.Do give your mind to the consideration of whetherwe should now push the Register Bill. Is it notastrong argument contra, just now, that if it shouldbe opposed powerfully, much more if successfully,(and as our opponents could fight us by urging thenecessity of inquiry, &c. they might succeed,) wemight alarm the West Indians, and cause them to beclamorous and united, &c. ; and that the differentEuropean governments, hearing the clamour, mightform a false judgment of their and our severaldegrees of strength and popularity ; and apprehendthat, by assenting to our proposal of abolishing, they1814. REGISTRY BILL POSTPONED. 177would only gratify one party by rendering themselvesunpopular with another? Surely the Abolition bythe European powers should now be so much ourgrand object, that we ought not to incur the risk of injuringit by benefiting another, or gaming a little timefor it, though in its season it will also deserve our utmostcare. This will be the chief subject of our consultationtomorrow I mean, whether to proceed withthe Register this year or not. Farewell.Ever affectionately,W. Wilberforce."Within a week the question was decided accordingto his wish at a " meeting of the African Institutionat the Duke of Gloucester's Lords Grey, andGrenville, and Lansdown, Macaulay, H. Thornton,W. Smith, James Stephen, Brougham, and Mackintosh."It was " agreed to give up the RegisterBill for the present, and to push for a convention forthe general Abolition to present an address to theCrown, to negociate with the foreign powers, and toforward the measure by all means." 19 So earnest washe in the cause, that he was ready to condemn himselffor not " having foreseen this conjuncture, andbeen prepared with works in all the modern languagesagainst the Slave Trade." 20His own special part was to prepare his letter tothe Emperor. " I am about to correspond with areal live emperor," he concludes a letter to Mr. Gisborne," not merely such a sort of Birmingham emsDiary. 20 ib. April 23.i 3178 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1814.pero as Buonaparte ; so admire my condescension,which can bestow all this penmanship upon you." Atthis he set to work directly, though he found it difficultto rescue from his other occupations the timewhich it required. " An incessant succession of inferiorconcerns," he complains, " prevents my doingthis really important business. I cannot yet pleasemyself at all ; and I have written to beg Bowdler to tryhis hand at a head and tail piece at least. Use yourinfluence with him. I cannot keep myself from interruptions."21 " Though I have as little conception,"replied Mr. Bowdler, " how to address an emperoras if he were an inhabitant of the moon, I halfhad intended to put what occurred to me upon paper, inorder that after seeing the failures of other pens, youmight be better satisfied with your own. Dependupon it, whatever styles you employ as contributory,if you consult the wise they will insist on your ultimatelyadopting your own." 22This in the end he did, though little able to securethe leisure he desired. " I find myself," he says, " stupidand slow, and not able to move at all to my likingin composition. My mind must be filled and warmed,then I can pour along pretty well. I am like a horsewhich cannot get into a gallop till it has some space inwhich to come to its speed; the incessant interruptionof little things obstructs my progress. I have beensadly bothered about the French translation, and forcedto write so many letters that I could not get to my21 Letter to Z. Macaulay Esq.22 Letter to W. Wilberforce Esq. April 18.1814. SUNDAY. 179work till very late." 23 Now however he kept close to it ;writing the foul copy " of his letter as he walked " inthe garden ; " and even giving to it some of that timewhich he most reluctantly conceded to any worldly care.I stay at home to-day, (Sunday, April 17th,) on accountof my cold, and I am about, after a short prayerfor the Divine blessing, to set to work on my letter tothe Emperor. I do it as in God's sight. Surely this occupationis pleasing to Him who says, Mercy is betterthan sacrifice. I can truly say in the presence of theSearcher of hearts, that I do not engage in it from inclination,for the contrary is the truth, but because it is abusiness which presses greatly in time, and which tendseminently to the glory of God, and the present andeternal happiness of men." 24 Yet on the followingSunday he says, <f I will not quit the peculiar dutiesof the day for my Abolition labours. Though lastSunday I set about them with a real desire to pleaseGod, yet it did not answer ; my mind felt a weighton it, a constraint which impeded the free and unfetteredmovements of the imagination or intellect ;and I am sure that this last week I might have savedfor that work four times as much time as I assignedto it on Sunday. Therefore though knowing thatGod prefers mercy to sacrifice, yet let me in faithgive up this day to religious exercises, to strengtheningthe impression of invisible and divine things bythe worship of God, meditation, and reading. I trustHe will bless me during the week, and enable me tomake up what might seem lost."23 Diary, April 23. Journal, Sunday, April 17.180 LIFE OF Wilberforce. 1814.He adds, " how sad it is that Louis the Eighteenthshould set out for France on this day, and therebyboth himself spend Sunday in travelling, and keepnumbers of others from public worship ! O pardonthem this great sin, and let it not draw down Thy justjudgments on them that they transgress Thy knownand acknowledged laws at the very moment in whichthey are experiencing Thy mercies. What ingratitude,and without temptation! What folly! Is this the RomanCatholic religion? Is it philosophical enlargementof mind, alas ! Is it a remnant of the principles, theprevalence of which drove them thence ? Then how sadthat none should have the courage to tell them ! Oshame ! shame ! Forgive, O Lord, and punish not ourland for this ingratitude and cowardice. Alas!" headds, " how this last week has rolled away, and scarceany thing is done ! " 25 Yet it was not long before hiswork was completed, and it was soon followed by aletter to Talleyrand, the anticipated head of theFrench administration, to whom, he says, " I was personallyknown when I was in France thirty years agowith Mr. Pitt."The address to the Emperor enters at considerablelength into the history of the Slave Trade, and containsa most striking picture of its chief abominations.<e And now, sire," he concludes the letter, " it maybeproper for me to state, that the individual who withallhumility has presumed to implore a hearing, isa private gentleman who from his earliest manhoodto the period much beyond the middle term of life,'" Journal, April 24.1814. LETTER TO ALEXANDER. 181which he has now attained, has had the honour ofa seat in the British parliament, having representedfor near thirty years by much the largest county inthe United Kingdom, an honour which declininghealth and domestic concerns compelled him twoyears ago voluntarily to relinquish ; who, though thepersonal friend of the late Mr. Pitt from their beingfellow-students at Cambridge till the period of hisdeath, always was, and still is, the devoted adherentof no political party ; and who having in the yearIf 88 brought forward a proposition for abolishingthe African Slave Trade, as inconsistent alike withthe laws of God and the happiness of man, aftera struggle of near twenty years, in which he hadthe honour of being associated with coadjutorsfar abler and more efficient than himself . . some ofthem, both of the dead and the living, the brightest ornamentsthat ever distinguished the British senate . .had at last, in 1807, the satisfaction of seeing thatmeasure sanctioned by the authority of the imperialparliament.But though the guilt and infamy of this wickedtraffic no longer attaches to Great Britain, yet theTrade itself still exists ; and it is in the hope, sire, ofleading you to employ your powerful influence in suppressingit, that in the name of religion, justice, andhumanity, I implore your notice.To the Divine blessing I now consign these pages.May that Almighty Being, whose I trust you are,and whom you serve, who has raised you up to bethechief agent in delivering the European continent182 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1814.from the bonds in which, by a mysterious Providence,it had been so long held, render you the honouredinstrument of accomplishing in Africa also His purposesof mercy. May you live, sire, to witness theblessed result of your beneficence, in the prevalencethroughout those benighted regions of Christian light,and moral improvement, and social comfort ; and tohear her sable children, when, in the language ofScripture, ' they spread forth their hands unto God,'call down not temporal only but everlasting blessingson the head of Alexander Emperor of the Russia,as the greatest of their earthly benefactors."In spite of all his hopes it was too soon evidentthat the French would not willingly abolish. " Theirmerchants," was the report which he received, " areintent on gain any how. Gregoire and all the oldamis-des-noirs men are in exceedingly bad odour.No respectable persons will have any thing to dowith them." 26 Although therefore he touched uponthe subject in congratulating his early friend, theArchbishop of Rheims, whom he hoped to find opento such an appeal, at the moment when he saidtf nous sommes tire du fond de 1'abime, nous mentionsdans notre patrie, dont nous sommes exilesdepuis un quart de siecle ;" 27 though he began to workthrough La Fayette, the Barori Humboldt, and everyother channel, yet he saw that every thing dependedon., the firmness of the British government. GreatBritain held the most important colonies of France,and she might refuse to restore them on any other26 Diary, May 15. v To W. Wilberforce Esq. April 22.1814. MR. MACAULAY'S MISSION. 183terms than instant Abolition. Although thereforehe felt at one time " doubtful whether he should notgo to Paris on the Abolition errand' 28 yet he thoughtit better to remain, and move an address 29 to theRegent, entreating him to take some steps for effectinga general Abolition. Towards the close of themonth " Vansittart came up " to him " at the House,and told me he was sorry I had not gone to Paristhat our question their chief difficulty. This looksas if government had not been stout in retainingthe islands. On reflection it occurred to me thatmy strength lies in the House of Commons; thattherefore though more eclat in going over, it wouldnot be politic. I can conceive Lord C. would likemy going, and would push me on with them, butsurely on the whole it is better not. It is advisablehowever to send some well-informed person to givethem intelligence, but who cannot be regarded asapolitical man, and have the affair shifted uponhim. I rejoice that I wrote so strongly to LordLiverpool advising him to settle a Convention forAbolition, but stating that for keeping the islands,unless they were to agree to import no slaves intothem, we looked to our government alone." 30The mission to Paris was immediately undertakenby Mr. Macaulay, whose zeal, sagacity, and accuracyof information made him a most suitable agent for acause in which he had been one of the principallabourers since his return from Sierra Leone in 1798.He started on the evening of Saturday the 21st,bearing various letters of introduction from Mr.2<> Diary, April 20. 29 May 2. 30 Diary, May 19.184 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1814.Wilberforce, which he had accompanied with thefollowing note.Saturday, six o'clock.My dear Macaulay,I think you should seal up my gay book forthe Prince of Benevento before it is presented. Imention that you are the bearer of it and of my letter.I have been forced to scribble in sad haste. Youwill say to Lord Castlereagh what I forgot to mention,that WE Abolitionists all understand that not acolony is to be surrendered but on the condition thatno African slaves are to be imported into it. I onlyadd, but with all due solemnity, may God bless you.I can truly say I wish I could have taken the loadfrom your shoulders to my own, but for reasonswhich probably Babington stated to you, my goingwould have done harm. Once more, God bless you,and, as the Orientals write, what shall I say morebut that I am,Ever affectionately yours,W. WILBERFORCE."The West India business was not his only subjectof disquiet in the pending treaty. " I slept but illlast night," he says, " from uneasiness about the approachingNorway question. I spoke at last, and wasforced to support the good faith of the country, thoughthe idea of starving the Norwegians into complianceis shocking." 3l " I wish that my argumentabout Norway had been inserted in the newspapers ;31 Diary, May 12.1814. NORWAY. 185it was acknowledged even by our opponents, I maysay so to you, to be the most convincing. ButMessrs, the reporters, had a better excuse thanusual, in its being so late an hour." 32 " The truthis, Norway would not starve. She would submitif she knew she must. We saved her from beingconquered by prevailing on the Crown Prince to postponethe acquisition of Norway till after the Europeanwar, which was then doubtful, by promising afterwardsto aid him with our naval force. Well, withhis aid we gain by God's blessing all our successes,and then position ask us to refuse him the promisedaid an aid which it was not unjust to promise. Webeing at war with Norway as part of Denmark, hada right to buy an ally by promising that if by ourcommon arms an enemy's country was conquered,she should possess it. Yet the idea of starving thesepoor people is shocking. Oh how hideous are war'sfeatures when closely viewed ! How thankful shouldwe be to be spared such sufferings ! " 33Amidst these causes of discomfort he was cheeredby grateful news from India. " A pleasing accountof Slave Trading punished in Ceylon, 34 and Java,and about to be suppressed on the Coromandel coast.Oh how thankful should I be for having been enabledto devote myself to this cause ; and though France nowbasely cleaves to it, we shall by degrees, I hope, stimulateher into wiping away the foul blot which she3i Letter to Colonel Creyke, May 14. 33 Diary, May 13.34 He had supplied information on this subject to Sir Alexander Johnstonthe Chief Justice of Ceylon, and to Sir Stamford Raffles, Governor ofJava.186 LIFE OF Wilberforce. 1814.is now willingly taking to herself. Detestable baseness!"35He was now about to move an address to bind theCrown, by an express engagement, to restore no colonyto France without the stipulation he desired. Butlike a prudent leader he abandoned the design onfinding in a private conference with some of theCabinet, that he should be opposed by government. 36While there was any hope of a favourable close tothe negociation, it was of the utmost moment to preventsuch a division. But when, contrary to all expectation,the treaty of peace was found to restore toFrance all her colonies upon a vague promise thatthe Slave Trade should cease in five years, " Weshall all," he says to Mr. Stephen, " be shortly I supposein opposition, from Macaulay's returning re infecta."" My spirits are quite lowered by it. Alas !alas ! How can we hope that in five years' time, withso many additional motives to cling to the Trade, shewill give it up ? Yet let us do what we can, and trustto God's blessing on our labours ; I by no means despair.Macaulay says, that when he dined withMalouet, minister for the colonies, Malouet said,Did we English mean to bind all the world ? Macaulayshould have repartee. His first words toMacaulay showed he confounded Abolition with Emancipation.37 I grow more and more shocked with thearrangement. Let all who would not be partakers of3 Diary, June 2. 3G Diary, May 24.37 " I set him right," says Mr. Macaulay, " in this particular, andsaid that we confined our views entirely to the former." To W. WilberforceEsq. June 1.1814. CENSURES TREATY WITH FRANCE. 187the guilt, protest against surely God will visitfor these things."I staved off yesterday," (Sunday,) his Diarycontinues, ee the thoughts of the Abolition arrangements,but to-day they rushed on me, and grievedme deeply." 39 On that evening, when LordCastlereagh, on his return from Paris, entered theHouse of Commons, he was received with loudand enthusiastic cheers. " The only voice whichremained mute amidst the fervent burst of joy, wasthat of Mr. Wilberforce. No heart beat more highlythan his with patriotic emotions, but this feeling wasmastered by another which forbad its utterance." 40The acclamations therefore were no sooner hushed,amidst which Lord Castlereagh laid on the tablea copy of the treaty, than he " opened upon him." 41I can assure my noble friend," he exclaimed, 42that if I have not been able to concur in thesalutations with which he has been welcomed onhis return, it is not from any want of personalcordiality, but because seeing him come up to theHouse bearing the French treaty, and calling to mindthe arrangements made in it respecting the SlaveTrade, I cannot but conceive that I behold in his handthe death-warrant of a multitude of innocent victims,men, women, and children, whom I had fondly indulgedthe hope of having myself rescued from destruction.It is not, however, to give vent to the38 Diary, June 4. 39 Diary, June 6.40 Memoranda, by J. S. Harford Esq. 41 Diary.42 "I wrote a sketch of what I had said, the first time for twenty yearsor more, and sent it to the Morning Chronicle." Diary.188 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1814.feelings of an overloaded mind that I have now risen,for in truth my feelings are far too deeply seated formeto be thus eased of them, but I rise chiefly to noticetwo particulars to which I entreat my noblefriend's immediate attention." One of them was thepreventing a five years' revival of the Dutch SlaveTrade, the other the imposing restrictions upon thatof the French. ee When I consider," he continued,the miseries that we are now about to renew, is itpossible to regard them without the deepest emotionsof sorrow ? Still as all this was known to my noblefriend, I will not suppose that he could lightly or withoutwhat appeared to him the most imperious andalmost irresistible necessity set his hand to such atreaty. For my own part indeed I frankly declare noconsiderations could have induced me to consent toit."" My noble friend must allow for my extremeregret, if when at length, after a laborious contentionof so many years, I had seemed to myself in some degreein possession of the great object of my life, ifthen, when the cup is at my lips, it is rudely dashedfrom them, for a term of years at least, if not for ever."His acquiescence in this article of the treaty, wasin vain entreated by ministers on both sides of thewater. On the 13th of June, he had " a long talkwith Lord Liverpool by appointment. He stated thatthe French government intimated the strongest oppositionto the Abolition, and that we could only at theutmost have stipulated for it as to those colonieswhich we were to surrender, while it would go on unlimitedlyas to St. Domingo. That their colonies1814. TALLEYRAND. 189were not in a fit or prepared state for the change.That they, however, would take but five years to preparefor it, though we took fifteen or eighteen. Thatultimately, the universal Abolition would be effectedby the influence of France with Spain and Portugal,whereas otherwise, all adverse. That the Frenchtook the matter up in a high tone, and resented ourdictating to them, believing that all our plea of havingabolished ourselves, or urging them to abolish, ongrounds of religion, justice, and humanity, were allmoonshine mere hypocrisy." 43 The same shallowfallacies, mixed artfully with personal flattery, formedthe burden of Talleyrand's reply. 44 Its flattery waswasted on him, and to its arguments he soon repliedat length. " France' he tells the Prince, 45 " neededno time to prepare its colonies for the Abolition of theSlave Trade, since they had in fact been going onwithout it for twenty years. Great Britain had avast capital engaged in it, several thousand tons ofshipping, &c. On the contrary, France has notnow the poor excuse to plead that the Abolitionwould demand sacrifices which she cannot afford tomake. Not one solitary vessel, not a single seaman,not a livre of capital is now employed in the SlaveTrade. Further, since the trade In man has beenfor many years practically discontinued, you cannotplead for it the excuse of established habits or inveterateprejudices ; you, in truth, would begin a newSlave Trade." " I had a letter acknowledging mine,43 Diary, June 13. 44 Vid. Correspondence of W. Wilberforce Esq,45 Letter to Talleyrand.190 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1814.from the Prince of Benevento all flummery, shrewdlythrowing in our having been so leisurely in abolishingas a fair plea for their five years." 46 His reception ofthe Prince's flattery convinced Mr. Stephen, " thatyou are praise-proof." " If I am," he replied, " it isonly when I have time to call up my antidotes."Amidst these various disappointments, he was notalittle " thankful to hear that the Emperor Alexandercharged himself with the Abolition in a Congress.He wishes to see me." 47 On the eveningof the 10th of June he ff received a note summoning"him for one o'clock upon the morrow. " Sunday,12th. Got up by half-past six, that I might prayto God for a blessing on my interview. Lock fromwhich, to the Emperor. In his waiting-room wereseveral of his nobles Prince Czartoriski, Princeof Oldenburghh, and others. At length the Emperorwho was absent at Messe (Greek Church) returned,with the Princess of Russia, (Oldenburghh,) and I wassummoned up-stairs, and soon after into the innerroom to the Emperor. He took me by the hand, verycordially, and assured me that he was much interestedfor my object, and very glad to see me. On mystating my fear that the French would not in factabolish at the time settled, he replied heartily, ' Wemust make them ; ' and then correcting himself, ' wemust keep them to it.' I asked leave, before I lefthim, to write to him, conceiving that any thing Ishould say would be driven out of his mind by theincessant bustle of his situation. He frankly assented,46 Diary, June 7. 47 lb. June 11.1814. AVOIDS DIRECT OPPOSITION. 191and told me he should be glad to hear from me, andwas obliged to me. He shook hands with mecordially. When I was expressing my concern aboutthe treaty, he said, ' What could be done, when yourown ambassador gave way ? ' :It was now clear that Lord Castlereagh hadnot done all which might have been effected. Of-thisconduct " there was no man' as Sir SamuelRomilly well said, 48 "in the King's dominions whohad more reason to complain, for there was noman living whom it could have robbed of a largershare of happiness." He felt it deeply; and therewere not wanting those who would have gladly fannedhis generous indignation into passion. Theday following that on which the treaty had beenlaid before "the House he te called at Lord Grenville'sabout Abolition Lord Grey, Duke of Gloucester,and Ponsonby there. They showed opposition spiritin their manner of judging, advising, resolving, inquiring,and admitting." 49 But with him all privateends had been too long lost in the interests of theAbolition for him to be hurried on by personal feelinginto a hasty opposition. At first indeed he wasmuch perplexed whether or not to oppose and stronglycondemn ministers, and Castlereagh especially, forthe Abolition business." But it was not of himselfhe thought. " I am afraid of injuring our great causeby exhibiting an appearance of diminished strength,owing to the country's being full of joy for the Peace,and I am afraid lest the Abolition proceedings should49 Debate, June 28. 49 Diary, June 7.I192 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1814.be deemed opposition and party measures. Barrington,whom I have consulted, is strong against myquarrelling with government. Lord, direct meright." 50Further considerations strengthened this conviction.All his hopes now rested on the approachingCongress at Vienna, and it must be his care to callforth such a spirit in this country as should compelministers to take a higher tone. " Do not youmove at Leeds," he asks Mr. Hey, " on theAbolition business ? Our best hopes rest on thecountry's manifesting a general and strong feelingon the subject." " It is indeed," he writes to Sheffield," sad to find such an article in such a treatythat the restoration of peace to Europe should betheletting loose the worst demons of intestine warthroughout the African continent. But I have onlytime to say, that for the purpose of effecting all thatin the present state of things yet remains to be donefor the great cause in the Congress about to takeplace at Vienna, let the nation loudly and generallyexpress its deep disappointment and regret,and most earnestly conjure both Houses, but especiallythe House of Commons, to use its utmost efforts inbehalf of the unhappy Africans ; expressing willingnessto make further sacrifices, (Mauritius, St. Lucia,&c.) as the price of the detestable five years' SlaveTrade, and of consenting to an immediate Abolition.Also, earnestly praying that all practicable measuresmay be adopted with a view to limiting and mitigating50 Diary, June 7.1814. LORD GRENVILLE'S SPEECH. 193the extent, and the miseries, and evil "consequencesof the treaty concluded, if the term cannot be shortened.Also praying that steps may be taken formaking the Slave Trade after ve years piracy, by ageneral Convention of all the European states."The spirit which he wanted was rising in the country,but he would have called for it in vain if he hadspoken the language of a party. The nation rejoicedtoo heartily in the blessings of peace to have any sympathywith opposition. Even as it was, there weresome hearty Abolitionists who earnestly deprecatedany attacks upon the ministry, and complained " thatall the friends of peace would be arrayed against theAbolition." " I have used my utmost efforts," heassures one of them, " to keep it from becoming aparty question, and the opposition have behavedhandsomely in giving way to me." He strove mostsuccessfully. On the 1.7th of June, a great meetingof the Abolitionists was held at Freemasons' Hall, andparty spirit was not suffered to intrude. A strongbut temperate petition was agreed to; and, the moreto mark the absence of an opposition spirit, intrustedfor presentation to the Commons to " WilliamWilberforce, the father of our great cause." Thesame tone was held in parliament, when, on the27th of June, the subject was brought forward byLord Grenville in the Peers, and in the Commons byhimself. Lord Grenville urged as a convincing proofthat it was no party measure, that it was in truth " onthese very motives its first promoter originally submittedit to parliament ; he, whose name it will trans-vol.IV. K194 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1814.mit with unfading honour to all posterity ; he, whosememory generations yet unborn, and nations yet uncivilized,will learn to bless. With these feelings, thetwo great party leaders of our times fought together,and together conquered under this standard," establishingwithin these lists a suspension of all hostilitiesa sort of " Truce of God."It is not necessary," he himself told the Houseof Commons, " to dwell here on the nature of theSlave Trade. So many years, indeed, have elapsedsince the question was discussed, that the particularsof the case have faded from our recollection,but in return our judgments have given it its placewith that class of actions of which it is the naturalassociate, and having by law recognised itsguilt as felony, it remains like the malefactor'scarcass hung in chains : we may have forgot thecircumstances of his crime, but its character standsunalterably fixed in our minds and memories. Itmight have been hoped therefore that the dethronementof Buonaparte would be a happy omen for theaccomplishment of our views. He who has done somuch to corrupt the moral feelings of the age, and tolaugh at truth and justice as an exploded superstition,could not be expected to understand our principles.The grief consequently which I feel at this treatyis the more poignant, when I recur to the period atwhich it is introduced a time when all Europe withone voice is returning thanks to God for its deliverancefrom slavery, when France has just risen from theweight of an iron despotism ; and yet with the .ADDRESS ON THE SLAVE TRADE. 195hence of this country her first act is to direct to anotherquarter of the globe the tide of misery. But Englandought even now to lift up her voice, if possible topersuade France to resign the contract, and to obtainthe assistance of foreign nations in endeavouring toprocure this resignation. When the heads of allthose now living are laid low, and the facts which nowexcite such powerful feelings are related by the pen ofthe cold, impartial historian ; when it is seen that-anopportunity like the present has been lost, that thefirst act of the restored King of France was the restorationof a trade in slavery and blood, what will betheestimate formed of the exertions which this countryhas employed, or of the effect which they haveproduced upon a people under such weighty obligations.Surely no very high opinion will be indulgedeither of British influence or of French gratitude."His speech produced a great effect. He carriedhis address to the Prince Regent, and two days lateranamendment to an address upon the peace, by theunanimous vote of the Commons. In the country itproduced little less effect. One passing incidentwill illustrate its reception. " If in no other waywe can prevail on France," he was reported to havesaid, " let us buy the Slave Trade of her." A fewposts brought him from a country clergyman, 51 whosewhole income was derived from private pupils, apromissory note for 100 " whenever that sum canavail in any degree to induce France to relinquish51 The Rev. Edward Ward of Ever.K 2196 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1814.the African Slave Trade." To Mr. Hey he communicatedthe issue of his motion.July 1,1814.My dear Sir,I have softened my language as much as possible,and by preventing the Abolition from becomingan opposition question, have produced an unanimousacceptance of my amendment to the address,as well as of my address itself. But we have declared,that the country still 'feels all its old interestin the business of the Slave Trade. We are knownto have made efforts to call forth the expression ofthat feeling, and if it be not expressed, it will besupposed to be because it is not felt; and I ampersuaded that Lord Castlereagh's exertions, and consequentlyhis success at Vienna, (in the ensuing Congress,)and even the disposition of the French governmentitself to accede to our wishes, will much dependon the degree in which the country appears to feelwarmly on the question.I take the pen into my own hand to conclude,which I am forced to do very abruptly. But I mustsay it would be very injurious, if our friends throughoutthe country were in general to forbear petitioning,under an idea of its being needless. Farewell.Ever yours,W. WILBERFORCE.P. S. Surely you in the country may agree, whenwe in parliament have concurred unanimously."1814. PETITIONS. 197His hopes were not disappointed. He had notcalled in vain on the humanity of Britain. More than800 petitions, with near a million of signatures, sooncovered the table of the House of Commons, andLord Castlereagh was warned that in the comingCongress the minister of England must speak out forAfrica.He had not been able to give all his time to thiscause, great as had been its claims upon him. Manydifferent subjects filled up his days. " Tuesday. ToBaldwin's Gardens Central National School meetingWalmsley Mr. Johnson a good man childrenadmirably taught, and general spirit delightful andanimating the difference between them and the Lancastrian52 very striking exemplifying the distinctionbetween Church of England and Dissentersthe intelligence, and fixed but not apparently nervousor feverish, attention pleased me much. Strange incidentof Princess of Wales running away alone at sevenin the evening, and not getting back till three Bishopof Salisbury the hunter, and present at every interviewsince, and says the Prince has behaved as kindlyand properly as possible. v Thursday. To layingfirst stone of Westminster school for 1000 children.Duke of York did it. Archbishop of Canterburyand bishops there. Friday. Freemasons' Tavern by52 You, I assure you, had some influence in deciding me at last to yieldto the earnest entreaties of the British and Foreign School Society, thatI would become a vice-president of that institution. I subscribe also toDr. Bell's institutions; but the latter do nothing abroad ; though, so faras my experience goes, I prefer them to the Lancastrian schools, for suchof our countrymen as can conscientiously be brought up in them."William Wilberforce Esq. to William Hey Esq. July 7, 1815.198 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1814.twelve to meet Archbishop of Canterbury aboutSuffering Germans* Committee." Another meetingfor this object was held upon the 21st of June, andhe went on the day " to the City of London Tavernto meet Blucher. They made me take the chair;and Blucher made me a very civil speech, (he spokein German, Mr. Nuper, the Queen's chaplain, actingas interpreter,) most pleasing in manner and demeanour."Mr. Wilberforce's own manner might likewise beread without an interpreter. Nor was it onlymonarchs whose hearts he could unlock. He tookhis children to see the Cossacks at the PortmanBarracks. They had been so worried by curious intruders,that " they could not bear to be looked at,"says one of the party, 53 " and but for his kind countenancewe should have been turned away. We wereso fortunate as to meet your son there, who served asavery able interpreter to Mr. Wilberforce, who shookhands with the Cossacks ; and even the roughest ofthem, who looked as if he had never smiled in his life,unbent his ebon brows and relaxed the muscles of hisiron face, and even kissed his hand when he cameaway."The bustle of this triumphant season added tohis occupations. More than once he was summonedby Alexander to conversations, in which the Emperorspoke French, and he replied in English. TheDuchess of Oldenburghh, and the King of Prussia,alike desired to see and talk with him ; and from55 In a letter to the late Arthur Young Esq.1814. CZARTOR1SKI. 199the latter he received a set of Dresden china, " theonly thing," he playfully declared, " I ever got byspouting." But none amongst the band of monarchsand nobles interested him more than Prince Cartona Polish Prince, formerly Foreign Secretaryto the Emperor. " Czartoriski came in and talkedto me for an hour or two about his country, andespecially our institutions, with a view to their adoption.He seems eager for useful information, andwhatever could improve the people. He acquiescedwhen I lamented the Emperor's being only feted, andnot let alone to see useful things, courts of justice, c."Such reflections could not but force themselves uponthe mind of calm and rational observers of these brilliantdays. " After we had, Hezekiah-like, ostentatiouslyexhibited our riches," says Mrs. H. More, " ourgold and our silver, after having gorged them withbanquets, which I hear they disliked, why were they notintroduced to something serious besides the Quakers'meeting ? I did not dislike to let them witness our owngrandeur, and I like to express our respect and admirationfor them, but why keep back from them everythingthat was useful ? They had really little more goodto carry home than poor Omar had." He at least wasfree from this reproach. " Too late," he says, June30th, " for dinner, because writing about the BibleSociety for Czartoriski, and getting for him some Reportsof the Society for Bettering the Condition of thePoor." Many years afterwards, almost the last visitMr. Wilberforce received was from this interestingman, when having resigned Russian greatness to fight200 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1814.the battles of his injured country, he sought theshores of England as an exile and a refugee.The temper of his own mind indeed was whollyundisturbed by the agitation round him. " How delightful,"he says after an evening spent in socialintercourse, " to see the love, simple devotedness, andgratitude of the three 's ! How it shames mylukewarmness ! Lord, forgive and help me, and letthe example spur me on to greater diligence." " TheBishop of Calcutta, Teignmouth, and C. Grant, &c.dined with me. Long and highly interesting talkwith Bishop Middleton. He seems very earnest andpondering to do good hopes for churches in differentparts of India favourable to schools and a publiclibrary a college with discipline. His powers greaterthan we conceived though his salary only 5000 ayear sad work too little less by 1000 a year thanapuisne judge. Before dinner I had heard andconsulting when they should go away. I stronglyurged their not hurrying away, as rude. I hopethat this intercourse softens. There is no sayinghow incivilities sometimes disgust and do mischief,where the object is to cultivate regard. They aresurely most opposite to St. Paul and Peter's precepts,and to Christ's example. In fact they arise fromselfishness in some degree."It is well worth while to trace up to its fountainhead,this quiet recollection of his principles amidstthe hurry of his public life. Another entry of hisDiary will point it out. When most engaged thissummer, he says, " I must try what I long ago1814. Mandate. 201heard was the rule of E. the great upholsterer,who when he came from Bond Street to his villa,always first retired into his closet. I will do it,though but for a short time. It will, with God'sblessing, be useful both for self-examination for thepast, and seeking God for the future." " I havebeen keeping too late hours, and hence I have hadbut a hurried half hour in a morning to myself.Surely the experience of all good men confirms theproposition, that without a due measure of privatedevotions the soul will grow lean. It is remarkablethat at such times my business and worldly concernshave also gone on ill ; enforcing on me old Sir M.Hale's remark, which might have been deemed toostrong. O Lord, help me. I will try to assign at leastan hour in the morning, and when circumstances willpermit, the same in the evening, for Scripture reading,private devotion, and meditation. How little can Inow realize the circle of angels and unseen spirits !Yet I hope I can truly say I allow not my corruptions.O Lord, strengthen my faith, send the Spirit of ThySon into my heart, that I may call Thee Father, andset my affections upon things above." 54At the end of July he left London, to devotethe quiet of the summer to his great design. Allhis hopes hung on the result of the approachingCongress. It was therefore of the utmost moment togive to the public mind on the continent the sameimpulse which it had received in England. He hadalready tried, through Cardinal Gonsalvi, to influencethe Romish conclave, and he now opened a correctJournal.K 3202 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1814.spondee with a number of literati, Alexander Humboldt,Sismondi, Chateaubriand, and Madame deStael, in the hope that he might act through themupon their countrymen. He was himself preparinghis chief effort, a printed letter to Talleyrand, whichwas to contain the strength of the Abolition cause,and to be dispersed as the manifesto of its supporters.How time flies away " he writes ! 55 " For a thirdtime are we now all collected at Sandgate, enjoyingwherever we are the overflowing bounty of the Almighty.The quiet of this place, so great a contrastto the bustle of my London life, produces a generalsleepiness and stupefaction, which almost disqualifyme for all active employment of my mental faculties.I must try to rouse and lash myself into somethinglike animation; but I can truly declare that I wish theoffice of writing a piece for general circulation devolvedon a more able hand. I will do my best however,after having executed two or three lesser dutieswhich require immediate attention. I mean to writeto the Emperor of Russia and the King of Prussia,and a private letter to Talleyrand. I hope herewithto transmit one to Chateaubriand. You know probablythat Lord Castlereagh charged himself withcommunicating with the Pope. Have you seen thearticle in the Edinburgh Review on the Revival ofthe Slave Trade ? I do not think it quite fair, andany statements which can justly be pronounced unfairare always in the end injurious as well as unjust."His work was intended to combine narrative andreasoning ; a few extracts from the best sources being55 To Z. Macaulay Esq. Aug. 1.1814. Mandate. 203to form an Appendix. These were to be selected fromthe authors with which his former studies had madehim familiar. Accordingly he writes to Mr. Macaulayto extract for him some passages from Gold-berry'sTravels in Africa. " Goldberry suggests thata valuable commercial connexion might be formedwith Bamboo, by obtaining access to the goldmines. This is just an idea likely to hit a Frenchman'sfancy, though not the wary and well-informedmind of the shrewd Prince of Benevento." x "Ilent my Goldberry to Mr. Birmingham, the secretaryto the Board of English Roman Catholics, and asMr. Charles Butler assured me, a confidential friendof Louis XVIII. In a long conversation with Mr.Birmingham after his breakfasting with me at KensingtonGore, he appeared full of all the old prejudicesand errors with which we had to contend in thebeginning of our African warfare such as the Africansbeing in a state of the most cruel slavery intheir own country, and all the rest. Now to haveall these calumnies contradicted by an avowed friendof the Slave Trade like Goldberry, appeared to meanopportunity not to be lost." 57 Mr. Macaulaymentions in reply some rising matters which mightsoon recall him to London, and ends, as an excuse forbrevity, with a complaint of being " harassed dreadfullyby Mrs. T. from Scotland, who calls on me andruns away with all my time." ^ " My dear Macaulay,"he replies, " I would go to John o'Groat's houseAug. 8. i7 To Z. Macaulay Esq. Aug. 1.Z. Macaulay Esq. to W. Wilberforce Esq. Aug. 9.204 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1814.if it were wanted. I forgot Mrs. T. is in Scotland, orrather now that Mrs. T. is not in Scotland howshocking that you should be bored with her ! Butthere is a breed of Mrs. Tes, who are the plague ofmy life and the enemies of my usefulness. Some ofthem I myself generate and carry about with me, inthe infirmities of my own mind. But seriously, sofaras writing is concerned, though even here interruptedoccasionally, I can be far more quiet than intown. Otherwise I should have decided to go up tomorrow.I feel a nervous irritation which promptsme to be on the spot when you are all at work. ButI believe, in my sober judgment, I am more likely todothe little I can do here than elsewhere."The want of books however, and a wish to be nearPeltier, the translator of his work, obliged him atlength to return to London. This was no inconsiderablesacrifice. He loved to spend his summer holidaysin the retirement of the country surrounded by hischildren ; with whom he had " begun walking, and examiningthem in walks in the books which they arereading, and talking them over together." While "inthe evening," almost the greatest of their treats, he wasreading to them Shakespeare." Occasionally, too,he made excursions with them for the day ; and inCaesar's camp and the cherry orchards " all the burdenof his business was thrown off, and he was the mostcheerful of the party. " We took our dinner with usupon Saturday," is the description of such a day thissummer in the letter of a guest, " and were fourteenin number. Mr. Wilberforce made us all very happy.1814. BATTERSEA RISE. 205He read, and talked, and carved, and reminded us ofthe benevolence of God in making the avenues ofinnocent pleasure so numerous, and forming us for somany enjoyments which have nothing sinful in them."There is no way," is his own remark on this day,in which children's tempers are more indicated thanin such excursions." With the same watchfulness fortheir advantage he now tells Mr. Macaulay,that thoughat first disposed at once to cut his cables and slip offfor London," he had postponed his journey " untilMonday, because I am to take with me on hisway to school, and I like to make Sunday his lastday at home. I think it tends to associate religionand domestic tenderness ; to identify them with eachother, and thereby augment both."He continued his work at Battersea Rise, where hewas a guest in the house which he had inhabited somany years before. He had left Sandgate hoping onlyto be kept a few days near London, but the claims ofbusiness multiplied upon him. On the 2nd of Septemberhe tells Mrs. Wilberforce, " My anticipationsare verified. I am forced to stay three or four dayslonger, I trust not more; but the work to be done is fartoo important to be neglected, or not to be done whereit can be done best. The interests at stake are so prodigiousthat even the probability of advancing themconstitutes an object of vast amount. What a comfortit is that my absence from you and our dear children isnot when 1 am engaged in the work, however necessaryfor self-defence, and therefore justifiable, of blood andtears making others miserable while endeavouring tosecure our own happiness ; but on the contrary, in the206 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1814.work of mercy and love ; a work which may truly besaid to breathe the same spirit as that of Him whosecoming was announced as ' peace on earth, and goodwilltowards men ' ! Aye, and surely we need not leaveout the most honourable part of the service, ' Glory toGod in the highest.' For I am occupied, I trust, inpreparing an entrance into Africa for the gospel ofChrist. I must say that I account it one of thegreatest of the many and great mercies and favours ofthe Almighty, (oh how many and how great ! ) that Hisprovidence connected me with this good cause. Imight have been occupied as honestly, but in ways,political ways for instance, in which the right pathwas doubtful."He touches here upon a secret spring which ledto many of his Abolition efforts. " I greatly fear'he tells Mr. Stephen, "if Hayti grants to Francea colonial monopoly in return for the recognitionof its independence, that all commerce with us willbe excluded, and with it our best hopes of introducingtrue religion into the island. Now I w r illfrankly own to you, that to introduce religion appearsto me the greatest of all benefits. I blame myself fornot having earlier stated to you my feelings on thishead. It has arisen from a want of reflection, for myprinciples have always been the same. God grant wemay not hinder the gospel of Christ. O rememberthat the salvation of one soul is of more worth thanthe mere temporal happiness of thousands or evenmillions. In this I well know you agree with meentirely."Another week had passed at Mr. Thornton's, and1814. ABSENCE FROM HIS FAMILY. 207upon the 7th he writes again. " It quite goes to myheart to think what a disappointment it will be toyou, and to our dear children, that I am forced to putoff my journey-till next week. On Tuesday or WednesdayI confidently trust, if please God I am well inthe interim, that my business need not detain me.But when I yesterday proceeded coolly to balance thereasons for and against my setting off to-day, wheninto the staying scale was to be put the considerationthat I am writing a piece, which if it please God togive it His blessing, may be considerably efficient insaving a number of human lives and an amount ofbodily suffering and of mental agony which surpassesalmost all power of calculation -, the other, in whichwas the benefit, too little I fear, which my familywould receive in the interval from my presence, andstill more the pleasure it would give to all of us,fairly kicked the beam. It is unspeakably gratifyingto me to know that you are fully alive to these arguments,and though it were at ever so great a cost offeeling, would advise me to do what I should believeto be right. It is right also that I should concludeand go to my work ; but you will explain to the children. . with an especial birth-day kiss for . . whyI stay, and I hope it may help to teach them to denythemselves, and to ask themselves what will pleaseGod, not what they would find at the moment mostgratifying. Farewell."There was nothing more remarkable about himthan the cheerful spring of his natural affections,even under the heaviest pressure of perplexing busi-208 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1814.ness. " There' he said when hurried once almostbeyond bearing, calling the attention of a friend to asudden burst of voices, " how can I be worried bysuch trifles, when I have such constant remembrancesof God's goodness to me ?" It was his children playingover head with a noisy glee which would havejarred upon the feelings of almost any one besides himself.Thus amidst his present business he rescuedtime enough to write to his second son.Battersea Rise, Sept. 14, 1814.My very dear ,I do not relish the idea that you are the onlyone of my children who has not written to me duringmy absence, and that you should be the only one towhom I should not write : I therefore take up my pen,though but for a very few moments, to assure you thatI do not suspect your silence to have arisen from thewant of affection for me, any more than that which Imyself have hitherto observed has proceeded fromthis source. There is a certain demon called procrastination,who inhabits a castle in the air at Sand-gate,as well as at so many other places, and I suspectthat you have been carried up some day, (at the tailof your kite perhaps,) and lodged in that same habitation,which has fine large rooms in it from whichthere are beautiful prospects in all directions; andprobably you will not quit a dwelling-place thatyou like so well, till you hear that I am on myway to Sandgate. You would meet the ' tomorrowman' there, (it just occurs to me,) and I hope you will1814. LORD CASTLEREAGH'S "BRIEF." 209have prevailed on him to tell you the remainder ofthat pleasant story, a part of which Miss Edgeworthhas related, though I greatly fear he would still partakeso far of the spirit of the place as to leave a partuntold till tomorrow. But I am trifling sadly,since I am this morning unusually pressed for time.I will therefore only guard my dear hoy seriouslyagainst procrastination, one of the most dangerousassailants of usefulness, and assure him that I am today,tomorrow, and always while I exist, 1His affectionate Father,W. Wilberforce."Meanwhile the Duke of Wellington became ambassadorat Paris, and Lord Castlereagh had proceeded tohis post at Vienna. Whatever may be thought of LordCastlereagh's previous conduct, he now heartily desiredto promote the objects of the Abolitionists. Lord Liverpoolindeed declared on behalf of his colleagues and ofhimself, " If I were not anxious for the Abolition ofthe Slave Trade on principle, I must be aware of theembarrassment to which any government must beexposed from the present state of that question inthis country." 59 Yet the negotiators required instruction,both on thee state of the Trade in general,and on the grounds of the exemption which wasclaimed for the north-west coast of Africa. "Youwill concur with me," writes Mr. Wilberforce to Mr.Macaulay, 60 " that it may be well to furnish LordCastlereagh with short notes like a lawyer's brief, ofi9 Letter to W. Wilberforce Esq. Sept, 7. 6o Aug. 3.210 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1814.all the main propositions on which the case of Abolitionrests, or rather I mean of all the facts. Forhaving been our opponent, he never, depend on it, admittedinto his mind any of those considerationswhich were so firmly established in ours, as to be asort of self-evident propositions in the last years ofour warfare. I would abstain of course from any statementswhich might appear to him invidious, and beas it is vulgarly called ' a slap on the face.' A copy ofthis paper may then be made for the Duke of Wellington,and also for any other of the foreign ministers.Lord Castlereagh must also be provided with sucha statement of the present condition of St. Domingoas will enable him to convince Talleyrand that theattempt to recover it by force will end in disgrace.Stephen can best draw up the account I mean. Isee nothing else to be said to Lord Castlereagh, exceptwhat I mean to press as strongly as I possiblycan without offending him, the opposite reception hewill have succeeding or failing for us." " I amafraid of their being too sure of having us friendlyif they do any thing, and not being enough aware whatwould be our feelings if we should hereafter see reasonto believe that the Abolition might have beenwholly effected if we would have purchased it by restoringthe colonial possessions." OlIn drawing up this "brief," no pains were sparedby himself or his associates. Mr. Stephen furnishedcopious details concerning St. Domingo. To securethe fulfilment of the promise of the French, that the<5' To J. Stephen Esq.1814. DUKE OF WELLINGTON. 211Slave Trade should not be revived where it had beenactually suppressed, Mr. Macaulay collected a vastbody of convincing proofs, that, except for a fewscattered smugglers, the Slave Trade had ceased onthe whole windward coast of Africa from Cape Blancnearly to the Equator. The small island of Bissao, belongingto the Portuguese, formed the sole exception.I only wish' wrote Captain Irby, who had just returnedfrom the African station, " that it had beenblown up with the Serpentine fleet." C2The proof was most complete: "I am delighted,"says Mr. Wilberforce, "to find it so much morevaluable and efficient than I had conceived. I donot think a grain can be added to the weight withwhich your zeal, diligence, and method in preservingyour papers, have loaded the scale in our favour."It seemed impossible for the French ministersto elude the force of this evidence. " I do notsee how on earth they can," exclaimed the Duke ofWellington with a soldier's bluntness, when Mr.Macaulay exhibited his proofs at a personal interview.63 This demand accordingly, as well as theother efforts of the Abolitionists, were heartily supportedby the Duke ; so warmly indeed did he at thistime devote himself to it that Mr. Wilberforce thoughta caution needed, " lest so much attention paid to aprovision for excluding the Slave Trade from a certainpart of the coast should convey an impression thatthe friends of the cause would be perfectly contented62 Z. Macaulay Esq. to W. Wilberforce Esq. Aug. 10.63 Ib. Aug. 8.212 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1814.with this qualified Abolition." 64 He stated thereforetheir strong persuasion that the French governmentmight be induced to abandon the Trade altogether,provided some compensation was furnished by thiscountry. " Grateful," he adds, " for your Grace'sexertions, they must, and ought ever to be ; but] theyindulge a confident hope that your Grace in this, asin so many other instances, will be able to achieve acomplete victory."If this idea of compensation, afterwards tried ineffectually,had ever succeeded, it must have been beforethe public mind in France had declared itself in favourof the Slave Trade. " Je vois avec affliction,"writes Humboldt, " que dans ce pays, ou Ton serefroidit sur tout, la question de la traite est consideredavec une coupable indifference." 65 " Elle n'est pointici, comme elle 1'etoit en Angleterre, une affaire sargent; elle est like uniquement a des passions nationales."66 But as an English and a revolutionary measure,the Abolition soon became so unpopular, that thewriters for their stage "introduced into their oldplays sarcasms against it, as clap-traps." 6T " Madamede Stael confirmed the information received from theDuke of Wellington, of the impracticability of gettingany articles favourable to the Abolition inserted in theFrench Journals." 6864 W. Wilberforce Esq. to the Duke of Wellington, Sept. 9.6 * Letter to W. Wilberforce Esq. Aug. 30.66 M. Sismondi W. Wilberforce Esq. March 3, 181.5.6 ? J. Stephen Esq. to W. Wilberforce Esq. Oct. 14.69 Letter from General Macaulay, (Oct. 8,) who was this autumn inParis at his request, and whose perfect knowledge of the French languageenabled him to be particularly useful.1814. PUBLIC MIND IN FRANCE. 213There had been no leader of the cause in France torescue it, as Mr. Wilberforce had done in England, fromthe contamination of the Jacobins, and the Royalistslooked coldly on a project which had been advocatedby the " amis des noirs." " French Royalists,"Lord Holland wrote to him, 69 " make no differencebetween you and me, or between me and Tom Paine."f I have received from Chateaubriand a letter whichis far from satisfactory. Such I really grieve to say asI should have expected if I had credited what hadbeen reported by his enemies of his trimming politics.He says that the principal defender of our causeparmi nous, est un regicide.' Who does he mean ? Iunderstood that Gregoire 70 had opposed the King'sdeath in the Convention. And he suggests the removalof the phantom we have left in the Isle of Elba,comme pour nous menacer, et nous effrayer'" 71"We greatly want a select society of literary men,"he had written to Humboldt, 72 " to draw up and circulateintelligence respecting our cause. Would you havethe goodness to be one of a little committee of thissort?" "On y a souvent pense," was the reply tothis proposal, 73 " mais les gens qui connoisseur biend'etat actuel de Paris covent que cet establishmentnuira beaucoup a la bonne cause. Tout le monde segendarme centre cette Societe. Le souvenir decelle des amis des noirs se revellers. Des hominesNov. 13, 1815.70 The Abbe Gregoire, being at the time on a mission in Savoy, gaveno vote, and the part which he was disposed to take is doubtful.71 W. Wilberforce Esq. to General Macaulay, Oct. 25.72 Sept. 16. 73 Sept. 28.214 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1814.tres zee's pour abolition de la traite, et qu'il serontimpossible d'exclure, sont detested pour des motifspolitiques."While Humboldt thus increased his sense of thecaution which the posture of affairs required, he encouragedhim to address the French nation in his ownname. He had mentioned in his former letter the planof his intended work. " I have been writing a pamphlet,partly to inform, and partly to interest and affectthe public, by appealing to all that is honourable andgenerous in the French feelings. The form of mypiece I mean to be a letter to the Prince of Benevento."74 " J'approuve beaucoup votre lettre a M.de Talleyrand," was Humboldt 's reply, 75 " elle siseraattention du public, et elle sera autant plus necessaryqu'on s'occupe ici beaucoup des taxes sur lessoissons et pas du tout de abolition de la Traite."Though his correspondence with foreigners as wellas that with the British ministers had occupied himgreatly, yet his work was now on the point of appearing." I finished my pamphlet on Tuesday last, andam now clearing away my arrear of letters. I amwriting to the Duke of Wellington, the Emperor ofRussia, Lord Liverpool, and Lord Bathurst, aboutthe Abolition." 76 He despatched also a private letterof explanation to Talleyrand, and besides receiving acivil answer, he heard afterwards that the Prince hadspoken to a third party of his pamphlet as " eloquentand convincing." " La chose," he added, " n'est"7 W. Wilberforce Esq. to Baron Humboldt, Sept. 16.7* Sept. 28. 76 Diary, Sept. 30.1814. LETTER TO TALLEYRAND. 215demon tree il s'agit de la demontrer a la France." 77Though reminded meanwhile that his letter was " impatientlyexpected' 78 it was the middle of Octoberbefore he could get it from the printer's hands. Theinformation which he had received from Humboldt hadnot led him to expect for it a very wide circulation.II est affreux de le dire, le public est si froid pourcet objet, que maugre* la caleb rite de votre nom, aucunlibraire a Paris n'imprimera la brochure a ses frail."The Duke of Wellington however undertook to disperseit for him at Paris, where he also circulated thesubstance of his Letter to his Yorkshire Constituents,which Madame de Stael had translated at the Duke'ssuggestion. 79 Its diffusion by this and similar meanssecured the notoriety of his pamphlet on the continent." It reads extremely well," says Sismondi,and I am persuaded has been much read at Paris." 80Mr. Villiers parlour de faire traduire de nouveauvotre lettre a M. de Talleyrand : je n'y vois aucuneespece advantage ; on peut relever dans le style dutraducteur quelques ledgers incorrections, mais dansson ensemble elle est ecrite d'une maniere qui fait uneimpression profonde, eloquence Anglaise a centre autravers du Francois, on ne la lit point sans emotions, et1'on ne gagneroit rien a changer un peu la tournuredes phrases. II e'en est pas de meme du resume dutemoignage de II est un mauvais ecrivain, et tous lesefforts du traducteur le laissent tel. Le premier etoit77 Sir Sidney Smith to W. Wilberforce Esq. Dec. 25.79 Letter from General Macaulay. TO Ib. Sept 29.so Letter from Hon. I. Villiers to W. Wilberforce Esq. Feb. 15, 1815.216 LIFE OF Wilberforce. 1814,complement barbare, mais mon ami Mr. Dumont e'en a encore fait qu'un ecrit fort mediocre." 81As the autumn advanced, the effects of theselabours 82 became evident. The recovery of St. Domingo,which had been the favourite scheme inFrance, was first abandoned. And " at length," hesays, " on the 15th of November, I heard from theDuke of Wellington that the French had actuallyissued an order, prohibiting all French subjects fromslaving to the North of Cape Formosa. A grandbusiness, but much detail needed." 83 This news hadbeen preceded a few days by the following letter ofcongratulation from Madame de Stael.Combien vous devez etre heureux de votre triomphe,vous 1'emporterez et c'est vous et Lord Wellingtonqui aurez gagne cette grande bataille pourhumanity. Soyez sure que votre nom et votre perseveranceont tout fait. D 'ordinaire les idees triomphentpar elles menes et par le terns, mais cette fois c'estvous qui avez defence les siecles. Vous avez inspirea votre Heros Wellington autant d'ardeur pour faire dubien qu'il en avoit eu pour remporter des victoires, etson credit vers la famille royale a servi a vous pauvresnoirs. Vous avez ecrit une lettre a Sismondi qui estpour lui comme une couronne civique, ma petite filletient de vous une plume door qui sera sa dot dans le8' Letter from M. Sismondi to W. Wilberforce Esq.89 Besides Mr. Wilberforce's letter, a pamphlet of Sismondi's and ashort address had been dispersed by the African Institution, both in Englishand German. Mr. Clarion who visited Paris in the autumn hadalso reprinted the translation of his work on the impolicy of the SlaveTrade.w Diary.1814. SISMONDI. 217ciel. 84 Enfin vous avez donne* du mouvement pour lavertu une generations qui sembloit morte pour elle.Jouissez de votre ouvrage, car jamais gloire plus puren'a este donner a un hommeJe me mets & vos pieds de tout mon coeur,A. DE Steel.Paris, ce 4 9bre, 1814."These partial successes were however far outweighedby many opposite appearances. A detailed account,sent him by a friend at Havre, of the preparation ofnine slave ships in that port, " completely sickened "his " heart. How I should like," he says, hearingthat some of the parties concerned were his countrymen," to catch the Englishmen some day when onshore, and send them to slave in New South Wales." 85(( I know not that in all my long experience of Abolitionism,I ever felt a keener paroxysm of grief andindignation. Oh that it might please God to dash tothe ground that bloody cup which they are preparingto quaff with so much avidity. They really appear to mymind's eye to be so many demons exulting over theirsavage orgies with grim, ferocious joy." 86 Yet in thedarkest moments his trust in God was firm, and hestill cheered his associates with assurances of success.I am provoked," he says, " but not despondent." 87Sismondi's pamphlet is an admirable one, and theM The Duchess de Broglie had translated part of Mr. Wilberforce'sLetter to his Constituents: an occasion of which Gen. Macaulay hadavailed himself in order to present to her a gold pen, as from the author.M To J. Stephen Esq. Oct. 4.86 To Z. Macaulay Esq. Oct. 13. ? To Gen. Macaulay, Oct. 11.VOL. IV. L218 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1814.circumstance that so many literary men are friendlyto our cause is to me indicative of good, an omen of afavourable turn in the public mind ; for France is acountry much swayed by popular opinions." 88 "Andwhen men are used to act in bodies with a sort ofesprit de corps, they often turn round altogether. Therising up of another able continental author is stronglyindicative of the progress of our cause. Depend onit we are gaining ground. God is with us." 89 "Whena cause is grounded like ours in justice and humanity,in truth and nature, we may cherish the hopes of agreat effect from the writings of the literati." 90Permit me," he concluded a letter of acknowledgmentfor the pamphlet of Sismondi, " as a mark of myrespect and a pledge of our friendly connexion, topresent you with a publication of my own, written(somewhat too hastily) for the information of ourHouse of Lords when the question of the Slave Tradewas coming before them for the last time in 1807.I fear that I am subjecting myself to the imputationof offering you a brazen shield for the golden one youuse, and which I trust I may have the honour of receivingfrom your own hands."It is not a little interesting to turn from these publicobjects to the details of his private life. He wasagain at Sandgate, living in the midst of his children,studying the Scriptures daily with some of them,walking and reading with them all, and bringingthem into the habits he desired by kind, not violent88 Diary, Oct. 20. " To Z. Macaulay, Esq. Sept. 30.9o To James Stephen Esq. Oct. lb.1814. ADULT SCHOOLS. 219means." 91 He was as busy too doing good to thosearound him, as if his sympathies had never wanderedfrom his own immediate circle ; entering eagerly intoany individual tale of suffering as when he "heard"this year of a case, (" the shocking account of Mrs.R.'s cruelty to her child") which he took up and carriedthrough, at a great expense of time and trouble,and in spite of repeated threatening of personal violencefrom the brutal parent and labouring too byschools and other institutions to relieve the want andignorance around him. " The adult school," wrotea friend staying at this time in his family to Mr.Arthur Young, " is established here ; a room andteachers provided, and all will be left in good train.Mr. Wilberforce went himself, read them extractsfrom Pole's History of Adult Schools, and made thema little speech, saying how much he respected theirgood sense for coming. You would have been delightedwith seeing him seated by the old ladies, withthe utmost patience, kindness, and humility, fairlyteaching them their letters, and quite unconsciousthat it was at all more remarkable in him than inany common person. This was beautiful in him, andhighly useful and encouraging in its effects upon theinstitution."Another day he was endeavouring by letter to adjusta disagreement between two absent friends, tellinghim who had taken the offence, " It grieves andjustly grieves me, loving and respecting you both asI do, to think that your friendship should be in any91 Diary.L 2220 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1814.measure injured by that which is in reason an utterlyinadequate cause for producing such an effect.As I hinted to you, my dear , you men of meditation(though I sincerely acknowledge and covetyour ruminating habit) are liable to the fault ofweaving a web out of your own cogitations, which hasno substance but that ideal one which renders it thebasis of your castles in the air, and leads you often,or at least sometimes, to false solutions of enigmas,and mistaken views of character ; though I grant thatit enables you to fix and retain conceptions of thepassing events of life with their causes and consequences,which flit away and are forgotten by us bird-wittedgentry, as Locke or Lord Bacon calls us. But Imust break off." Nor was Christian courtesy to thosewho were his accidental neighbours forgotten. " Thescalled very friendly. How every day enforcesthe duty of being always disposed to closebreaches instead of widening them ! I had not calledon them last year the effect of want of time. Theywere affronted but she very wisely . . oh the good offriendly frankness on proper occasions and to properpeople . . told me of it. I instead of excusing humbledmyself, and on Christian principles sought and tookpains to heal the breach, and have at length succeeded,and much prejudice done away." A few hours tookhim to Deal Castle, where he was " kindly welcomed.Warrington has made it an excellent house. He andI to Walter Castle, and went over it. Not there fornear thirty years before in Pitt's time. Next day homeagain all delighted to see me, and most kind."1814. FRENCH "ORDONNANCE." 221It is no wonder that thus causing and enjoying thepresent social happiness, he should have " felt melancholyat the idea of breaking up and going to town." 92But the session was about to open, and duty calledhim up to London. 93 " Whitbread strong againstgovernment, and overbearing. Opposition seem tomean to practise the game of running down theministry as drivellers. How impudent this, consideringall things ! Oh that they had abolished !How cheerily would I then defend them ! Much distressedhowever about American war. Yet afraid oftalking lest I should do harm rather than good byencouraging Addison to stick out for terms." 94 Buthis main business was still with his own cause.We have seen much of Wilberforce," Mr. HenryThornton tells Hannah More, 95 " and heard his lettersfrom many of the renowned of the earth, allseeming to pay homage to him. Lord Castlereaghtells him that he has obeyed his commands, and puthis book into the hands of each of the Sovereigns.Talleyrand's last letter has rather a clearer acknowledgmentthan before of his sympathy with Wilberforce,as to the grand object. The most happy partof the intelligence is an official assurance of an ' ordonnance'of some sort issued recently by the Frenchgovernment, excluding French slave traders from allthe northern parts of Africa; and the line is so drawnthat Sierra Leone, and all the settlements restored bythe treaty with France, as well as a very large district98 Diary. as Nov. 10.^ Diary, Nov. 4. 9* Dec. 2.222 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1814.below Sierra Leone, are exempt from their molestations.I almost anticipate more good from these newefforts of our friends than even from the Abolitionvoted here ; and the name of Wilberforce has attainednew celebrity, and his character and general opinionsa degree of weight, which perhaps no private individualnot invested with office ever possessed. My delighthas consisted much in observing his Christian simplicity,and the general uniformity in his characterand conduct, amidst the multitude of complimentsfrom the great, made on the part of some with muchfeeling. He is indeed in his usual bustle, but he remindsme nevertheless of that saying which was appliedto Fox, that the greatest objects, or the mostheavy load of business, seemed never to put him intothat petty tumult which is the common mark of inferiormen. Wilberforce expressed his regret thatHatchard has not sent you his book. It is called aLetter to Talleyrand. It is well adapted to his purpose,and every line of it is manifestly written for useand not for fame, though made a little French in itsstyle in some parts. I thought it admirably calculatedto give the French reader a persuasion of theintegrity and unadulterated benevolence of at leastone public character among the English."The hostile feelings of the French ministers werenot however abated. They even attempted to abridgethe exemption promised to northern Africa by makingCape Three-points its southern limits, thus openingthe Bight of Benin to the Slave Trade. " I havenot however given up Cape Formosa," writes the1814. FRENCH SLAVE TRADE ABOLITION. 223Duke of Wellington. 96 " I was in hopes," he adds,that the King's measures had in some degree changedthe public opinion ; but I found yesterday that I wasmuch mistaken. In truth we have nobody for us onthe question excepting the King." Two monthsbefore Lord Bathurst had in like manner declaredthat no one across the water " was in earnest for theAbolition but the King of France. That he is so,his letter to the Regent, a copy of which I enclose,will I am sure convince you." 97 The vigilance ofthe Abolitionists had not let the time of his residencein England pass by without an effort to possess hismind with right notions on this subject. He hadbeen presented while at Hart well with Mr. Wilberforce'swork on the Slave Trade, accompanied by Mr.Stephen's most impressive letter. The Archbishopof Rheims, who had been the channel of communication,expressed the King's intention of making himselfcompletely master of a subject, with which he was alreadyin some measure acquainted lf par les differencesmotions que vous avez faites au parlement sur cettegrande question, et les discussions auxquelles elles ontdonne" lieu." " Pour moi," added the Archbishop,"j'yai trouve*, monsieur, les sentiments de bone ethumanity, que j'avois reconnus en vous lorsque j'aieu le plaisir de vous recevoir chez moi, et de vous ytemoigner, ainsi qu' au celebre ministre votre ami, queje retiens toujours tous les sentiments destine quej'avois pour Tun et autre." 98w Duke of Wellington to W. Wilberforce Esq. Dec. 14.97 Lord Bathurst to W. Wilberforce Esq. Oct. 7.99 Archbishop of Rheims to W. Wilberforce Esq. Feb. 6224 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1814.The measures, however, which Louis XVIII. eitherwould not or could not carry, were now about to beaccomplished by a stronger hand. From his rock ofElba, Buonaparte had not been an unobservant witnessof the feelings of this country, which he nowprobably for the first time believed to be sincere.Upon his sudden return to power, he attempted to ingratiatehimself with England by proclaiming a totaland immediate Abolition of the Slave Trade. Thuswas the bloody cup dashed from the hands of France,and the scourge of Europe became the pacificator ofAfrica. And when Louis was again restored by Britisharms, he was not suffered to revive the hateful traffic.I have the gratification of acquainting you," writesLord Castlereagh, " that the long desired object isaccomplished, and that the present messenger carriesto Lord Liverpool the unqualified and total Abolitionof the Slave Trade throughout the dominions ofFrance. I must beg to refer you to his Lordship forthe terms in which this has been effected ; but I feelgreat satisfaction in persuading myself that, as theywill leave you nothing to desire on the subject, soyou will trace in them the undeviating and earnestexertions of the Prince Regent's ministers to effectuatethis great object, which had been so impressivelygiven them in charge." "To W. Wilberforce Esq. July 31, 1815.CHAPTER XXX.JANUARY 1815 TO JANUARY 1816.Christmas at Barham Court Count de Limonade Illness ofHenry Thornton His death John Bowdler's death LettersAbolition matters Register Bill Corn Laws Riot'sLetter to his son Letter to Lord Liverpool Mr. Stephenresolves to resign his seat Diary Waterloo BlucherWhitbread's death Letter to Hannah More Tour inDevonshire Brighton Mrs. Henry Thornton's deathPavilion.MR. WILBERFORCE had been long accustomed tomake the opening of a new year a time for seriousand devotional reflection. After morning service,on Sunday, Jan. 1st, (1815,) "I was much affected,"is his entry, " O may it be permanently, by thereflections the seasons suggests. Read in the eveninga sermon on the fig-tree a cumbered of the groundto my family." He was now occupying BarhamCourt, and with the holyday employments of his children." reading Blair's Lectures, and Voltaire'sLouis XlVth with W. hearing Hume " . and theirholyday amusements ." Twelfth-night, and our childrenasking us, we invited the N.s,and all played blind-man'sbuff for two hours or more; reading Waverley,and sometimes, chess" . he found himself, though inthe country, "sadly pressed" by his "correspondence."L 3226 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1815.The part which his opposition to the Foreign SlaveTrade had led him to take in behalf of Hayti addeda new and interesting series to his correspondencewith "the four quarters of the globe." A letter ofthis date thus describes its commencement.TO ZACHARY MACAULAY ESQ.Barham Court, Jan. 7, 1815.My dear Friend,*###*.#I received the other day from Sir Sidney Smith, aletter from Vienna, 1 stating that he was busily employedfor us, (also against the depredations of theBarbary powers,) but that he was almost aground forwant of money, and that if 200 should be lodged forhim at Courts's by the African Institution he wouldaccount for it, and could use it beneficially. When Iconsidered the man, the object, the sum, and the circumstances,Down I thought it would be clearly rightfor us to advance the money, but I did not like to doiton my own authority ; I therefore wrote about it tothe Duke of Gloucester. What think you ?# * # * * * *I have had, last not least, a Hadrian correspondent.Two days ago I received a note from Hatchard, tellingme that a letter had come for me of 85 ounces,and was charged 37 10s. and that he had refusedit. It was explained by a letter from the post-office,which very handsomely under the peculiar circumVid. Correspondence of W. Wilberforce Esq. &c.1815. HENRY THORNTON. 227stances of the case let me off for a pepper-corn ofIs. which I shall gladly pay. I will send you thisletter from the Count de Limonade. How strikinglydo we see the just and good dispensations of Providenceproduced hy ways, in which at the time welittle see the point to which we are tending ! But Imust break off. The account I have received ofHenry Thornton is delightful. I mean, please God,to be at Kensington Gore for two nights next weekto see him. Farewell.Ever your sincere Friend,W. Wilberforce."Mr. Thornton was at this time occupying his houseat Kensington Gore, to be nearer medical advice.His health, which was at no time robust, had beenmuch weakened by a fit of illness in the autumn ; butit was hoped that he was rallying from it, and no apprehensionswere expressed of its ultimate result. Onthe 9th of January Mr. Wilberforce was (f so busywith" his "letters" that he "could hardly find time"to leave the country ; " but it would be unkind notto go to town for Henry's sake, if, as they think, Icould be any comfort to him," The next day thereforehe went up " to Kensington Gore, but did notsee dear Henry till the next morning for fear of flurryinghim." He had come to town with no idea thathis friend was in any danger, and " was shocked "therefore " to hear" when he " saw Afford early thenext morning, that a sad change had taken placewithin the last five or six days ; inflammation going228 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1815.towards the heart, and the greatest danger. kensingtonagreed as to the danger, though not immediate.I had no idea of his danger till to-day. He isso weak that he could not talk for above a minute ortwo. His voice broken and feeble. Poor dearHenry ! " The next day was devoted to attendanceon the sufferer. " I ordered myself to be refused toall but particular friends. Healthy and I up prayingwith Henry and Mrs. and Miss Thornton. Grantdined with us, and Stephen came in the evening. Onthe 13th he returned to Teston to attend upon anothersick friend whom he had left behind, whence hewrote at night to Hannah More.Barham Court, Jan. 13, 1815.My dear Friend,Though I am much fatigued, having been upearly to breakfast and come off by the Maidstonecoach which brought me to this place, I must sendyou a very few very hasty lines, though they will be themost melancholy communication my pen ever madeto you. I went on Tuesday to Kensington Gore, tosee our dear friend Henry Thornton. I had no alarmconcerning the issue of his illness, but while theresaw Afford and Bailie, and they are both of themalarmed ; so also is Bennington, an apothecary ofgreat sagacity and high character. God alone knowswhat the event will be, and it is this consideration thatmust silence all our murmurs and all our doubts, thatwhatever it may be, it will be ordained by a Being ofinfinite wisdom and goodness. We may say however1815. HENRY THORNTON. 229that the sudden removal of such a man would be amost mysterious providence. Poor Mrs. HenryThornton, since I have regarded his death as a probableevent, my heart has bled to see her surrounded byall her little ones. Still the event may not now takeplace ; but I could not forbear making you partaker ofmy apprehensions,I am ever your sincere Friend,W. Wilberforce."Our dear friend," he tells Mr. Macaulay on thefollowing day, <f is continually before my mind's eye,and his emaciated figure and face are very affecting.Above all, seeing poor Mrs. Thornton with her ninechildren makes my heart bleed. May it please Godto raise him up again, in answer to the prayers of hismany friends." Sunday brought a more favourablebulletin. " Dr. Warren had been called in, and saw noreason why Henry should not recover." 2 With theserekindled hopes he was " shocked and astonished by aletter from Healthy, dated four o'clock on Monday,to say, that though Warren had called and said Henrywas much the same, Bennington declared he wassinking fast, and could not survive the night. I wasoff in about an hour and posted up to town. Inquiredat Palace Yard, and heard that our dear friend hadexpired at eight the preceding evening. Went on toKensington Gore, where I found his family and sweetMrs. Grant." 3 The next day was spent with themourners. " In the morning I saw dear Henry'sDiary. 3 Ib230 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1815.body ; I should not at all have known him, and oh howemaciated ! Poor 's kind affection. Poor dearMrs. Henry Thornton behaving with admirable firmness."On the 20th, he returned to Barham Courtfound all well, and oh how kind a reception ; meaningfully to return again 011 Monday and be present at thefuneral." Before Monday came he was himself so ill,that for a week he was confined entirely to his room,giving up most unwillingly attending at the funeral."On the 24th," he says, " dear Henry's body committedto the tomb grieved I could not be there amost respectable attendance." To Mr. Stephen onthe following day he says, ee I thank God I am muchbetter. The respect and affection for our departedfriend manifested by so many who were personallyless intimate with him, are highly soothing and useful.They show that even in this world the end of the uprightman is not only peace, but sometimes honour.My dear Stephen, I never can feel grateful enough foryour excessive affection for me. May God bless youand reward you sevenfold for your exuberant kindness.How strongly has been enforced on me lately thecomfort and benefit, as well as the moral duty, of contractingintimacies and friendships with the well-principled! The very sorrows of such persons aremore enjoyable than the pleasures of the worthless."I ought not to delay noticing," he writes at thesame time to Mr. Macaulay, (f one part of your lastletter. I cannot undertake to draw up an account ofour dear departed friend, though I shall gladly lookover what may be written by some other person, and1815. HENRY THORNTON'S CHARACTER. 231probably suggest observations. As soon as I returnto Kensington Gore I will hunt for letters, but I fearI have not many that can be deemed at all adequateindications of his great mind. He wrote so fast commonly,as to do no justice to himself. I am decidedlyof opinion that there should be some delineation of theman a detailed account of his intellectual and moralcharacter. If I were to name the person to draw allthe outlines of the work it should be Gisborne ; and Ithink we all should see it, and it should be understoodthat the statement is the deliberate, conscientiousjudgment of several of us, who had opportunities ofknowing thoroughly his understanding, heart, andaffections. I am the more desirous of this, becausethe exterior manner sometimes failed to do justice tothe warm and generous heart that glowed within.Farewell, my dear Macaulay ; I seem to love my ownand our dear Henry's surviving friends better sincehis being taken away from us."My mind," he tells another friend at the conclusionof a business letter, " is in reality engrossed allthis time by a different subject, and I scarcely need tellyou that it is the loss of one of my oldest, kindest,most intimate, and most valuable friends. His deathis indeed a loss, though so much more to poor Mrs.Henry Thornton than to any of us, that all comparisonis at an end. However the old, well-worn consolationis not worn out, our loss is his gain, and we shouldindeed be selfish if we could even wish to call ourfriend back to inhabit once more an emaciated, sufferingbody, from the far different scene on which he232 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1815.has now entered. The question concerning the intermediatestate appears to me to be set at rest, (withthose who admit the Divine authority of that part ofthe sacred Scriptures,) by our Saviour's language tothe thief on the cross, f This day shalt thou be withme in paradise ; ' and if, as seems highly probable, thedisembodied spirit, besides the enjoyment of the presentstate, is enabled to look forward to the glory,honour, and immortality which lie before it, what anexalted conception is given to us of the prospect suddenlypresented to its view ! I knew my deceasedfriend well, and I can truly say, after living in thesame house with him for several years, and on termsof the closest intimacy and the most unreserved andintermitted society for eighteen or nineteen subsequently,that a more upright character I neverknew taking the word in the largest sense, as expressingthe fulfilment of every duty, and the cultivationof every Christian grace and moral virtue on rightprinciples. To me who was used to consult with himon all public questions, and who profited so often fromthe extraordinary superiority of his understanding,the loss is almost irreparable. But it is the will of theAlmighty, and it becomes us to submit. It is theordination of infinite wisdom and goodness, and it becomesus to say, Thy will be done. I will notapologize for the serious strain of my letter, because Iam persuaded you would wish me to pour forth of thefulness of my heart."I have been daily thinking of writing to you," hetells their common friend, Lord Teignmouth, " though1815. JOHN Powder. 233it should only be a few words of friendly salutationand condolence. The truth is, and I doubt not yourown feelings may be appealed to for the justice of theremark, the loss of one dear friend increases our senseof the value of those that are left to us, and producesa disposition to renew the assurances of affectionateattachment, not from any idea of its being necessaryso to do, but merely from the natural appetencies ofthe mind, from the disposition we feel to call on thosewe love to sympathize with us, especially in events inwhich they also have been deeply interested."^Another blow soon followed. There was not perhapsany one amongst his younger friends whom heloved and respected as he did John Bowdler. " Iloved him so warmly," he says when four busy yearswith all their obliterating influences had passed bysince his death, " that it quite delights me to findhim estimated at his true value. If poor Kirk Whitehad lived he might have grown into something of thesame kind. But Bowdler had a dignity he wouldhave become capable I assure you of thundering andlightening. And then he was the tenderest, and thehumblest, and the most self-forgetting creature." 6Bowdler too had just been mourning with him. Onthe sorrowful day which followed Henry Thornton'sdeath, Mrs. Thornton had ff sent for him. He camein the evening, and I had much talk with him. Itook him to town next morning." 6 It was the lasttime they met on earth. The very next day " about4 To Lord Teignmouth, Jan. 28.To the Rev. Francis Wranghara, July 7, 1819. 6 Diary, Jan. 18.234 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1815.one in the morning dear Bowdler burst a blood vessel,and until about seven, when his bed-maker came in,he lay in his chambers, humanly speaking in themost desolate state. Yet he told C. afterwards thathis mind was then so filled with the Saviour that hethought of nothing else." Such was the colour of histhoughts for the ten following days, during which hemeekly bore the sudden breaking up of the strongestnatural affections, and the highest intellectual powers.Upon the 31st of January, he was pronounced " better,the inflammation of the lungs subdued and its conquestthought a great point." 7 Yet on the followingevening, when Mrs. Henry Thornton's business hadagain carried Mr. Wilberforce to town, " a note cameto " him " at seven telling me of dear Bowdler'sdeath at twelve o'clock this morning. Oh how littledid I foresee, when we met lately at Kensington Gore,that it would be the last time of my intercourse withhim on earth ! O sit anima mea cum Bowdlero. Iwent on to Grosvenor Square, and saw his lifeless andghastly frame." 8To Hannah More a few days later he pours outhis heart.London, Feb. 11, 1815.My dear Friend,Scarcely had a week passed away alter thedeath of our dear friend Henry Thornton, before theexcellent and elevated Bowdler was called out of thisworld, only less dear a friend as of more recent aceDiary. 8 Jb.1815. LOSS OF FRIENDS. 235question ; and scarcely had we returned from hisfuneral, . . though there also I speak figuratively, becauseI was unable to attend from the continuance ofthe same indisposition which kept me from joining inthe same sad office to my earlier friend, . . when thetidings arrive of the departure of Dr. Buchanan. Howstriking ! We are all involuntarily looking roundand asking with an inquiring eye, Who next,Lord ? Oh may the warnings have their due effect inrendering us fit for the summons. But I at this momentrecollect some important and urgent claims onmy time (too little for them) before I must go out oftown, and I must therefore break off unwillingly, formy stream of thought was in full flow, and it beatsagainst the barrier. Kindest remembrances. Farewell.I enclose the half of a bank note ; the remaindershall follow.Yours ever most sincerely,W. WlLBERFOROE."These deep tones of manly affection are strikinglycontrasted with his lowly estimation of himself. OnSunday, Feb. 12th, he was at Battersea Rise and receivedthe " Sacrament. Mrs. H. Thornton staidfor the first time since her husband's death, and wasmuch affected. Indeed, so hard a creature as myselfwas so. What letters did I see yesterday, one quiteexquisite from M. How wonderfully the power oftrue Christianity is displayed in the tempers, feelings,and even reflections of the several sufferers ! Harford,236 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1815.one of them, having lost a beloved father, indicatedthe same blessed sentiments and feelings." 9 To thisfriend he wrote two days later.TO J. S. Hartford ESQ.Kensington Gore, Feb. 14, 1815.My dear Sir,Even by those who think and feel concerningthe events of this chequered life as real Christians,such an incident as the death of a parent, or even ofa near and dear friend, will be felt severely ; and indeedit ought to be so felt, for here, as in so manyother instances, it is the glorious privilege of Christianityand the evidence of its superior excellence,that it does not, like the systems of human fabrication,strive to extinguish our natural feelings, from aconsciousness that it is only by lessening them that itcan deal with them, if I may so express myself, andenable us to bear the misfortune as we ought, but itso softens, and sweetens, and increases the sensibilityof our hearts, as to make us love our friends betterand feel more keenly for the whole of this life the lossof our former delightful intercourse with them, andyet at the same time it so spiritualizes and elevatesour minds as to cheer us amidst all our sorrows ; andenabling us, on these as on other occasions, to walkby faith and live by the Spirit, it raises us to thelevel of our ascended friends, till we hear almost their9 Diary.1815'. TO J. S. Hartford ESQ. 237first song of exultation, and would not even wish tointerrupt it, while we rather indulge the humble hopeof one day joining in the chorus.Yet the loss of so excellent a man as Bowdler, atwhat seemed to us so premature a period, when wemight have hoped that for so many succeeding yearsthe world would be instructed by his wisdom, andcharred by his eloquence, and above all, edified andimproved by his example, must be deeply felt by thesurvivors. And even in the case of Mr. HenryThornton, I at least may naturally feel this who wasof the same age ; much it might be hoped still remainedfor him to do for the benefit of his fellow-creaturesand the glory of God. And Buchanantoo ! but, I am silent, ."Another characteristic effect of these various scenesof sorrow appears in a note to Mr. Stephen.My dear Stephen,I have received a new packet from Hayti,giving an account of a spy of Malouet's 10 having beenseized, and of his having been treated much betterthan he deserved. You will see that every effort isused to animate the people. You will see also amanifest hope of interesting England.(e The sad event which has just taken place impresseson me the lesson, Whatsoever thy hand find-ethto do, do it with all thy might. I am unspeakablyshocked by the consciousness of having wasted56 French minister for the colonies.238 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1815.time and opportunities which never can return.Farewell.Yours ever affectionately,W. WILBERFORCE."In this spirit he set at once steadily to work. Muchimportant business was pressing for despatch ; aboveall, the Abolition question required all his time andthoughts. " I have this day sent to Stephen' hewrites, Jan. 27th, to Mr. Macaulay, " and desired himto put into your hands after having read it, a mostinteresting letter from Sismondi. As there are shadesat least of difference in the colour of Stephen'sopinions, and yours, and mine, on some of the topicstouched on by Sismondi, we should compare notesbefore he is answered. I will write at once to assurehim of my having received his letter, and intendingto give him a more detailed answer before long. You,I, William Smith, and Stephen, should make up ourminds on the important points to which he draws ourattention ; particularly the actual consequences of theAbolition in our West Indies, since 1807. I agreeentirely in your solution of the problem concerning W.Converts to our cause are not able endure se, (so tospeak,) with all the apparatus of facts, arguments, inferences,&c. which an Abolitionist, of considerablestanding, has been insensibly contracting, and whichhave become a part of his mental atmosphere throughwhich every other object is viewed."It was the general question of the effects ofAbolition, which was soon to engross his attention.1815. PATIENCE OF THE ABOLITIONISTS. 239The Abolition party were upon the eve of taking animportant step in their great struggle. Their objectshad been all along most strictly practical ; they contendedfor no abstract principles ; they did not enforcethe natural rights of man; but they saw a greatsystem of iniquity and wrong, which called aloud toHeaven for some redress. The Abolition of theSlave Trade was the first remedy for all this evil.This would staunch the wounds of Africa ; save thepresent victims of the Trade ; and insure, as it washoped, the kind and Christian treatment of the actualstock of labourers. Seven years had passed away,and there was no visible improvement in the West.During all this time they had been anxiously watchingfor a change of system in the negro's treatment,and seeking to promote it by all private and inoffensivemeans. When a case of great oppression wascommitted to Mr. Wilberforce in 1811, "a privateremonstrance," says Mr. Brougham, " would, in myhumble opinion, be the most advisable course ; theymake such work about doing things by private communications."Some of his more, eager partisans would scarcelybe confined within these prudent limits. " These,my dear Wilberforce, are troublesome and wearisomethings," Mr. Stephen had complained fouryears before. " I am quite, quite sick of the WestIndies as a field of labour in our cause ; especiallywhen that Augean stable is to be cleansed with agovernment muck-fork. There is satisfaction inspeaking to the public ; the sympathies of congenial240 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1815.minds, the indignation of honest hearts, may bemoved, and much solid ground in public opinion maybegained ; but to load the shelves of a minister withlaboured memorials, to haunt him with conferencesfor years, and at last to be turned round by the whisperthat a governor stands well with great men, andmust not have his toes trod upon, is beyond all patience; at least beyond mine. If it prove otherwise,it is not because either philanthropy, or a strongerprinciple with me (hatred of injustice and oppression)excite, but because duty to God will constrain mewhile I still hope to do Him service. I sometimesfeel like St. Paul ; I do this thing not willingly, butof necessity ; a dispensation of negroes is committedto me, and woe is me if I do not work for them.After all I have said, let me be just to Perceval.I have not yet complained to him. It is because thework is very delicate, because I have not time to preparefor it to my own. satisfaction, and because (whatis most vexatious) I am never refused any thing atthe Colonial Office. All is fair, and all is smooth,all promises well and better ; and yet nothing effectualis done, and something always done or permittedto thwart my best founded hopes. Of what use willthe Register Act be, even if approved by tLe council,without a judge to execute it, and while contumacy togovernment itself is tolerated, when opposed to rightprinciples in the colonies ?P. S. (added the next morning.) " I am ashamed ofmy grumbling spirit, but you must even take my1815. HIS FORBEARANCE. 241effusions as they are, as I have no time for revision.How do our views and feelings disguisefacts to our own deception ! It is not true that nogood has been done even at the Secretary's office.If it were as easy to do good as it is pleasant whenthe end is gained, where would be the merit, or mustI say to you, the force of the evidence ? Certain howeverit is that without a humble hope of God'sapprobation, or at least a sense of duty to Him, menwould soon be as weary as Sisyphus at attempting todogood in this bad world; and I think I have knownsome of the worst and most unfeeling characters partlyformed by the frustration of benignant efforts, whichtheir amiable but godless motives had not strengthto persevere in under the pain of disappointment. Solet us look to God and find room even for the Hottentots.I really think however that we shall do nothingeffectual to check colonial crimes till we blaze themto the English public, and arm ourselves with popularindignation."Even now Mr. Wilberforce would not listen to thesemore violent counsels. " You," he tells Mr. Stephen,are full ten degrees above me." He was resolved inthe first instance to strengthen the ameliorating influenceof the Act of Abolition, by preventing the illicitintroduction of fresh labourers. Thus the Bill for aRegister of Negroes was the first move in this newconflict ; and yet in this mildest and most necessarystep, the principle of all his later conduct was inVOL. IV. M242 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1815.fact involved. For it was in truth the appeal of theslave population from the narrow-minded island legis-turnsto the supreme council of the empire ; from thecorrupted currents of Jamaica and Barbadoes to Englishsympathy and moral feeling. It led therefore toevery after-effort for the mitigation of their sufferings ;and when all these had been tried in vain, it led stepby step to the great principle of entire emancipation.But he and others around him saw not as yet to whatthey should be led. They had never acted upon theclaim of abstract rights ; and they reached emancipationat last only because it was the necessary conclusionof a series of practical improvements. " Theylooked' says Mr. Stephen, " to an emancipation ofwhich not the slaves, but the masters themselvesshould be the willing authors."The first steps of this transition may easily be tracedin the short entries of Mr. Wilberforce's Diary. It waseven at its opening a stormy course ; every step was tobe secured by fighting for it. But his first cares at thismoment were from a different quarter. " Thorpe," hesays, Feb. 1 th, 11 "has published a pamphlet 12 addressedto me, comprising all that has given him of theold stuff about Sierra Leone. Poor dear Henry waswell qualified to explain and justify all. But it isquite providential (how I abhor that word, fortunate;as if things happened by chance !) that the inquirytook place last winter, and Thorpe himself was ex-diary.12 " Reasons for establishing a Register of Slaves," the manifestoof his party on this subject,1815. THORPE'S PAMPHLET. 243mined. 15th. Meeting on West India conduct at theDuke of Gloucester's long discussion Lords Grenvilleand Lansdown there, Babington, James Stephen,sen. and jun., and Harrison. Resolved on pushingRegistry Bill immediately, and on noticing Thorpe'spamphlet, which is doing harm in France tellingthem, though most falsely, that we are trying toestablish a slave cultivation of tropical produce inAfrica. Agreed to contradict it in House. 22nd.Suffolk Street Committee at eleven on Thorpe'spamphlet where till near three when saw LordBathurst and Liverpool about Register Bill. Latterrather adverse kept long. House. Corn Lawinteresting debate. Whitbread clever pressed moderation,abstinence from panic, and against allinterference, as useless. 23rd. Horner mentionedThorpe's pamphlet in the House it makes muchnoise I hear. House on Corn again till near four.26th. Sunday. Could not help thinking of Thorpe'spamphlet in the night when half asleep. I thankGod it has not molested me to-day, while betterthings have occupied me. 28th. A general meetingof the Board on Thorpe's business. Deferencefor Lord Grenville overcame the disapprobation offour-fifths of the meeting, which for an authoritativecontradiction of Thorpe's publication, referring to subsequentdetailed examination in the Annual Report.By Grenville's recommendation adopted a sample ofa few, by no means the strongest misstatements, withoutany summary sentence to enforce the conclusion.Sad work for the cause in foreign countries ; FranceM 2244 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1815.especially. I am sadly grieved for Abolition' sake,and that of justice and truth, at our acting so weak apart in the African Institution.March 1st. An interview with Liverpool, Bathurst,and Vansittart, when they told us they could not supportthe Register Bill for want of proof of actual smugglingof slaves. Dear Stephen" (he sat at this time foragovernment borough) " wishing to go out of parliament.With difficulty persuaded to wait till Castlereaghcomes ; when we may ascertain whether we ourselvesshall bring in the Bill this year. 5th. Castlereaghreturned yesterday. Public discontent running high,Corn Bill causa. 6th. House. Corn Bill in committeesad rioting at night. Both doors of the carriage,which set down members, opened, and member pulledout. None much injured. 8th. Called on Castlereaghby appointment to hear his narrative of Viennaproceedings on Abolition. I believe all done thatcould be done. Much pressed to speak on Corn Bill ;and told Huskisson I would, if government wouldsupport the Register Bill. It would not be right tochange my opinion ; but one may fairly take a more orless forward part from considerations of expediency.House Report of Corn Bill, and tendency to riot.9th. House. Some mobbing, and people savage andinveterate alas ! alas ! Charles Grant, and Mr.Arthur Young the agriculturist, slept with us forsecurity on Tuesday." Mr. Young was now entirelyblind, and found his chief pleasure in such society asthat which he continually found in Mr. Wilberforce'shouse. " He says that in his present state of Egyptian1815. CORN LAW RIOTS. 245darkness, Kensington Gore is still like the land ofGoshen to him ; and that while he has the hope ofhearing Mr. Wilberforce's voice,, he will not say thathe finds i in change of place, no change of scene.' " 13At my prayers this morning," his Diary continues,March 10th, I reflected seriously if it was not myduty to declare my opinions in favour of the CornBill, on the principle of providing things honest inthe sight of all men, and adorning the doctrine ofGod my Saviour in all things. I decided to do it.I see people wonder I do not speak one way or theother. It will be said, he professes to trust in God'sprotection, but he would not venture any thing.Then I shall have religious questions and moral questions,to which my speaking will conciliate, and contra,my silence strongly indispose men. Besides, it isonly fair to the government, when I really thinkthem right, to say so, as an independent man notliable to the imputation of partyjbias, corrupt agreementwith landed interest, &c. ; so I prepared thismorning and spoke, and though I lost my notes, andforgot much 1 meant to say, I gave satisfaction." " Iam sure that in coming forward, I performed a verypainful act of duty, from a desire to please God, andto serve the interests of religion, and I humbly trustGod will protect me and my house and family. Ifnot, His will be done." " Sir Joseph Banks's housesadly treated ; all his papers burnt, and his housenearly being so."A letter to his eldest son now seventeen years old,enters into more particulars.13 Letter from a friend of Mr. Arthur Young's.246 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1815.London, March 15, 1815.My very dear W.I do not recollect with any precision when Ilast wrote to you, but my feelings have been for somedays intimating to me that it is long, too long, sincewe either of us heard from the other, and therefore Igladly avail myself of a leisure half hour, which Ienjoy in consequence of Mr. Whitbread's, or rather ofLord Castlereagh's, business being put off, to despatcha letter to Sweden.You did not mention, I think, the subject ofyour declamation I wish you had, and shall be gladif you will name it in your next letter to me oryour mother. What are the speculations of theSweden politicians on the escape of Buonaparte IWe old hands are, if we would confess it, as much ata loss as you what predictions to utter. In short, Ifor one have learnt from experience to be very diffidentin my speculations on future events. It is howeveran unspeakable comfort in such circumstances tobe assured that able, and active, and wicked as Buonaparteis, he is no less under the Divine controlthan the weakest of human beings. He is executing,unconsciously, the Divine will ; and it is probably becausethe sufferings which he before brought upon thenations of Europe did not produce the intended effectof humiliation and reformation, that he is allowedonce more to stalk abroad and increase the sum ofhuman misery.Were you to enter the dining-room at familyprayer time without having received some explanationof our appearance, you would probably begin1815. HIS MOTIVES. 247to think that we were expecting a visit from theex-emperor and his followers at Kensington Gore,and had prepared a military force to repel hisassault. For you would see four soldiers and a sergeant,together with another stranger, 14 who as far asbodily strength would go, would play his part as wellas any of them. The fact is, that we had some reasonto apprehend mischief for our house, in consequenceof the part which I judged it my duty to take on theCorn Bill ; and as your mother, &c. was advised toevacuate the place, I preferred the expedient whichhad been adopted by Mr. Bankes, and several othersof my friends, that of having four or five soldiersin my house the very knowledge of their beingthere, rendering an attack improbable. But it wasa curious instance of the rapid circulation of intelligence,that at Covent Garden market early on Saturdaymorning, John Sherman, who sells garden-stuff,being there to purchase for the supply of hisshop was hooted after, with f So your old master hasspoken for the Corn Bill,' (I had spoken only the nightbefore,) ' but his house shall pay for it.' All howeveris hitherto quiet, and I trust will continue so. But Iwas aware of the danger when (to you I may say, itwas at my prayers) I resolved to speak for the Bill ;but I judged it my duty to show that I was in favourof the measure (though thinking 76s. a preferableimportation price to 80 s.). I thought that if I remainedsilent, many might say Mr. Wilberforce professesto trust in the protection of God, but you seewhen there is danger to be apprehended from speak -14 Bushel the Peace-officer.248 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1815.jng out, he takes care to protect himself by beingsilent. Again, I sometimes need parliamentary supportfor measures of a class not so popular as someothers, as missionary questions, or any others of areligious kind. Now by coming forward and speakingmy mind on the present occasion, I knew I shouldrender people better disposed to support me in any ofthese cases, while on the other hand my remainingsilent and snug as it might have been termed, wouldhave produced a contrary disposition. I acted inshort on the principle of ( providing things honest inthe sight of all men, and of adorning the doctrine ofGod our Saviour.' But observe, I was clear in myjudgment in favour of the Bill.I did not intend to give you this long history.And as I have expended all my own time, and havetrespassed on yours, I must hasten to a conclusion,not however without a few words to assure my dearhow often I think of him, how often pray forhim. O my dearest boy, let me earnestly conjure younot to be seduced into neglecting, curtailing, or hurryingover your morning prayers. Of all things guardagainst neglecting God in the closet. There is nothingmore fatal to the life and power of religion ; nothingwhich makes God more certainly withdraw His grace.Farewell, my beloved , my first-born : and O mydearest boy, bear in mind what a source either of joyor sorrow you will be to your affectionate mother, andYour affectionate Father and Friend,W. WILBERFORCE.P. S. Kind remembrances to any young friendsI know."1815. MR. STEPHEN. 249His Journal continues on the 14th of March; " Allquite quiet here, but sad accounts from France ;Buonaparte having got to Lyons, and Homer anticipatingthe worst. The soldiers (Scotch) behave extremelywell ; they come in to prayers, and pleased todoso. 15th. Stephen decided to give up his seat inparliament ; government not supporting the RegisterBill. His integrity is great. I believe after what hehas stated, he can act no otherwise." He camereluctantly to this conviction ; after having for sometimedelayed his friend's decision. Mr. Stephenlived for this great cause, and often could scarcelytolerate the indifference of his friends in the administration." If Lord Castlereagh fails to redeem thispledge," he had declared in the preceding year withthe vehemence his generous temper dictated, " mayGod not spare me, if I spare the noble Lord and hiscolleagues." l5 In the House Mr. Stephen was a greatloss ; but his energies expanded when they were freedfrom the shackles of official life, and his vigorous andcopious pen produced, within this year, four pamphletson the subject of the Slave Trade.Mr. Wilberforce's language with the government,though calmer was not less explicit than his friend's.(Private.) l6 Kensington Gore, March 17, 1815.My dear Lord Liverpool,Were the subject of my letter of less urgentimportance, I would not intrude on you with it at a15 June 28.16 From a rough copy among Mr. Wilberforce's papers.M 3250 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1815.moment like the present, when the mind of every manwho feels for his country is pressed upon, and whenyou, who have to hear the weight of all, must have anoverpowering burthen to sustain. But I was about towrite to your Lordship before the news from Francearrived, and the relation which my business has toMr. Stephen's measures compels me to take up mypen without further delay.I can truly assure you that your decision againstthe Register Bill, has not only grieved me in consequenceof the various evils with which I saw buttoo plainly that determination was pregnant toAfrica and the black and coloured population of theWest Indies, but also on account of its sowing theseeds of disunion between myself and your Lordship'sgovernment, to which I have been the morecordially attached from my personal good opinionof yourself and some of your colleagues. For it isnot merely this measure of the Register Bill thatis in question. But the same consideration whichleads you to decide against its adoption, would stillmore clearly prompt you to decide against a bill toattach slaves to the soil ; indeed against all measureswhich should be brought forward for mitigatingthe sufferings and improving the condition of theslaves and the free coloured population of the WestIndies ; though our having left their grievances unredressedhas been so long the reproach of thiscountry throughout Europe, though Mr. Burke hadprepared a plan of reform, and though the late LordMelville avowed his plan for gradual emancipation,1815. REMONSTRANCE WITH GOVERNMENT. 251and this idea of interfering with their legislativerights was never deemed a sufficient obstacle in theway of such reformation. Now, that sooner or laterwe shall succeed, you can I think have no doubt, ifyou consider the great yet increasing number of thepeople of Great Britain who are governed by religiousprinciple in the great concerns of life where neitherdirect interest or passions lead them astray, and reflectthat nineteen out of twenty of these will infalliblybecome our friends. I am persuaded your Lordshiphas no adequate idea of the real condition of thepoor creatures I have been referring to. And thatwhich I own shocks me in the extreme is, that, inJamaica especially, all efforts which are made forenlightening these wretched beings with the blessedtruths of Christianity, which might compensate theirtemporal sufferings, are obstinately and warmly opposed.How shocking is this ! And I insist on it,because I firmly believe and confidently trust thatyour Lordship will feel the force of this appeal, andbe shocked by the very idea of setting yourself andyour government in direct array against the progressof Divine truth, no less than against that of humanhappiness. But there is also another considerationwhich I own has no little weight in my estimation.The black population of Hayti I am assured is alltaught to read, and we cannot doubt of its readingwith deep interest all that is said and written againstthe system of slavery from which they have recentlyescaped, and to which, as they conceive, it is theobject of France again to subject them. Now, canit be but that when they read the accounts we shall252 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1815.be compelled to make public . . if we can no otherwiseproduce a discontinuance of these evils or the gradualintroduction of a sanative and meliorating principle . .they will be strongly moved by them, and probablybe urged to knock off by force those fetterswhich the British legislature will not consent to renderless galling? Your Lordship however has notime to spare; I will therefore detain you no longer.Only let me conjure you to consider seriously thenature and direction of the path into which you areentering. No human being knows of my writingthis letter ; but I could not be easy without pouringforth a few of the painful considerations which forsome time have been distressing my feelings.It really would, on all accounts, grieve me to findmyself opposed to your Lordship's government onthese great questions of the deepest interest to everyman of religion as well as humanity. Hitherto Ihave abstained from bringing into notice the miseriesof the black population, and I would still abstain, ifwithout divulging them they might gradually beremoved ; but life is wearing away, and I should indeedbe sorry if mine were to terminate before atleast a foundation had been laid of a system of reformation,which I verily believe would scarcely be morefor the comfort of the slaves and free coloured populationthan it would be for the ultimate security of theWest India colonies themselves. I remain, with realrespect and regard, my dear Lord Liverpool,Your Lordship's very sincerely,W. WILBERFORCE.To the Earl of Liverpool, &c. &c. &c."1815. MR. STEPHEN. 253His life was not to close until the very top-stone ofthis work of reformation has been brought forth withshouting ; but its foundations were now laid in heaviness,and for many patient, persevering years its wallsand buttresses seemed scarcely to advance.On the 17th his Diary proceeds, " Stephen summonedme to town on his affair so went and on thewhole for his giving up his seat. All we fear over inFrance. Alas ! All the army false sad work andthe King said to be fled to Belgium. 20th. To townto confer with Lord Liverpool about Register Billbusiness he just mentioned Stephen's business, butafterwards showed he felt more than he said. I wasafraid of meddling with it. Soldiers left us on Saturday,(18th,) London quite quiet ever after. 25th.How wonderful are these political changes ! yet it iscurious that we have now grown quite used to Buonaparteon the throne again. It is a compensation tomethat the Roman Catholic religion is stunted andinjured by the change. 27th. Stephen had receivedfrom Vansittart, (Chancellor of Exchequer,) a kindquery, and wish for his pausing present altered circumstancesnot requiring his surrender of his seat onhis own principles, and the times and circumstances ofthe country claiming every man's service I doubtfulhe very honest, and desirous of pleasing God, andresolving on the whole to adhere to his decision."I have decided finally," were Mr. Stephen's words,on the side of perseverance. The verdict of myown conscience was upon the whole that I shouldretire. It was a truly painful victory over very LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1815.ful feelings. I pray God to accept it as a sacrifice.,and to bless the event. I wrote to-day a long letterto Sir W. Scott, announcing that final decision."Called about the slave traders pitied by Dr.Thorpe; a mere point of law. The tribunal incompetentfrom want of a pirate's commission, and the protempore judge (not a professional man) misled by followingprecisely Thorpe's precedent of a former year.It is certainly curious, and furnishes an apparent triumphto Thorpe, that they should be acquitted. It isa lesson not to expect to escape unjust calumnies, andtemporary suffering from their prevalence ; not onlyis Macaulay not justly censurable on the groundsstated by Thorpe, but his merits are of the highestorder. 30th. Dined Grant's to meet Mackintosh,who very entertaining-r-speaking highly of Hallentertainingly of France, Waverley, &c. How wonderfulthe change in France ; yet what more naturalthan that an army should pull down and set up sovereigns,and that a vain-glorious nation should admireand be attached to a great warrior, who has extendedthe bounds and augmented the glory of France, ratherthan a peaceable king to whom they are long unaccustomed! Mackintosh thinks the French governmenthad many warnings. But then government so oftenwarned, and told the wolf coming, that when he doescome it is unprepared. . . Joseph in Switzerland gettingmoney. . . Madame de Stael was in two or three daysto have received two million livres, a deposit of herfather's, when Blacks, who was to have accompanied herto the French minister, wrote to her that from imperious1815. PARIS IN 1815. 255circumstances all payments stopped. She for a fewdays lost her head and drove about wildly. Afterwardsreturned to Cope. French society Mackintoshsays very agreeable. Dine at six dinner very shortthen coffee, and go to various houses. Mr. H. describedthem from six months' observation as fond ofreading; but on pressing it seemed only the gazettes,(hired) on hired chairs in the public gardens at Paris.He described them as void of all principle. Theiropera, &c. How little can this be a fit recreation forthose who are bound by their profession as Christiansto mortify the flesh with the affections and lusts !General Macaulay states that almost all the Frenchhe saw were friendly to Napoleon and adverse to theBourbons. Mr. S. a man of good parts . . of the middleclass and probably so in his connexions . . tells me thathe was told by all his French acquaintance, ' We werea great empire under Buonaparte, now we are a littlekingdom.' For my own part I cannot but feel it astrong objection to supporting the Bourbons, thatthey are such firm Roman Catholics. And nowBuonaparte seems courting the friends of liberty, andCarnot being his minister of the interior is perhapsdeceived too : this must make him a much moreformidable enemy.April 1st. Spurzheim the craniologist in london,and people talking about his system ; L. fullof it. Ministers are disposed for war ; saying theAllies will have 700,000 men, and he be unprepared; whereas if you wait he will be becomingstronger and better equipped, especially with the LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1815.teriel of war, and you and the Allies less compacted :we however are so exhausted that we cannot afford topay all the forces. Our foreign expedition last yearcost above thirty millions sterling. An affecting visitfrom Mrs. B. the wife of an attorney of respectablestation and character, near thirty years in Leeds, convictedof forgery of stamps on deeds, (vitiating securities,)and to he hanged this day week. Poor thing !I gave her no hopes, and wrote to his friend at Leedsto tell him plainly that no hope of pardon ; till that beclear they never will look eternity in the face. Alas,may not our bloody laws send many unprepared intoanother world from this very cause ? I once sawa poor wretch whom nothing would persuade heshould not through his friends obtain a pardon, whereasI knew about ten at night that he was to be hangedearly the next morning. 7th. Suffolk Street aboutThorpe's pamphlet. House Lord Castlereagh's addresspreparatory to discussion about Buonaparte'sescape, and the measures to be pursued, Addressambiguous, but Castlereagh's speech tending to war.Liverpool rather pacific. 8th. To Duke of Gloucesteron Register Bill Lords Grey and Lansdown.Then Suffolk Street. Then Kensington Gore.Spurzheim dined much talk. What an awful intervalnow : when all Europe collecting troopsagainst Buonaparte. 700,000 mentioned by LordLiverpool."In the midst of all this daily business, encounteredwith the utmost diligence, comes in the result of aSunday's self-examination. " April 10th. I humbly1815. DIARY. 257hope that I enjoyed yesterday more of a Christianfeeling of faith, and hope, and love, than of late. ButI have been to blame in point of hours. Lord, forgivemy past unprofitableness, and enable me to mendin future. I really wished to give more time andpains to the Report than Macaulay has allowed me.This very morning I meant to have given to it, buthe had taken it away with him ; but I am conscious Igrow incompetent, and if my infirmities, as is natural,increase, while my talents and powers decline, I mustgo off extremely in efficiency. Let me only, however,try to please God, and do my best, and He will, Idoubt not, bless me as He has done hitherto in a marvellousdegree. 13th. House on Civil List. Leftthem (about eleven) differing about the committee'scalling for oral testimony a point of honour and interestto the minister ; they must fight their master'sbattles, as well as former ministers have fought theirs.21st. Being unwell, I kept the house, but busy onletters, and chiefly African Institution Report ; andoccupied evening. Committee on Lascars' businesscalled just when dinner going on table. I too faint,and, alas, impatient, forgetting Christ's talking withthe woman of Samaria, and neglecting the solicitationsof hunger, and the distress of faintness. Sunday,23rd. I have been neglecting general politics, and amsadly behindhand in my pondering on them, withouthaving done adequate good elsewhere. O let melearn hence, 1. To guard against procrastination.2. Whatever my hand finder to do, to do it withvigour. 3. To humble myself deeply for my sad LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1815.profitableness. How little do I deserve the character,which the good providence of God, and the uncommonkindness of uncommon friends, has preservedfor me ! I can only hide my face in the dust, and bespeechless. Yet let me try to amend, and be activeand efficient to the utmost of my remaining faculties.My judgment hesitates as to the political line Ishould adopt ; but on this blessed day, let my mottoever be, and I bless God I am enabled pretty wellto make my practice accord with it, (so far at least aspublic affairs and private business are concerned,) acquaintnow thyself with God, and be at peace. 27th.House Whitbread's motion, that a particular familyno bar to treaty for peace. I spoke ill, because indecisively,as indeed I felt in one sense ; for my ownjudgment would be for treating with Buonaparte ifwe were free : but we are so connected with the Allies,that we could not honestly separate from them, asagreeing to Whitbread's motion would substantiallyhave been. Tierney very coarse and caustic. Whit-breadill-natured about my ingratitude for Abolitionservices. I could not reply, and better I should not ;for alas, I was angry.May 3rd. Anniversary of Bible Society. It wentoff well. Robert Grant spoke beautifully. I was wellreceived, but very moderate in real performance. AsI came out, a truly pleasing Quaker accosted me, andwith the true friends 9 frankness and kindness, withoutany thing of forwardness and vulgarity, asked meconcerning peace or war, ' having been much exercisedabout conferring with me ' on that topic, wishing me1815. WAR RENEWED. 2591 to become a fool that I might be wise c. I walkedwith him some time, and was affected to tears.6th. Dined at Lord Liverpool's, a large and mixedp ar ty their notions about churches all outside work.10th. Early to see Lord's Castlereagh and Liverpoolabout Abolition and St. Domingo. Castlereaghclear that the Bourbon government will never revivethe Trade. I hear every where that the Duke ofWellington is in high spirits. I am distressed andpuzzled about politics ; but surely without being clearit would not be right to oppose the government. IfBuonaparte could be unhorsed, it would, humanlyspeaking, be a blessing to the European world ; indeedto all nations. And government ought to know bothhis force and their own. Yet I greatly dread their beingdeceived, remembering how Pitt was. 13th. ToLambeth public day large party Lord Camden,&c. Before parting, Archbishop speaking of my singingGod save the King at Sons of Clergy dinner, theBishop of Exeter said, he had heard that I was famedfor the selection of my songs. ( Take care,' said theArchbishop in a very gentlemanly, episcopal, reprovingway, ' my Lord, lest you show yourself too knowing.'All this time a fearful interval, expecting thebursting out of the war. It is amazing how littlepeople seem moved. Generally, I think, for war ;especially all who used to be friends of Pitt's government.24th. Dined Sir T. Acland's, to meet WalterScott, Planta, jun. a highly pleasing man Inglis,and others. Scott very unaffected and pleasing ;some very clever colloquial hits. 26th. Reading LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1815.bates this evening Grattan's brilliant speech, interestingthe understanding, not affecting the passions.29th. Wordsworth the poet breakfasted with us, andwalked garden and it being the first time, staidlong much pleased with him.June 1st. A report to-day from Brussels that it isstill said there will be no fighting ; Buonaparte willretire surely there is no ground for this idea. 7th.House. Notice about Register Bill. 3rd. Duke ofGloucester's on Registry Bill Lords Grenville andLansdown, Romilly, Carthorse, Horner, WilliamSmith, Stephen, Babington, and Macaulay. I againstbringing on the measure this year. But Grenvillestrongly for it, and all the rest gave way. 9th.Letter-writing. First quiet thought of the plan ofmy speech for Tuesday. Then African Institution,Captured Negroes' committee. Then House. DinedSir G. Beaumont's to meet Wordsworth, who verymanly, sensible, and full of knowledge, but independentalmost to rudeness. 12th. Off early toStephen's, Chelsea, to prepare for motion ; any quiettime here being next to impossible. 13th. Busy preparingall morning ; but not having settled plan ofspeech before, much less finishings, I felt no confidence.Got through pretty well, speaking an hourand fifty minutes."Sunday, the 18th, was spent at the parsonage ofTaplow, where his family had been staying for aweek. It is described in his Diary " as a quiet day."Above measure did he enjoy its quietness. He seemedto shake off with delight the dust and bustle of the1815. BATTLE OF WATERLOO. 261crowded city ; and as he walked up the rising street ofthe village on his way to the old church of Taplow,he called on all around to rejoice with him in thevisible 'goodness of his God; and " perhaps' he saidto his children, (f at this very moment when we arewalking thus in peace together to the house of God,our brave fellows may be fighting hard in Belgium.Oh how grateful should we be for all God's goodnessto us ! " The next day he " returned to London forLord Roseberry's Divorce Bill,, religionis causa ; " andalmost the first news which met him showed that hisgrateful reflections on the Sunday had been utteredwhilst the battle of Waterloo was being fought. 22nd.Dr. Wellesley came and told us of the Duke of Wellington'ssplendid victory of the 18th." " A dreadfulbattle," he writes word to Taplow. " British victorious; but great loss. Duke of Brunswick and LordErrol's eldest son killed. We are said to have lost25,000, the French 50,000. Oh my heart sickensat the scene ! Yet praise God for this wonderfulvictory."On Saturday, the 24th, he again plunged into thecountry, but hastened back upon the Monday, forthe Duke of Wellington's reward ; I preferringinfinitely a palace to be built, to buying one readymade. 28th. Breakfasters again Sanders, a blackmanSpanish, Blanc White; yesterday PrinceBlucher's aide-de-camp who had brought the despatchesdesired by Blucher several times over toletme know all that passed." " Did Marshal Blucher,"he was asked at his audience by the Regent,262 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 181,5.give you any other charge." " Yes, sir, he chargedme to acquaint Mr. Wilberforce with all that hadpassed." " Go to him then yourself by all means," wasthe Prince's answer, "you will be delighted with him."The veteran soldier's lively recollection of the effortsmade in the preceding year to succour his afflictedcountrymen, is highly to his honour. " I have fought,"he wrote to the managing committee, " two pitchedbattles, five engagements, masked three fortresses,taken two ; but I have lost 22,000 men. Will thepeople of England be satisfied with me now ? DesireMr. Wilberforce to bestir himself." Though he hadlately lamented his forge fulness, and begged a friendto act always as his flapper," he needed in truth nosuch assistance. He took at this time the leadingpart in another meeting for the Germans, and in themidst of his busiest preparations for the introductionof his Registry Bill he (( came back and took thechair at a private meeting of the neighbours for a fund,raising for the widows and children of the killed andwounded of the 1st Life Guards always quartered atKnightsbridge a small meeting, but cordial."A grateful remembrance of the gallant services ofour soldiers and our sailors was deeply wrought intohis mind, and appeared often in his conversation ;as when he said to a friend, " I never see a soldieror a sailor without a mingled feeling of gratitudeand compassion. I think of the privationsthey suffer, and of the dangers, moral as well asphysical, to which they are exposed in our defence,while we are comfortably at home by our fire-sides,1815. REGISTRY BILL. 263enjoying freely our domestic blessings and our Christianadvantages." Or when at another time the conversationturned upon the beauties of our Englishvillas. " I must speak," he said, " of the comfort andsecurity of English cottages. It is delightful to thinkhow many ther are in this country who though havingno title to personal security from the extent orimportance of their possessions, are so completelyguarded in their little nooks and tenements by thepower of the law, that they can enjoy undisturbedevery comfort of life as securely as the first peer inthe land. I delight to see, as one sometimes does, anold worn-out sailor poor fellow ! seated in his queerboat-like summer-house, smoking his pipe, and enjoyinghimself in a state of the most happy independence."The session was now drawing to a close. On the5th of July the Registry Bill was introduced by Mr.Wilberforce, and read a first time. It had for sometimebeen determined to carry it no further tillanother session. West Indian hostility was risingmightily against it, and further efforts would at thismoment have been premature and dangerous. " Iam assured," he tells Mr. Macaulay, " that they aremustering all their forces and all their natural alliesagainst* us, with the most assiduous diligence andsystematic array. The Bristol merchants are joiningthe general body of our opponents. Rememberthat we were challenged to prove in a committee thetruth of our allegations, that slaves are smuggled, andalso that the abuses we charge do really exist. Doconsider about getting evidence from the West Indies26 i LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1815.against the next session. If we could get the leadingparticulars of our allegations concerning the state ofthe slaves established by positive testimony, the effectdepend on it would be considerable." A tragicalevent marked painfully the conclusion of the session.On the 6th, and more fully on the 7th, he wasshocked to hear of Whitbread's death having destroyedhimself. It must have been insanity, as thejury immediately found it. Oh how little are weduly thankful for being kept from such catastrophes !Doubtless the devil's instigation." " The newspapers,"he writes on the same day to Zachary Macaulay," will state to you the dreadful end of poorWhitbread. I need not say how much the event hasshocked me. There can be no doubt of insanityhaving been the cause, and from, what is said the impulsemust have been sudden. Are not such actsmost probably to be referred to the evil spirit's operation?"He found some slight alleviation of thesepainful feelings, in bearing witness on the 11th, whena new writ for Bedford town was moved for, " in afew words which I found pleased his friends," to thethoroughly English character of this rugged butmanly statesman.A few days later he writes to Hannah More."Near London, July 19, 1815.My dear Friend,I cannot tell how it has hurt me to hear thatyou had been throwing out a plaint of never hearingfrom me, in such a way as to indicate the wounding1815. TO HANNAH MORE. 265of the friendly heart from which it came. If I hadwritten to you as often as I have thought of you, Ican truly say you would have had no more frequentcorrespondent. But alas, my friend, think of mysituation. Truly I may say with Falstaff, though Itrust with some difference, (I feel however as if Iwere guilty of Falstaff's selfishness in making theremark,) Men of all sorts take a pride to gird at me.Men ! aye, and women too. For it is not twenty-fourhours since a young female of twenty came into mylibrary, whose first words when we were alone were,I have run away, Mr. Wilberforce.' And a long pieceof business have I had with this young fugitive whosecompanion however I am assured is of her own sexher maid-servant. But the truth is, I have beenand still am in a continual state of struggling to preventmy sinking into an abyss of unanswered letters,unread papers, unfinished business. I am like a manhunted on all sides by his creditors, and striving invain to stop the growing accumulation, if not to payoff the old arrears. Pity me therefore, my goodfriend, instead of blaming me take my part ratherdefend me against myself put me again into goodhumour with myself.I have been for some time about to state to youthat I was coming with W. and a young friend ofhis into your neighbourhood for a tour, and that Icertainly could not resist the attraction of BarleyWood. I am just now trying to wind up matters,in order to enable me to quit this place ; butnew claims are continually recurring. Let me notVOL. IV. N266 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1815.however run off again into the same lamentation.What events have we witnessed both in public andprivate life ! Poor Whitbread, what a close, alas ! Hewas certainly however deranged. But oh, how doesall enforce on us the important truth that we mustacquaint ourselves with God to be at peace ! Hopingere long to see you, I will not now enlarge. Farewell,my dear friend, believe me,Ever yours sincerely and affectionately,W. WILBERFORCE."Though travelling was " beyond measure gratifying" to him, this was the first excursion of the kindwhich he had made for five-and-thirty years. Itschief features may be traced in the interesting hintsand graphic entries of his Diary and letters. Oxfordwas one of his first halts, whence he writes on the25th to his family at Brighton, " I am pretty well today,though I was attacked by one of my little enemieswithin a quarter of an hour of my entering theinn, (the landlord had never had a flea in his house, Ithink, for twenty years !) and afterwards seized the delinquentin the very act of hostility, and subjected himto the water ordeal, whence he would have as littlechance of escaping by fair means, as the unhappy victimsof superstition who used to be disposed of in thatway ; but an unfortunate oversetting of the bason relievingthe petite bete, like Buonaparte fresh fromElba the immediate use he made of liberty was torenew hostilities, which kept me broad awake tillbetween five and six this morning : yet I am pretty1815. DEVONSHIRE. 267well ; travelling suits me admirably. We are goingon to see Blenheim immediately." Here " the day"was " delightful, and the park beautiful. The firstspectacle gorgeously magnificent, like the Duke ofMarlborough at the head of his 100,000 men."Cirencester with its " beautiful church whitewashed,alas!" and Bristol where he " dined with Brother,whom alone of the West Indian merchants " he foundfor the Register Bill, while all the rest are combiningagainst us with systematic zeal" passed him on toWinter Abbey and the Wye. Barley Wood was notforgotten ; reaching it upon the 3rd of August, hewas " most kindly welcomed," cheered with " muchtalk," and " greatly interested by hearing some ofPatty's materials for Hannah's Life, who, to my surprise,just seventy. It is surprising how mind supportsitself in them against body." On the 4th he"left them as at all other times unwillingly," andspent a quiet Sunday at Munster, more to his mindthan another which soon followed, on which he complainsthat " a grand dinner, even though with bet-perishsort of people, is upon Sunday quite out of concertpitch." Hence he plunged into the beauties andsolitudes of northern Devonshire ; crossing " PollockHill," with its <e wild deer all over, to the beautifulopening into Linton Vale, and the romantic valley ofRocks." Here he enjoyed te a delightful summer'sday," on which (Aug. 9th) " he wrote letters, morning,and followed the rest about three to the brink ofthe two little rivers, and dined in a most romanticvalley. At C. my name being mentioned the bellsN 2268 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1815.set a ringing, and the people would take nothing, insistingon my services years ago Abolition I believe."His tour lasted for another fortnight, bringing himby the 26th of August to his family at Brighton,where blessed be God found all well, after an absenceof five weeks and a day." His birth-day hadjust passed under a friend's hospitable roof. " I hopedas well as wished to get much time for private devotionson this important and most humiliating day, butpartly through my own fault, partly through dearW.'s keeping me in his room, I had very little. Yet Ihope the season has not elapsed without serious reflection; and as iron sharpened iron, oh may my spirit beincited by the good men here. W.'s little one, my godchild,received into the church. Dear W. all Christianfervour and love, but rather too fanciful ; yet oh howfar removed from the excesses of our dear s !There it is self-conceit operating through the mediumof religious doctrines. If even knowledge puffed up,how much more self-sufficiency ! I am tempted towaste time in W.'s library an immense variety, especiallyof old divinity." 17He was now fixed at Brighton, " a place," he tellsLord Teignmouth, t( at which you have so often been,that I need scarcely explain why it appears to me solike Piccadilly by the sea-side. And yet so situated,when I can forget that there are at this season of theyear woods that wave with all their leafy honours,I can delight in the fresh breeze from the sea, and in7 Diary Aug. 24.1815. FRENCH PROTESTANTS. 269the varied forms of the beautiful and sublime, whichthis single object exhibits. Again, coming down tothis, a strange place, I find an excellent house andevery other comfort, with security and peace, freefrom all fears of evil as well as from all actual molestation.What a highly favoured country is ours !Though before my late tour I knew, almost as well asI now do, that to the very extremities of our bodygeographical, or national, (shall I term it ?) the circulationwas vigorous, and the action in every part complete; yet I have a far more vivid impression of thissince I travelled through the most remote recesses ofDevonshire, and found every where all the comfortsand even luxuries of life ; no where in a fuller measurethan at a little inn at Lovely, a place which morethan equalled our utmost expectations,"He found "an immense accumulation of letters"waiting his return. "How can I clear away thearrear ? Surely it would cost me a month to do it, andis it tante ? Yet courtesy is a Christian duty. Mytime slides away insensibly, and though I get littledone I really have too little air and exercise." Manyof these letters were upon important matters, and requiredmuch time and thought. Amongst their subjectswere the state of religion in Ceylon, the Frenchand Spanish Slave Trade, and the persecutions whichwere at this time harassing the Protestants of France.The holding public meetings on this subject waswarmly pressed upon him ; but having ascertainedfrom a correspondence with Lord Liverpool, " thatour government had exerted itself with the French270 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1815.government, and the French government with itssubjects' 18 he advised, with his usual discretion,that there should be no kindling of the flame here.There would be a danger of rendering the Protestantcause in general, schools and all, unpopular in France,from being connected with England. They would saywe were forcing our religion on them ; whereas if welet them alone, the bulk, who are indifferent in religionand friends to the charter, would be friendly tothe Protestants. But I approve of subscribing forthem, guarding against misapplying the money." 19His letters were not his only occupation ; he wasagain called to an attendance in the house of mourning.Even you would be shocked," he writes to ZacharyMacaulay, (( at such a terrific mass of unansweredletters as environs me, and I am pressed for time, forI have an invalid friend here who, having no othercomforter, occupies much of my attention." Besidesthis friend a young Cambridge student, over whomhe watched with the kindness of a father the state ofMrs. Henry Thornton claimed much of his attention.It was but too evident that she was following herhusband to the grave. " I was extremely shocked byher first appearance," he tells Mr. Macaulay on the15th of September, " but I really hope she is ratherbetter since her arrival. The weather has been andnow is the most unfavourable possible ; a cold eastwind morning and evening, and an intensely burningsun all day, and a sultry feeling in the air beyond the18 Diary. Vid. Correspondence, &c.'9 Diary.1815. MRS. HENRY THORNTON. 271actual heat. Till I saw her I was sanguine in myhopes ; I own I am now greatly alarmed." " I amthankful," he continues on the day following, " to saythat the east wind has given place to a genial westwind, and I hope dear Mrs. Henry Thornton will feelthe benefit of the change. I am so sure that all thedispensations of Providence towards that family,must be dispensations of love and not of anger ; thatin my serious moments I can be sure the welfare of thechildren will be provided for by Him who has emphaticallycalled Himself < the Father of the fatherless.'But if it be His will, may her valuable life be sparedto them." " I fear," he says on the 27th, " I have beenmisled into too favourable an opinion of Mrs. Thornton'scase, and I have touched in conversing with heras strongly as I could on the guardianship of her childrenin the event of her death. I fear it might bedeemed superstitious, but I own the coming forwardof such excellent and childless people to execute thetrust has appeared to me strikingly ominous of themother's removal."The termination of her sufferings was hastening onwith the sure but unsuspected progress of rapid pulmonaryconsumption. " All this time Mrs. H. Thorntongradually declining I fear, though we are doubtfulsometimes if she is not getting a little better." Onthe 3rd, " Macaulay and I were with her reading herapaper for her will an affecting interview 1 couldscarcely understand her speaking ; she is in a sweetstate." On the 11th of October she was " sinkingrapidly," and on the morning of the 13th he writes to272 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1815.Macaulay ; " All is over she died last night at half-pasteleven, and so peacefully did our friend depart,that even her children who were all round the bed,and leaning on it, were not sensible of the moment ofher expiring. I am not clear I was not myself present."" For several days before her death, I hadread and prayed with her, and written to their friends ; "and from her dying-bed he went on the last morningof her life to a meeting of the Brighton Auxiliary BibleSociety. " When he entered the room' says an eyewitness," he seemed so pale and fatigued, that hisfriends feared he would scarcely be able to speak. Buthe no sooner entered on his subject than his countenancewas lighted up, he became animated andimpressive."Had it not been," he said, " for one painful circumstance,it was not my intention to have been present atthis meeting to-day, for I have been compelled to curbthe zeal which I always feel to attend on occasions likethis, by making it a rule to myself to decline being presentat such meetings in places of which I am not aregular inhabitant, that I may not become too obviousand intrusive. But to-day I have broken this rule, forI am just come from a scene in which the value of thebook which it is your object to disperse, is displayedas with a sunbeam. I dare not withhold such a testimonyas it furnishes to the healing and victoriousefficacy of the inspired volume. I am come from achamber, in which a widowed mother, surrounded byher soon to become orphan family, is enabled to lookthe last enemy calmly in the face ; herself possessing1815. DEATH OF FRIENDS. 273a peace which even the waves of Jordan cannot ruffle,because it is the gift of God ; her children in somedegree enabled to anticipate for her the hope of glory.It is a scene which must be witnessed to produce itsfull effect upon the heart, a scene such as, if I had notmyself witnessed, I could not have adequately imagineda happiness felt in the moments of the deepestoutward dejection and sorrow, an elevation above theevils and trials of this mortal life. Trials did I callthem ? Triumphs let me rather say of the believer'sfaith. And let me ask, is this consolation in affliction,this hope in death, any thing peculiar to theirparticular circumstances or temper of mind, any familysecret which they alone possess, and from which meningeneral are excluded ? No, sir, it is that which theblessed word of God offers to all who will embrace it ;and therefore how could I but come, and congratulateyou and this assembly on being permitted to be thehonoured instruments of the Almighty, in diffusingsuch a cordial as this through a dying world ? Howcould I but rejoice in being allowed to join withyou in endeavouring to circulate these imperishableblessings ?It is true indeed, some tears of mortality will fall,when we see a friend descending into the dark valleyof the shadow of death, and the mortal framesuffering its last agonies. ' Jesus wept,' and He willallow His people to weep also; He will pardon andpity the tears we shed from human infirmity. Butnotwithstanding this natural sorrow, it is the blessedprivilege of the work in which we are engaged, thatN 3274 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1815.whilst its end is glory to God in the highest, the wayby which it conducts us is pleasantness and peace ;and it gives us substantial victory over that lastenemy, whom, sooner or later, we must all of us individuallyencounter. For it is not only in the din andconfusion of battle that the spirit may be so raised asto brave danger, and not turn away the eye fromdeath when it stares you in the face. This may arisefrom the mere excitement of the occasion, or fromdriving away all thought about the consequences ofdeath. But in the cool and silent hours of reflection,a nobler and more genuine courage may be evinced ;and in the chamber of sickness, and from the bed ofdeath, the soul, leaning on the word of her God, maymeet that enemy without alarm, and calmly say, ' Odeath, where is thy sting ? O grave, where is thyvictory'"Never surely," was his private reflection, " wasthere such a tranquil scene as Mrs. Henry Thornton'sdeath." " I am almost tempted to think I seea present explanation of the mysterious providenceby which the mother of these nine orphans hasbeen taken away, when I witness the depth of pietywhich it has made manifest. It is a fine remark, Ithink of Bishop Butler's, that though there be nopain nor cause for resignation in heaven, there maybebenefits from resignation and other tempers whichearthly pain has contributed to produce." In thefollowing week he followed her remains to London,and on the 19th of October attended at her funeral.Went there with Stephen. How strangely are we1815. CORRESPONDENCE. 275constituted ! I have often been more affected by avery trifle."Business 20 and friends gathered round him beforehe could again rejoin his family. " The good Dean'sold saying," he writes to Brighton on the 20th,has been already a little verified; that I mean ofmy drawing a tail to me wherever I may be. C. anddear Lord Teignmouth have been here, and they, andI believe three more, are to dine here at half-pastfour." " I will use my pen no more," he ends a notewritten on a following Sunday, " than to expresswhat however I express much more at large on myknees, my earnest wishes that God's best blessingsmay be ever strewed abundantly upon you all. Oh !how blessed will be that day, when after all our conflictsand anxieties we shall be made partakers of thatrest which remaineth for the people of God ! Oh letus all strive lest a promise being left us of enteringinto His rest, any of us should seem to come short ofit. But if we give diligence to make our calling andelection sure, we never shall, we never can fais for thepromises of the God of truth are the pledges of oursecurity. But let us all remember that if we wouldbe admitted hereafter into heaven we must be mademeet for it here. That striking passage in the 8th ofRomans quite haunts me f If any man have notthe Spirit of Christ he is none of His.' Oh let thisthought quicken our endeavours and our prayers."On the 14th of November he returned to Brighton,uo One entry should be saved. " Late up rooting amongst my papers,burning Crebillon, &c."276 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1815.and to business, for he complains, " I cannot evenread during the day all the letters which the morning'spost has heaped upon me : twice within the lastfew days I have had five or six packets beyond mynumber." tf I will give you the precedence," hewrites to Mr. Bankes, 21 t( over many business correspondentswho are clamouring around me, happily indumb show, for otherwise no dog-kennel would evergive a more dissonant chorus of discordant soundsthan my pro tempore study at Brighton. A watering-placeis in general parlance so commonly understoodas a synonymous term with an idling-place, that anabsent friend who knew I was here, might suppose Ihad no hinderance but indolence to writing to him asoften and as largely as he might wish. Yet I assureyou I have never been more occupied. While Mrs.Henry Thornton lingered on her dying sofa, (reallya sober triumph if ever there was one in such a situation,)I was much and frequently with her and herfamily. And now I have correspondence on importantsubjects with all the four quarters of the globe.In fact my letters, it is grievous, deeply grievous tosay, leave me scarcely any time for reading, which Ibelieve no man loves better than myself still less forwriting, for which also I have a wish."In the midst of these over-occupations, he perceivedwith no great pleasure a new feature of resemblanceadded to " Piccadilly by the sea-side," in the presenceof the Prince Regent, and the consequentclaims of the court and society upon his straitenedNov. 37.1815. PAVILION. 277time. " I at the Pavilion once. The ministers havebeen down with the Prince for two or three dayseach. Lord Sidmouth and Bathurst called on meyesterday. Lord Castlereagh before. The foreignministers there also. Lord St. Helen's and Carletonhere. The Queen here about a week. The Pavilionin Chinese style beautiful and tasty," 22 " though itlooks' he added, " very much as if St. Paul's hadcome down to the sea and left behind a litter ofcupolas. When there, the Prince and Duke ofClarence too very civil. Prince showed he had readCobbett. Spoke strongly of the blasphemy of hislate papers, and most justly. I was asked again lastnight, and to-night ; but declined, not being well."This excuse however would not long serve, and threedays afterwards he was again /f at the Pavilion thePrince came up to me and reminded me of my singingat the Duchess of Devonshire's ball in 1782, of theparticular song, and of our then first knowing eachother." 23 " We are both I trust much altered since,sir," was his answer. " Yes, the time which hasgone by must have made a great alteration in us."Something better than that too, I trust, sir." 24 et Hethen asked me to dine with him the next day, assuringme that I should hear nothing in his house to give mepain, . . alluding to a rash expression of one of histrain, when I declined the other day f Mr. Wilberforcewill not dine with you, sir,' 25 . . that even if thereshould be at another time, there should not be whenDiary. Ib. ** Con. Mem. * Ib.278 LIFE OP WILBERFORCE. 1815.I was there. At dinner I sat between Lord Ellen-boroughand Sir James Graham. The Prince desiredI might be brought forward." 26At night in coming away I opened to Bloomfield, verycivilly as I am sure I ought, saying I felt the Prince'skindness, but told him that it was inconvenient to meto come to the Pavilion often children causa. He atonce said, I understand you. When I next saw thePrince, he gave me a kind and general invitation. Iheard afterwards that Lord Ellenborough was askedto Pavilion expressly to meet me. I was glad to hearit, as indicating that I was deemed particular as to mycompany. What misrepresentations of facts ! Stephenheard that the Prince's speech to me wheninviting me intimated that if I came hereafter I musttake my chance ; that commonly the talk was such asI should dislike to hear. The direct contrary wasthe fact." Several times in the ensuing weeks he wasagain a guest at the Pavilion, and met always withthe same treatment. " The Prince is quite the Englishgentleman at the head of his own table." " I wasconsulted by the Queen's desire, whether proper tokeep the Queen's birth-day which fell on the .I replied that not wrong, but ratherdoubtful. I went myself, being forced to obey thesergeant and summons, otherwise should have deemedit for me ineligible, and therefore wrong ; but nowwent to mark my distinction. The party very largeand splendid. The Ladies sweetly unaffected and26 Diary.1815. INTERRUPTIONS. 279kind Princess Charlotte still shy introduced to thebearded Lord P. and found him under that strangeexterior very mild and pleasing."No, my dear Stephen," he wrote in reply tothe playful taunt, " you will live to be a peer at last,"I am not afraid of declaring that I shall go out ofthe world plain William Wilberforce. In one viewindeed I seldom have had less reason to be dissatisfiedwith that less dignified style : I mean in the degreeof civility or even respect to which even plainW. W. may be deemed entitled. For really had Ibeen covered with titles and ribands, I could nothave been treated with more real, unaffected, apparentlycondescending, and therefore more unostentatiouscivility. But, alas ! still better reasons suggestthe same dispositions. I become more and moreimpressed with the truth of good old Baxter's declaration,that ' the great and the rich of this worldare much to be pitied;' and I am continually thankfulfor not having been led to obtain a station whichwould have placed my children in circumstances ofgreatly increased danger."All this society and the late hours it caused, greatlyinterfered with his regular employment. " What,"he wrote on the day of his last visit to the Pavilion,what with leave-takings and homage-paying . . thedisloyal habits of Chancery Lane 7 if not second childishness,may have rendered even Masters forgetfulthat this is in the Court Calendar the Queen's birthThe present town residence of his brother Mr. Stephen, a Masterin Chancery.280 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1815.day, . . and episcopal 28 visitations, and interruptionsof the 01 Uo\\oi what with all these, I say, mypoor day has been run away with, so that I shallscarce have any time at my own command before Ipay my court at the Pavilion. But it is not to-nightonly ; yesterday, and the day before, and the day beforethat, I have been worried almost as incessantly.This place is to me far more public than London, orrather than Kensington Gore. Oh how thankful I amthat my wife is not one of the Pavilion-monger ladies,about to bring out her daughters ! " But it was notmerely the interruption of his hours. " This Pavilion-goingI find," he says, "injurious even to myself;how much more so must it be to young people, especiallyyoung handsome women ! "Nor was this a merely passing feeling. On thefirst Sunday after his return to London, he says,( I am fresh from Brighton, a place much to beavoided in the winter except for some special purposeswishing to see the Prince, or some other persons,whom one would meet only there. It must beabad place for the generality of young women ; infusinga pleasure-loving, dissipated spirit. Howdifferent this from crucifying the flesh with the affectionsand lusts, and making no preparation for theflesh to fulfil the lusts thereof ! How ill-suited to thebaptismal engagement to resist the pomps and vanitiesof this wicked world ! I find it steals on myselfthough so advanced in years. And it must do harmto them, for they associate with you freely, yet not^ To the Archbishop of York.1815. RETROSPECT OF THE YEAR. 281confidentially. You never can have a te"te-a-tete.This is bad the very evil of the lawyers' systemfamiliarity even to coarseness, yet no real cordiality oreven frankness except in rare instances."With him and his meanwhile, the year had closedwith thoughts of soberness and prayer. "What achange has a single year and less made in the circleof my acquaintance ! Mr. Henry Thornton and hiswidow, and their excellent young friend and mine,Mr. Bowdler, who was carried off just when he wasabout to be married to the daughter of another friend.Mrs. Henry Thornton dying at this place, it was myprivilege to be much with her in her latter days, and amore peaceful, humble, grateful, hopeful death I cannotconceive. ' I trust,' she said a few days beforeher decease, ' God is gently leading me to that blessedworld which He has prepared for those that love Him.'I thank God we are well. We overflow with blessings."Sunday, Dec. 31st. Church morning. Afterchurch, we and our six children together I addressedthem all collected, and afterwards solemn prayer.How little likely on the 30th May, 1797, when I married,that we and all our six children (we never hadanother) should all be living and well ! Praise theLord, O my soul."CHAPTER XXXI.JANUARY 1816 TO JULY 1817.West Indian opposition to Registry Bill Feelings underabuse Spanish Abolition Postponement of Registry Insurrectionin Barbadoes Speech in parliament MonkLewis Sessional business Property tax Poor reliefEarlham Sister's death Hustings West Indian Distressesof the country Secret Committee Illness LotteryDiary Second Report of Secret Committee HabeasCorpus Suspension Act debate Spanish Abolition.THE year 1816 opened with a storm of opposition,well fitted to try the firmness and ascertain the realprinciples of the proposer of the Negro Registration.The stream runs most strongly against us. Marryatt'sviolent and rude publication, Matthison's more fair,and Hubert's well-timed one, all come out to meetus at the first opening of parliament. But how vast isthe influence of government ; it is of that only we areafraid ! Yet our cause is good, and let us not fear ;assuredly God will ultimately vindicate the side ofjustice and mercy. Marryatt's new pamphlet is extremelybitter against my religious profession, thinking1816. FEELINGS UNDER ABUSE. 283that nail will drive. Poor fellow ! I hope I can bearhim no ill will, but allow for,, and pity him." iIt was comparatively easy to throw aside one or twosuch attacks, but it became a real trial of his principleswhen they were daily repeated throughout years ofpatient perseverance in efforts for the good of others ;when scandalous insinuations were multiplied, and everydayproduced a new set of slanders of such an aggravatedkind, that " if they had been true," he told theHouse of Commons, 2 " nothing but a special Providencecould have prevented my being hanged fullthirty years ago." Yet he stood the trial ; never inhis most unguarded hours did he manifest any bitternessof feeling ; never in public was he led into angryrecrimination. Often did he provoke some of hismore impetuous colleagues by taking the part of theWest Indian planter suggesting excuses for his conductalleging that there was no class of personswhom it was so much the interest of the actualmanagers to keep in darkness as to the abuses of thesystem and so extenuating their moral guilt that hedrew upon himself a portion of the storm whichlowered over his West Indian slanderers. His severestpublic answer was an apt quotation of thewords of Gibbon to an abusive assailant " Everyanimal employs the note, or cry, or howl, which ispeculiar to its species ; every man expresses himself inthe dialect most congenial to his temper and inclination,the most familiar to the company in which he haslived, and to the authors with whom he is conversant."Diary, Feb. 14. * Debate, May 22.284 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1816.On behalf of others whose characters were lessascertained he felt something more. Yet even here,where anger putting on a virtuous semblance is mostreadily excused, there was the same high and sobertone of feeling. " I trust," he writes to Mr. Macaulay,that it will please God to spare you long to yourfamily, your friends, and mankind; and the rather because. . though it is of very little consequence to ourselveswhen we are gone, what may have been, ormay be hereafter, said or thought of us on earth . . yetfor the sake of others, and the general interests of religionand morals, I do wish that you may continueamongst us to live down those base and wickedfalsehoods "to which your African and West Indianwarfare has exposed you. Though the wealth andactivity of our opponents may obtain for a time possessionof the public mind, depend on it their hold willnot be lasting. May we be enabled to maintain aChristian frame of spirit amidst all these irritatinghostilities, and remember that they will by and byappear only like the barking of the cottage curs onour passing through a village, when on our progressin the journey of life."He set therefore steadily down to the work beforehim, and would have pressed forward his RegistrationBill, if he had not been arrested asbefore by the evident interests of the cause. Spainand Portugal were now the only European nationswho continued the accursed Trade ; and Portugalhad agreed to present restrictions, and a speedy Abolition.Spanish co-operation was now therefore of1816. SPANISH ABOLITION. 285the first importance, and the hope of gaining itstaid once more his hand. On the 29th of Marchhe communicates to Mr. Stephen this rising dawnof hope.Downing Street, Friday, March 29.My dear Stephen,With unfeigned joy I state to you, that I havejust heard from Lord Castlereagh that the council ofthe Indies, to which the whole question of the Abolitionhad been referred by the Spanish government,had reported in favour of total and immediate Abolition.But a minority of seven, of whom one haslarge property in Cuba, had protested against theothers and made a separate report. Even they howeverhave recommended abolishing north of the Lineimmediately, and totally in five years. But all thecouncil seems to wish to make it a condition, thatwe should give them money, or at least give uptheir captured ships. Lord C. therefore says, itis of great importance not to talk of the thing atpresent.Last, but scarcely least, it appears that LordCastlereagh made good use of your pamphlet 3 inimpressing the Spaniards, and that they are afraid ofour quarrelling with them. Let us bless God, andpray, and hope for the best.I am much too late for dinner, but I could not3 A Spanish pamphlet also, formed by the Rev. Blanc White out ofMr. Wilberforce's Letter to his Constituents, is said to have had considerableeffect at Madrid.286 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1816.go to it at Lord Harrowby's, till after writing to you.I will call on you on my way tomorrow to dine at theDuke of Gloucester's.Ever affectionately yours,W. WILBERFORCE."To secure this step he consented to delay his effortsfor the internal regulation of our own possessions.Depend on it," he urges upon Mr. Stephen, " theloud cry which would be set up that we were fomentinginsurrections among the slaves, would operatepowerfully against us in the Spanish Cabinet no lessthan our apparent weakness. If Lord Castlereaghsays that probably the Spaniards will abolish entirely,and that then there will be no urgent reason for pressingthe Registry Bill, we shall lose many even ofthose who had been disposed to support us." Aftera. consultation therefore with the principal supportersof his cause, (( Romilly, Brougham, Homer, WilliamSmith, Macaulay, Stephen," he determined " not tobring on the Registry Bill ; but to find some motionto which government would agree, and which wouldyet produce discussion." 4At this critical moment the news of a dangerousinsurrection in Barbadoes, armed the West Indianswith new weapons of assault. " If in such a worldas this," he writes to Mr. Babington, 5 (e we were notto expect to be calumniated, it would seem beyondwhat one should be prepared for, to find our WestIndian opponents charging us with the effects of their1 Diary, May 3. 3 June 7.1816, BARBADOES INSURRECTION. 287own presumption and folly. From the very earliestAbolition efforts they kept clamouring, ' It is emancipationyou mean, you mean to make our slaves free ; 'we all the time denying it. At length wonderfulthat not before the slaves themselves begin to believeit, and to take measures for securing the privilege ;in short the artillery they had loaded so high againstus, bursts among themselves, and they impute to usthe loading and pointing of it."This same charge he fixed publicly upon hisopponents, in proposing to the House the motionon which he had decided." 6 After proving theconsistency of his past conduct, and declaring hisresolution to attempt every practicable ameliorationin the condition of the negroes, " I am naturallyled," he continues, " to the consideration of anotherextremely painful topic, though even here my concernis mixed with surprise at the sort of argumentsemployed against me. The House will be noless astonished than myself when I say that some personshave even gone the length of charging upon thesupporters of the Registry Bill the insurrection ofwhich intelligence has so lately been received. Ifgentlemen will only act fairly with themselves, I protestthat I think it impossible such a notion shouldfor a moment be entertained, and I will state why.Ever since the year 1789, those persons who resistall improvement in the condition of the negroes havebeen reiterating the cry against us, f What then, youmean to make the slaves free ! You intend to eman-6 June 19.288 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1816.cipate them all at once and without the least notice.'It might be supposed that our opponents would haveabandoned this position after we had gone on fortwenty-seven years constantly refuting it. But no,they still persevere. ' We have not many good argumentsto use,' they may truly assert, ' and we mustemploy to the utmost such as we are able to fabricate.'Nor have they confined their assertions to thisHouse or to this country, but they have actuallyprinted and published in the West Indies that thedesign of the friends of the Abolition was to makeall slaves instantly free. In short there is nothinghowever monstrous, however dangerous to the tranquillityof our islands, which they have not laid opento the eyes and ears of all the inhabitants of theWest Indies. I state it as a fact that these thingswere published ; and the poor creatures however degradedwere not in such a state of absolute brutality asnot to be operated upon by some of the passions thatactuate the rest of their species. Though unable toread, the domestic slaves would obtain and promulgatethe notion that their friends in Great Britain werelabouring to give them liberty, while their masterswere the only persons who opposed it. I beg leavetherefore to say distinctly, that I and my friends areclear of the blood so unhappily shed ; let those lookto it whose consciences accuse them as the instigatorsof the commotion. I can lay my hand upon myheart and feel it beat with the regular pulsation of apeaceful conscience."Towards the close of his speech, he noticed the1816. ANSWER TO ATTACKS. 289prejudices which had taken possession of the publicmind, and the personal calumnies by which they hadbeen in part occasioned. " When I consider' hesaid, " the actual condition of the negroes in the WestIndies ; when I call to mind the country in which Ilive, and reflect upon the nature of the heads andhearts of its inhabitants, slow perhaps of conviction,but certain to do justice in the end ; when I look backto the sort of opposition which my honourable friendsand myself, the advocates of the Abolition, have experiencedduring the last twenty-eight years ; whenI recollect the discussions through which we had topass with the Slave-carrying Bill, the Middle-passageBill (to remedy a few of the horrors of that dreadfulvoyage,) which it was so often declared would beruinous to the West Indies ; when I remember alsothat the Abolition was for a long time in the mosthopeless condition ; that many of its friends began todespair of the issue ; that we had to struggle againstthe winds, and buffet with the billows, until our strengthbegan to be exhausted, and our spirits almost to failus, yet at last reached a port of safety ; when I knowwhat power it was that led us and animated us ; andthat the good sense and benevolence of the people ofEngland at last triumphed ; I say, when I see allthese things, I cannot help declaring my full persuasionthat when our cause and its objects are fully understood,we shall be as successful with our future aswith our former measures.At least we have gained some experience in thecontest to which we have been exposed ; and the sameVOL. iv. o290 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1816.weapons are now employed against us that were used inall our former battles, though they may have been alittle furbished up to give them a new appearance.The grand arguments against us are derived fromwhat are called Methodism and fanaticism. Whatgentlemen mean by the terms I am not very wellaware, and I may doubt perhaps if' they themselvesknow ; but this I will say if to be feelinglyalive to the sufferings of my fellow-creatures and tQbe warmed with the desire of relieving their distresses,is to be a fanatic, I am one of the most incurable fanaticsever permitted to be at large. At least such Iknow I should wish to be ; and as the harsh treatmentadopted by the other side to cure me does not at allsuit my complaint, and is not likely to produce anychange, I really would recommend them to alter theirregimen. For however loudly one honourable gentlemanurges the charge of fanaticism, he is not morehappy in his exertions than his predecessors in thesame attempt. He does it a little more roughly certainly,but that I ascribe to his Agency. The honourablegentleman is in such a situation that he must actas he has done : he has no choice, no will of his own :he is bound by virtue of his office to make these attacks.His attack at one time was conducted in such astrain that it did occur to me, whether by the usualforms of this House he was at liberty to proceedas he had begun. But perhaps it is better as itstands ; upon second thoughts, it is rather a comfortablecircumstance than otherwise, because it is anomen of good. The experiment was tried before, and1816. CONFIDENCE OF SUCCESS. 291it failed ; and if I am opposed with the same weaponswhich I formerly vanquished, I have reason to thinkI shall again triumph. And I will say that eventuallywe depend for our success upon the very principle bywhich they endeavour to discredit our cause. I relyupon the religion of the people of this countrybecause the people of England are religious and moral,loving justice and hating iniquity, they consider theoppressed as their brethren whatever be their complexion; and they will feel more-especially for thedespised race of the blacks, because they find thatthey are so despised and degraded."After having declared that he would renew hismeasure in the following session, he offered no oppositionto an address, by which the Regent was requestedto express his disapprobation of the insubordinationwhich had appeared in the colonies, and to recommendto the local authorities to take measures for theimprovement and comfort of the negroes.There was nothing like despondency in the tone ofthese remarks ; and in truth, though he had consentedto delay his Bill, he had been labouring in many privateways to further its success. Thus on the 16th ofMarch, he says, " called on Lord Wellesley aboutRegister Bill, and talked with him over old times andpersons." 7 To Lord Liverpool he " stated honestlythe pain it would cost " him " to oppose his governmentsystematically on a question, which will I am clear, onthe long run, (though now people are uninformed andtherefore indifferent,) interest in our favour the bulk7 Diary.o 2292 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1816.of the religious and moral part of the community ;which will never sit quiet and leave 6 or 700,000human beings in a state of studiously preserved darknessand degradation." 8 The same views he pressedtoo on Lord Bathurst, te who assured me that he hadtold the West Indians frankly, he would next year passaRegistry Bill, if their colonial assemblies would notdo it. I guarded him against their doing it fraudulently; in words, but not in substance." 9 On everyside too he caught at the least opening for exertion,and in personal communication on the subject withsome of the more liberal-minded planters. " MonkLewis dined with me, to talk over Jamaica. I wentagain to town to see him ; he is I hope in earnest inwriting to me to secure the happiness of his slavesafter his death ; I am quite anxious to try to do somegood through this channel." 10Such instances as this (and it did not stand alone)deserve to find a place amongst the records of thispainful struggle. But, alas ! it was more frequentlyhis lot to find that distorted views of private interestchoked all such generous purposes ; converting sometimesinto the warmest enemies of personal freedomthose who professed to hold the most " liberal " politicalopinions. Such an instance, at this time, calledforth from Mr. Stephen one of those indignant burstsin which his ardent mind from time to time foundvent. " His letter," Mr. Stephen writes, " too plainlyshows that we may reckon on him as an opponentone of the last men I should have distrusted. As to9 Diary, May 2. 9 Ib. May 17. 10 Diary.1816. DEMOCRAT SLAVE-MASTERS. 293the pestilent cant of not prejudicing reformation byattempting ( alleged injustice and doing violence towell-founded scruples it would be trying to muchgreater patience than mine. What a violence was itto the well-founded scruples of Duke's Place, when receivingstolen goods was made felonious ! What allegedinjustice to prohibit frame-breaking and unlawfuloaths in Nottingham ! They should wait in Irelandto proclaim the counties till the carders and boys petition for it. But all similes are weak toillustrate the absurdity of expecting the assemblies toreform slavery, and shut out clandestine Slave Trade.This-instance added to others confirms my antipathyto liberty boys and democrats. In all humancharacter I know of nothing so detestable and contemptibleas a democrat slave-master or defender ofprivate slavery. I once was fool enough to thinkWhigs and Jacobins our sure friends, and thereforeshould have been a Whig or Jacobin myself, if theirprivate vices had not repelled me from their society.I still was fool enough to think that we should havezealous support from the opposition, when they foundgovernment against us. I find new reasons to bethankful that I broke with the latter about theRegistry Bill, for if I had not, I should have ascribedmuch or all of what I now see to political dislikeand hostility towards myself as the author of thatmeasure, coupled with a natural suspicion of my sincerity.It was to avoid this evil, as you know, andacheron movere that I acted as I did ; and if Imistook my men, at least I have escaped very painful294 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1816.self-reproaches by leaving them no excuse in my ownconduct.It has been more than once in my mind to writeto Lords Liverpool and Bathurst, and try to work ontheir generous and conscientious feelings by tellingthem in effect that the cause (Divine interpositionexcepted) is at their mercy ; that they have nothingto fear from our political' strength ; that the public issated with the subject and not to be roused ; and thatthe parliamentary Whigs and democrats are, with fewexceptions, rather hostile than friendly to us ; that itlies with them therefore, on their responsibility totheir own consciences and to God, to frustrate ormaintain the noblest work of human benevolence, tocorrect or perpetuate the most odious system of crueltyand wickedness that ever disgraced and cursedour species.""How I wish," replied Mr. Wilberforce, 11 "thatI could transport myself through the air to SunningHill, and pour forth in a quarter of an hour's talk theeffusions produced by your desponding letter ! I amstrongly tempted to employ an hour in writing toyou, but I must resist the impulse and only say thatI am persuaded your confinement to your desk 12 hasdiffused a gloomy tint over the whole of your prospects.It has made you judge unfairly of men aswell as things. Surely the present phenomena areeasily accounted for by two considerations ; that the11 June 6.12 Mr. Stephen was engaged in his great work, "The Slavery of theWest Indies delineated in Law and Fact."1816. HOPE OF SUCCESS. 295West Indian proprietors are extremely numerous, andthat their interest with its associated prejudices extendsits ramifications far and wide ; and, secondly,that the public in general is utterly uninformed onthis subject. By degrees however we must inform it.You must write for men of reading, sense, and especiallyof professional habits, and perhaps as before,virginius puisque canto, must be my motto ; orrather your concha must be ad cherub, mine ad populus; you must write for the bar and pulpit, and I forthe million. My chief fear is of another kind, thatProvidence is taking the matter into its own handand rendering the crimes of the West Indians theirown punishment."This calm and settled hope of ultimate success wasthe usual colour of his mind. " I have much to sayto you," he tells Hannah More, " about my RegistryBill, or rather about its object, the amelioration ofthe state of the poor slaves. Alas, alas, it grievesme to see the Bristol people so misled, but it really isentirely the effect of misinformation ; and I have toldDavis that I am sure they will agree with me, secretlyperhaps in three or four years, but avowedly before itbe much longer."Throughout this session he had taken far less partthan usual in its public business. A complaint on hischest hung upon him obstinately, and made himfear that I shall do little more good. Alas, that Ihave not laboured more to make the best use of myfaculties." 13 "It is a stroke which I own 1 feel;Diary, April 17.296 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1816.not I hope with a rebellious but with a humbled will ;yet I trust it may still please God to enable me touse my organs (and oh that it might be better in allways) in His service, and for the benefit of my fellow-creatures."14 He was obliged therefore for themost part to confine his exertions in the House to hisown proper business," 15 and to questions of a moralcast. As " a chamber counsel" 16 he was still labouringdiligently. Every year multiplied the privateclaimants on his time, and this year they abounded,from the tale of ordinary distress, and the throng ofbreakfasters," to the " Duke of Kent who morethan once called " on him " for two hours about hisaffairs, and why going abroad hardly used." Onsome few great occasions he came forward, andalways with effect. In the month of March " theopposition, of which Ponsonby " was " the head, butBrougham the most active, incessant, and bitter,"were <c pushing at government about the PropertyTax, or as it is the fashion with opposers to call it,and as it is pretty fairly called, the Income Tax.Many of government's friends are against them onthis question. I think that though in itself it wereright it would not be expedient." 17When a week after this entry the question camebefore the House, he declared this opinion in hisplace, and had no small effect in causing the defeatof ministry. " I spoke last of all, after LordCastlereagh, having been personally alluded to by14 Letter to Z. Macaulay Esq.H Diary. l Ib. '? Ib. May 10.1816. DISTRESSED MANUFACTURERS. 297him. I never remember producing more effect bya speech at the time, though there was no accountof it in the newspapers." At the end of the sessionhe took an active part in the exertions which weremade to provide relief for the pressing distresses ofthe times. " July 25th. Wrote to Vansittart aboutthe best way of relieving the present distresses preparatoryto the general meeting." His advice wasnot followed ; and when four days later he was (t atthe City of London Tavern, Distressed Manufacturers'meeting, with the Dukes of York, (chairman,) Kent,and Cambridge, Archbishop of Canterbury, Bishopof London, Duke of Rutland, and others, Lord Cochraneand a party of his friends made a grand row,grounded on our assigning false causes the very evil Ianticipated. A sad squally meeting, but got throughit pretty well altogether. The brutality of the peoplewas shocking, bursting into laughter when theBishop of London, being unused to public speaking,made a pause. I spoke to prevail on Lord Cochraneto give way. Though I was dissatisfied with myself,partly from matter, partly from voice which failed me,yet my speech was praised." At the sub-committeeof this association he attended as long as he remainedin the neighbourhood of London.Lowestoft on the Suffolk coast was the scene of hissummer retirement with his family. He had spentbut a few weeks there and in its neighbourhood, whenhe was called suddenly away by the illness of a friend.In how different a congregation," he writes to hiso 3298 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1816.family on the first Sunday he now spent at Bath,have I been from that of Wakefield ! 18 It reminded meof the difference between the twelve poor fishermen,(I did not till now recollect that yours are literallysuch,) who constituted the first asse-obliges of Christians,and the well-dressed and well-mannered meetingsof the high and the literary, who used to congregatefor their various purposes of devotion orinstruction. I thank God that our hopes are sanguineof the speedy amendment of our friend. ThoughI make it an invariable rule not to write letters onthe Sunday, except in cases of necessity and charity,yet on the principle of charity I may send you a fewfriendly lines. I need not assure you that on thisday you are all much in my thoughts. I hope youall feel grateful for being brought at once into sofriendly an intimacy with so excellent a family asthat at Earlham. 19 For my part I am still full ofEarlham, or rather of its inhabitants. One of ourgreat astronomers has stated it as probable that theremay be stars whose light has been travelling to usfrom the creation, and has not yet reached our littleplanet ; and thus some have accounted for new starsfirst observed by more recent astronomers. In thisEarlham family a new constellation has broke uponus, for which you must invent a name as you are fondof star-gazing ; and if it indicate a little monstrosity,(as they are apt to give the collections of stars thenames of strange creatures, dragons, and bears, &c.)19 A village near Lowestoft. l9 Joseph John Gurney's.1816, MRS. STEPHEN'S DEATH. 299the various parts of which the Earlham assemblage 20is made up, may justify some name indicative of queercombinations; only let it include also all that is tobe esteemed, and loved, and respected too, andcoveted."Before he had spent many days at Bath he receiveda hasty summons to attend upon his sister, who hadbeen suddenly attacked by dangerous sickness. Itwas a great shock to him. His other sisters hadbeen so early taken from them, that there had beennone to share or to divide the affection for each other,which had grown in them with their growth and years.Her affectionate admiration of her brother had beenrarely equalled, and affection was never wasted uponhim. He had parted with her a few weeks before atCambridge, and rejoiced " to see her better than shehad been for a long time past." He was thereforeunprepared for such a blow, and set off immediatelywith a heavy heart for Sunning Hill. " On arrivingI heard that my sister had died yesterday at fouro'clock. Poor Stephen much affected ! Liable tostrong paroxysms, at other times calm and prettycheerful. I prayed by my dear sister's body, andwith the face uncovered. Its fixedness very awful.I sat all the evening engaging Stephen, while thecoffin was adjusting below. How affecting all thesethings ; how little does the immortal spirit regard it !Looking at night, till near two o'clock this morning,Amongst the " large party " at the dinner table he mentions theBishop of Norwich, Col. B. and Lady Emily, Mr. Buxton, Mr. Cunningham,Mr. Hudson Gurney, &c.300 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1816.over my dear sister's letters many to and from myself,when she and I first in earnest in religion."Our separation from each other just at this time,"he writes to Lowestoft, " if it produces some pain,yet reminds us of the call we have for gratitude tothe Father of mercies, who has so long spared us toeach other. How can I but feel this, when our clearfriend's solitary situation is so forcibly impressed onme ! I indeed have lost a most affectionate sister, one,of whom I can truly say, that I believe there neverwas on earth a more tenderly attached, generous, andfaithful friend to a brother, who, though I hope notinsensible to her value, saw but little of her to maintainher affection, and of whom, alas, I could saymuch that might reasonably have abated the forceand cooled the warmth of her attachment.How affecting it is to leave the person we haveknown all our lives, on whom we should have been afraidto let the wind blow too roughly, to leave her in thecold ground alone ! This quite strikes my imaginationalways on such occasions. But there is another thingwhich has impressed itself in the present instance muchmore powerfully than in any other I ever remember,I mean in contemplating the face of our dead friendto observe the fixed amiableness of the features.Perhaps it struck me more in my sister's case becauseher countenance owed more of the effect it producedto the play of features than to their formation. Icould not get rid of the effect produced on me by thisstiff and cold fixedness for a long time. But oh it isthe spirit, the inhabitant of the earthly tenement,1816. MRS. STEPHEN'S DEATH. 301not the tenement itself, which was the real object ofour affection. How unspeakably valuable are theChristian doctrines and hopes in such circumstancesas ours ! We should not care much, if we believedthat the object of our tender regard had gone a fewdays before us a journey we ourselves should travel ;especially if we knew that the journey's end was to bealasting abode of perfect happiness. Nos blessed beGod, this is after all not an illustration. It is thereality. The only drawback with me here, is the consciousnessthat I have much to do for God, and theself-reproach for not having done it. Yet here alsoI can cast myself on the sure mercies of my God andSaviour ; and while I desire to do on each day theday's proper work, and to be more active and usefulthan I ever yet have been, still I can humbly hopethat if I should be taken hence with my work unfulfilled,He who said ( Thou didst well that it was inthine heart,' will graciously forgive my sins ; andthat my all-merciful Saviour will take me to Himselfout of the same superabundant goodness, which 1have ever experienced. For how true it is, (I amoften driven to this,) ' Thy thoughts are not as ourthoughts, nor Thy ways as our ways ; for as the heavensare higher than the earth, so are Thy ways higherthan our ways, and Thy thoughts than our thoughts ! 'I think I told you that my dear sister, when askedwhether God comforted her and gave her peace,said, ( O yes, so much so, as quite to put me to shamewhen I consider what a sinner I am.' She then exclaimedso like herself, ' I hope this is not cant ;'adding, however, ' I am sure it is not all so.' '302 LIFE OF Wilberforce. 1816.I am extremely pressed for time' he tells HannahMore, " but I am with you in heart. It is probablethat ere now your sister is no more. I begin,though with different accompaniments, to feel likeMacbeth ' acquainted with death.' O my dear friend,may all we most love be made ready, and may weourselves be more so. You may rejoice in that Godand Saviour who have blessed you, and made you ablessing to so many ; may you have a gradual and easyrelease, whenever it may be the will of God to removeyou. Your sister Patty, that generous creature ! hasbeen in my mind all the time I have been scribblingthese last sentences, and I have applied them mentallyto her. I must break off. Farewell."After a few days he returned to Bath, and staid inits neighbourhood until the 13th of November, whenhe set out by the London coach to join his family atKensington Gore. " Mr. H immediately recognisedme, and with stentorian voice left me no peacetill his whole tale was told. . . Inventor of Tram roads,founder of all great iron works in Monmouthshire,&c. . . Arrived safely D. G. at half-past ten at KensingtonGore, after travelling above 700 miles withouta single accident. The boys coming out immediatelyto me, and receiving me with humiliating kindnessGod bless them!" 21At his first leisure his thoughts were turned to theWest Indies. " I think," he tells Mr. Macaulay,that I ought to write, and affix my name to anappeal to Abolitionists for the purpose of undeceivingand rousing the public. Your * Sketches ' so far from81 Diary.1816. WORKS ON SLAVERY. 303being hereby superseded would be rendered more useful,and the same of Stephen's work ; to which it wouldserve in truth as an advertisement. For the chief valueof this will be, that we shall possess in it a repository ofprinciples and fundamental facts to which we ourselvesmay have recourse, and to which we may send others.It will also gradually, but not rapidly, fix the publicstandard of opinion on West India subjects so far asthe slaves are concerned, producing this effect throughthe medium of the first and second waters, who willread, write, and refer to it. But then all this implies,that so far from sufficing, it will require other meansof bringing it forward, and rendering it productive ofits due effects. Now tell me your mind honestly onthis head. Remember that my pamphlet will notproceed at the rapid rate of your works ; for thoughbut a mouse should come forth, the time of gestationwould be that almost of an elephant. But I mustbreak off. I am about to take my family for health'ssake to the coast. If your time of sea-siding be notexpired, why should you not come over, and spend alittle time at Hastings ; when together we can chafeeach other into warmth and sparkling ?Let me beg you to thank the General 22 for a verykind letter from Scotland. It gratified me by makingme in idea a party to his tour, but he did not tell mewhere he should alight, and I was always a bad hand atshooting flying. I will not treat him so ceremoniouslyas to take up my pen when inconvenient to myself, merelyto say I have answered him. If two friends pass eachw General Macaulay.304 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1816.other, and one having more leisure can stop and chat,and the other being pressed for time is forced to passon in silence, he is not therefore sulking. O my dearMacaulay, my dear sister enjoyed in her last illness ameasure of consolation and peace quite unusual withher in the seasons of health, and she is now doubtlessin paradise. Sit anima mea cum ilia. Farewell."Besides his preparations for this pamphlet, he wascorresponding with Lord Castlereagh on the variousstipulations of the Foreign Slave Trade. " Even forthis object," he tells Mr. Stephen, " I am better at adistance from London ; if I saw him from time totime, he would contrive to secure my acquiescence,so far as to prevent my afterwards objecting ; whereas,by my writing, he will have the effect of my letterdiffused over the whole course of the correspondence.Whatever weight is to be obtained from the idea ofmy parliamentary approbation or censure will remainentire, and I can strengthen his hands with theforeign ministers, by writing letters, part of which hemay read them."There had been no abatement of the storm, whichhad been raised against the Registration Bill. Itwas taken up as a colonial question. A voluntary taxupon every hogshead of sugar which passed the CustomHouse, was raised by the West Indians to opposethe measure ; and one and all clamoured loudlyagainst its proposers. All this tumult of calumnypassed over him almost unnoticed. At times indeedhe nearly roused himself to make some reply, lestthey should occupy the public mind, and prejudice1816. PERSONAL ATTACKS. 305his cause. But there is really no trace of any personalfeeling in any of his entries. " It is quiteshocking," he says to Mrs. Wilberforce of one ofhis fellow-labourers, whom these reports had greatlywounded, " to see the health of a man like endangeredhy the unprincipled calumnies of such avarlet as . He is in so nervous a state, that thereis great cause for serious alarm about him. It is anxiety,and even still more vexation at himself for beinganxious, which so harasses him. A cheerful temperis a great blessing, as I have abundant reason forsaying ; but has more cause for anxiety than Ihave." " The Speaker of the House of Assembly atBarbadoes," he tells Mr. Stephen, " has. made a veryscurrilous speech, and says he always thought you adangerous man. However, I can excuse their violence.Their feelings cannot but be wounded andacescent." " An acquaintance has sent me theCourier. A more scandalous attack I have seldomseen ; but I am rather animated than discouragedby it,"It was not merely cheerfulness of temper, onwhich this calm was based, there was a deeper andmore sure foundation for this high-minded peacefulnessunder perpetual provocation. " I get more andmore to disrelish these rawlings, and to be lesstouchy as to my character. This I fear is chieflyfrom advancing fears, and quiescence ; somethingfrom the decay of natural spirits, and some little Ihope from the growing indifference to human estimation,and from an increased value for peace and love.306 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1817.But it is our clear duty to prevent our good being evilspoken of, when we can do this by a fair and calmdefence ; and I very greatly deplore my not havingprepared an answer to Marryatt. His answer to onecharge, that he had pledged himself not to interferewith the condition of the slaves, deserves to be recorded." It is really true," he tells Mr. Stephen, 23 " as Imust one day state, (I grieve at my not having answeredMarryatt in print ; he very wisely never would enterinto controversy on. his legs,) that the condition ofthe West Indian slaves first drew my attention, andit was in the course of my inquiry, that I was led toAfrica and the Abolition. As long ago as in 1781,the very first year of my being in parliament, and whenI was not twenty-two years of age, I wrote a letter toJames Gordon expressing my hopes that some timeor other I might become the instrument of breaking,or at least easing, the yoke of these poor creatures "(the West Indian slaves). " I have for some timehad an idea of publishing Burke's plan with a preface,but not yet. Such a piece would be subsidiaryto your larger work, which is to make its way withlawyers, and gradually to alter the public standard,by convincing the people that set it. Reflection rendersme more and more confident that we shall, or atleast that they who live a few years will, see the beginningsof great reforms in the West Indies, as well asopening prospects of civilization in Africa. In thelatter instance I must even to you say that Pitt'sdeath has been an irreparable loss to us. He had23 Jan. 15.1817. PUBLIC MIND PREOCCUPIED. 307truly grand ideas on the topic of our moral and humanedebt to Africa. But still our cause is so goodthat I am clear we shall establish it in the judgmentof the religious part of the community." 24This was the calm confidence of a reasonable hope.While it was at the highest, he planned his measureswith deliberate judgment. 25 ' It is very grievous'he writes to Macaulay ten days later, " to be thusharassed with a set of snarling calumniators, for likeyou I long for peace and quietness. But I am verysorry I laye not written something in answer toMarryatt ; yet had I done so, it would have come outjust now when the nation is full of its own grievances,and we might incur the imputation of being indifferentto the sufferings of our countrymen, comparedwith our sensibility when a black skin is in question.I have for some time been unwillingly yieldingto a secret suggestion that it would be better perhapsto lie upon our oars in the Registry Bill, aridWest Indian cause. When parliament meets, thewhole nation, depend upon it, will be looking up forrelief from its own burthens, and it would betray anignorance of all tact to talk to them in such circumstancesof the sufferings of the slaves in the WestIndies. We should specially guard against appearingto have a world of our own, and to have little sympathywith the f sufferings of our countrymen."21 Jan. 17.25 In one of his MS. books dated Dec. 1816, among copious notices onthe state of the West Indies, appears the following remark :"Against precipitancy. Moses 80, Aaron 83 years old, when Godsent them to lead out the Israelites from Egypt. Abraham 100 years oldwhen Isaac born. Our Saviour himself 30 years old before he cameforth, having till then probably worked with his father at his trade."308 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1817.The distresses of the country soon called him to hispost ; and leaving his family at Hastings, he was intown by the opening of parliament upon the 28th ofJanuary, and found the political horizon unusuallydark. " We are here, (in the Secret Committee 6 ) " hewrites back to Hastings, " in the midst of accounts ofplots, &c., but a gracious Providence, I trust, watchesover us. Remember to pray in earnest against sedition,privy conspiracy, and rebellion." 27 " The SecretCommittee," he says three days later, "put off; andthe chief conspirators having been taken up the daybefore, all went off quietly to-day. House. LordMilton's business put off for ministers to be at theirposts, if there is a riot in Spa Fields. Hunt's secondmeeting." His time was now fully occupied. "Ifeel," he writes from the table of the Secret Committeeroom, " the effects of sitting up too late. Butdo not be uneasy, I am pretty well. Dear asksabout our Committee, though he very properly checkshimself. We are not to divulge ; but thus much I maysay, though do not let it be repeated out of doors, thatthe seizing of the ringleaders on Sunday last preventedbloodshed from the Spa Fields mob oh Monday.Hunt seems a foolish, mischief-making fellow,but no conspirator, though the tool of worse anddeeper villains. Cobbett is the most pernicious ofall ; but God will bless and keep us, 1 fear not ; and itis highly gratifying that all the truly religious classeshave nothing to do with the seditious proceedings.The blasphemous songs and papers of the seditiouswill disgust all who have any religion, or any decency."2 Appointed Feb. 5. * Feb. 8.1817. LETTERS TO HIS CHILDREN. 309So constant were at this time the calls on his attentionthat he assures Mr. Roberts, " you have perhapssupposed that now I am no longer member forYorkshire I have as much leisure as I can desire formy own enjoyment and the service of my friends. Ifsuch was your surmise, never I assure you were youmore mistaken. I do not find the smallest diminutionof the amount of my business, though there issome difference in its nature." Yet in the midst ofall this occupation the flow of his kindly natural affectionswas as warm and free as if his mind wasnever burthened by a single thought of business.Some of its expressions in his correspondence withhis family are peculiarly striking ; and his lettersthough written often in " those edging of time, whichlike the edging of cloth or other substances are theirleast valuable part' 28 are full of thought and manlytenderness. " Mr. R.'s last letter," he writes toHastings at this time, " suggests to me some verypainful fears that 's temper has been again ungoverneddear, dear boy. Though writing at theCommittee table with people all around me, I canscarce refrain from tears while I thus write abouthim. Oh that he would pray earnestly ! How sure Iam that he would then be blessed with grace, and beenabled to make our hearts leap for joy. Farewella thousand times God bless you all ! "This was the great aim of his parental watchfulness.O if I could but see them give up their hearts toGod," he says in another letter, " I think that I couldLetter to Z. Macaulay Esq.310 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1817.cheerfully lay down my life." " Above all, my dearest," he writes to one of them on his tenth birth-day,I am anxious to see in you decisive marks of thisgreat change. 1 come again and again to look and see ifit be indeed begun, just as a gardener walks up againand again to examine his fruit trees, and see if hispeaches are set, and if they are swelling and becominglarger ; finally, if they are becoming ripe androsy. I would willingly walk barefoot from this place "(near London) " to Sandgate, to see a clear proof of itin my dear at the end of my journey." " MayGod bless you, and if it be His will, may we be longspared to each other. I am strongly impressed witha persuasion that this will much depend on the goings-onof our children ; and as I have often said, let itbe with us an argument for growing in grace, that inproportion as we do thus cultivate an interest, if I mayso express it, in the court of Heaven, the more weshall insure our children's edification in answer toour earnest prayers"* 9Upon his busiest days he found time to write to them.Were it not," he tells one of his daughters, " thatmy eyes were so weak, and that, in such a state, writingby candle-light does not suit me, especially aftera full day's work following a bad night, you wouldhave received a good long letter instead of this sheet-ling.My last night's wakefulness arose in fact frommy thinking on some subjects of deep interest, fromwhich, though I made several efforts, I could notaltogether withdraw my thoughts. My mind obeyedso To Mrs. Wilberforce.1817. SUNDAY EMPLOYMENTS. 311me indeed while I continued wide awake, but when Iwas dropping half asleep it started aside from theserious and composing train of ideas to which I hadforced it up ; and like a swerving horse chose to goits own way rather than mine. I like to direct mylanguage as well as my thoughts and feeling towardsyou on a Saturday night, because it serves as a preparationfor that more continued mental intercoursewith you in which I allow myself on the Sunday.When I was a bachelor, and lived alone, I used to enliventhe dulness of a solitary Sunday dinner bymustering my friends around me in idea, and consideringhow I could benefit any of them ; and now howcan there be a more suitable employment of a part ofthe Lord's day, than thus to call my absent childrenround me ? And you, , and , will presentyourselves tomorrow ; and I shall pray that our greatheavenly Shepherd will number you amongst thesheep of His pasture, and guide you at last into Hisfold above."Many of these letters are highly indicative of hispeculiar character of mind, from their cheerfulnesssubsiding into serious thought as affection stirred thedeeper current of his feelings. Thus to one of hisyounger sons 30 he writes from London.House of Commons."My dear ,I take advantage of a dull speech to come upstairsand chat a little with my dear , though I11.312 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1817.heartily regret that I alone can he the speaker, for Ishould gladly hear my dear hoy's voice and see hiscountenance. Yesterday was the first time of mygoing to Kensington Gore. I had no comfort there,hut many qualms of emptiness when you were allaway, and only vacant places to remind me of thewant of you. I hope Mr. L. told you that I hadtried to get your watch mended in time to go downto you by him, but in vain. A broken limb is notso easily repaired, especially when it is required thatthe party shall go as he did before. I am sorry tohear that the substitute you have is liable to occasionalhead-aches. I hope you will bear this in mindin your treatment of it, and not let it be stunned orstupefied through carelessness.My very dear boy, I received no little pleasurefrom the account which Mr. L. gave of you. I hopethat while he is absent from his earthly father, my dearwill look up the more earnestly to that heavenlyFather, who watches over all that trust in Him. Tryto bring on your brother in all good, ever rememberingmy advice not to be satisfied with not being unkind,but trying to be positively kind. Above all rememberprayer is the great means of spiritual improvement,and guard as you would against a wild beast whichwas lying in a bush by which you were to pass, readyto spring on you guard in like manner against wanderingthoughts when you are at prayer, either byyourself or in the family. Nothing grieves the Spiritmore than our willingly suffering our thoughts towander, and fix themselves on any object which .HIS FRIENDS. 313pens at the time to interest us. May God bless andkeep you, my very dear boy. I think that my dearis greatly improved in bearing little crosses of inclinationproperly, and I do hope that God will hear myprayers for him, and will make him a comfort and asupport to my declining years. I have indulged theserious train of thought into which I naturally fall inwriting to my children, and am ever, my dear ,Your most affectionate Father,W. Wilberforce."Nor was it for his children only that this tendernessof spirit had survived all the chilling influencesof a long public life. His affection for his friendswas in its degree as strong. " I am writing," he tellsMrs. Wilberforce, " at C.'s with whom I am come todine tete-astute. He sees no other company, dearfellow, so that it is a great pleasure to him I believe,and must be beneficial also, for me to sit with him asmuch as I can. You may be sure therefore, that Ido my best in this way. It is a sad encroachment onmy time ; but I love him more and more, and valuehim not less. I must copy for you a short passagefrom Southey's last letter. ( I hope from your mentionof C. that I was mistaken in representing him tobe in a dangerous state of health. Yet when I sawhim, I could not but fear that he was not long to be asojourner on earth. There is an expression in hiscountenance at times, which has more of heaven thanof earth about it ; something which is at once inexpressiblysweet and mournful, like the smile of aVOL. IV. P314 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1817.broken heart.' Do show this beautiful passage toMr. Collision, who appeared to me to enter fully intoC.'s character. Indeed let all see it, as the beautifullytender sentiment, exquisitely expressed, of a verysuperior man concerning my dear friend. Lord Baconsays, that we bear better to hear our friends abused,than our enemies well spoken of. But I am sure thatthe converse of this dictum of the great Bacon's holdstrue in my instance ; for this eulogy on the expressionof my dear friend's countenance has given me verygreat pleasure. I must break off. Farewell. 'One other brief but touching instance shall beadded from these crowded days.My dear Stephen,You appeared to me to look unhappy lastnight, as if something was giving you pain either inbody or mind. It will be a pleasure to me to hearthat this was not so ; or if it was, and I can help toremove it, let me try.Ever affectionately yours,W. WILBERFORCE."The inquiries of the Secret Committee disclosed afearful extent and degree of disaffection. " You andI agree," he wrote to Mr. Macaulay before he cameto town, " in esteeming it to be the duty of everygood subject to support government when he can.But then I own I feel that to draw on ourselves theill-will, and worse than neutrality, of opposition on allWest Indian questions, when we cannot have governess.WISH TO SUPPORT GOVERNMENT. 315ment as our friends, is to act in a way, which thoughit might become our duty if the ship were in danger ofgoing down, is not to be expected from us unless insuch critical circumstances. I have again and againbeen silent when I should have spoken against thedemocrats, and even oppositionists, more especiallyagainst party, but for the consciousness that I had tolook to the opposition rather than to government, asour supporters in the Registry Bill and West Indianmatters."The unsettled aspect of the times now so farsuspended these ordinary motives, that he preparedto take an active part in strengthening the handsof the executive. " Read," he says to one correspondentwho had consulted him upon this subject,31 " the last article in the last Quarterly, 32 it iswritten with a pen of fire." " I continue," he tells aYorkshire friend, 33 " friendly to the moderate, gradual,and almost insensibly operating ParliamentaryReform, which was last brought forward by Mr. Pitt.I am firmly persuaded that at present a prodigiousmajority of the more intelligent people of this countryare adverse to the measure. In my view so far frombeing an objection to the discussion, this is rather arecommendation of it. But it is a serious and verystrong objection to its present consideration, that theefforts of certain demagogues have had too muchsuccess in influencing the minds of the lowest of the3i Feb. 17.3 On the Progress of the Popular Discontents, No. XXXII.33 Feb. 7.p 2316 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1817.people in several of our manufacturing districts, mostfalsely persuading them that the evils under whichwe at present labour are owing to the state of ourparliamentary representation, and that they wouldbe cured by a Parliamentary Reform. I have givenyou this general idea of my sentiments to enable youto form an opinion as to the propriety of my attendingthe ensuing public meeting at York." **But all such intentions were cut short by a sharpand sudden fit of illness, which seized him the veryday following the presentation of their Report by theSecret. Committee. " I have just written to LordCastlereagh," he tells Mrs. "Wilberforce, " to expressmy concern at not being able to support him to-nightin the House of Commons, and to the Duke of Gloucester,(and the Duchess too I should have said,) whohad invited me to meet the Queen at GloucesterHouse to-night." And a few days later he declares,It has been a very great mortification to me, orrather it would be, were it not for the reflectionthat all is in higher hands, that I cannot attend theHouse to support the measures which have been taken,and are still in progress, for preserving the publicpeace. I assure you that in my judgment they areabsolutely needed if we would not incur the danger ofbloodshed and conflagration." " Perhaps, however,my not being able to attend the House, waskindly intended by Providence to prevent my needsA requisition for a county meeting on Reform, &c. was at thislime originated by the opposition party in Yorkshire.To the Rev. Charles Simeon, March a1817. LOTTERY. 317lessly differing from some who are friendly to myobject of West Indian reform." 36This attack was so serious as to hurry Mrs. Wilberforceto London on the summons of the friends whowatched anxiously the inroads it was making on hisfeeble constitution ; but after about three weeks, therough, which was its worst symptom, yielded to medicaltreatment, and on the 1 th of March he " thankedGod that he was much better, but giving this weekto annealing." His first attendance in the House wason the 18th, on the Lottery question. " I can ventureto assure you," he had written a month earlier toMr. Roberts, " that this national sin will ere long berooted out of the catalogue of our transgressions.Mr. Littleton last session gave notice of a motion toabolish it this year, and though I fear the House ofCommons, actuated by worldly rather than by Christianmotives, will consider the present distresses ofthe country as a plea for continuing, not for puttingan end for ever to this public system of gambling,and therefore though I dare not be sanguine in thehope of seeing it renounced this year, yet I am confidentthat many will not elapse before it is got ridof." In moving its suppression, "Littleton arguedtoo much like a man who is conscious that he is liableto be quizzed by his gay companions for talking ofreligion, morality, &c. Romilly as commonly wasfeeling, moral, and elevated. I had not arrangedany order of thought, and I argued it too much onthe ground of its effects, though not omitting higher36 Diary, March 5.318 LIFE OF Wilberforce. 1817.considerations, but not enough introducing God'sprovidence and will, (in the way wherein alone properthere,) and subjecting myself therefore to theanswer Castlereagh gave, as if it were a question offeeling, not of right and wrong. How shocking doesit seem to me on cool consideration, deliberately, forthe sake of 500,000 per annum, to break God's lawsand abjure his protection ! Oh may He forgiveus." 37 " Replied," his Diary continues, " to Dr. Gaskin,who had very kindly written to me, to ask iftrue that I had communicated at the Dissentingmeeting in his parish. I knew not it was his parish,but I did not reconsider enough." This hadhappened a few weeks before, when staying withsome friends at Islington, whom he had accompaniedto their ordinary place of worship. " So far," hetold Dr. Gaskin in reply, " from its being my practiceto communicate in Dissenting meetings, it isthe only time it has ever happened." It was anact which he never repeated. Dr. Gaskin's answerstated forcibly the grounds on which he deemed suchconformity unlawful. " He is a very worthy, and Ibelieve truly religious man, and wrote me a very properletter," was Mr. Wilberforce's next report to Mr.Stephen. " After all I fear the fault was acting toomuch from impulse, and not enough thinking beforehand."Dr. Gaskin's letter 38 he pocketed " Claimsof the Church deserves most serious consideration;"and " reading the 5th Book of Hooker," is a followingentry in his Diary.37 Diary, March 18. 3S Vid. Correspondence, &c.1817. Henchard's PROSECUTION. 319He had now resumed his attendance on the House,and hastened to uphold the hands of government."Feb. 28th. House Seditious Meetings Bill. I spokefirst opportunity, strongly defending the Bill. April1st. African Institution meeting, to settle whether togive up Dr. H.'s name, which the Duke and others supported.Brougham argued powerfully, as I urged also,that it would he positively wrong as well as inexpedient.The Tenth Report of this Society contained, " throughthe error of our secretary, commonly a most carefulman," 39 an erroneous statement of a case of cruelty.Such a slip was caught at eagerly by the West Indianbody, and made the ground of prosecution for a libel.As soon as the mistake was known, the publicationwas suppressed, but the opportunity could not bewasted, and the cause was pushed to trial, and Hat-chart(the publisher) was found, as we expected,guilty. We, of course, shall prevent his suffering."The name of their misinformed was never given up ;yet Mr. Wilberforce complains, 40 " he seems ratherquerulous, and a little disposed to regard himself as asaint in our calendar, though poor Hatchard has beenthe martyr." " This trial is likely to be injurious tous.What a pity it is that our secretary did not atonce frankly state how the mistake arose ! So ableand accurate a man might well stand the avowal ofso trifling an error, though in its consequences important.I am sometimes discouraged by finding allthese things going against us ; yet surely the causewe are engaged in is the cause of God endeavour -39 Letter to Mrs. Wilberforce. " Letter to Z. Macaulay Esq.320 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1817,ing by legitimate methods to succour the wretchedand right the injured and oppressed."He had too the encouraging remembrance of pastsuccess. There was a time when he had stood almostalone, to urge on a reluctant parliament the Abolitionof the British Slave Trade; and he had lived to see theday, when the whole power of England was exerted topersuade other nations to sacrifice the guilty traffic.April 30th. Almost immediately after breakfast,forced to town to Castlereagh on Spanish Abolitionwith him for above an hour on the Spanish Abolitionbusiness. He really takes much pains for the cause.He says he has written more on this head than on anyother. The Spaniards are pressing hard for 600,000,and for a loan. (They refused 600,000, and a loanof 2 millions, for immediate Abolition during the war.)We refused, and at last got them to treat on the basisof 400,000 for ships taken, &c. half to be paid now,half when the Abolition is completed in May 1819.But this last condition they will not assent to. LordCastlereagh wishes me to consider and consult friends.He seems to think, and I must say fairly enough,that he has done famously, though from the actualstate of the country, I cannot catch at the offer as inother circumstances." 41Battersea Rise to dinner, where Southey. 42 Sawhim for the first time, and much struck with him.Acland, Lord Sidmouth, Robert Grant, GovernorRaffles, &c. We dined at seven o'clock, and time flewaway so rapidly, that we kept on chatting till two in the41 Diary. Ib. April 26.1817. SOUTHEY. 321morning, and my watch having stopped, I thought itwas half-past eleven." " It was at Battersea Rise'writes Mr. Southey, 43 " at Sir Robert, then Mr.Inglis's, that I saw Mr. Wilberforce for the first time.A memorable day it was to me on that account, andalso because I then for the first time saw the lateBishop of Limerick.How it happened I know not, but although noperson can be more disinclined to disputation thanmyself, we got into one upon the question of CatholicEmancipation ; your father and Sir Thomas Aclandtaking the one side, and I the other. Inglis had notyet been in parliament, and I did riot know what hisopinions were upon the subject. Jebb I knew agreedwith me ; for with him, as coming from Ireland, thestate of that country had been one of the first thingson which we had touched when introduced to eachother. They took little or no part. It was a subjecton which I spoke with no diffidence, because nothingcould appear to me more certain, than the perilousconsequences which would ensue, if the friends of theChurch should be so far deluded by its enemies, as toassist them in throwing down the bulwarks of theProtestant establishment. But if my temper hadbeen likely to hurry me into any unbecoming warmth,your father's manner would effectually have repressedit. His views, when I thought him most mistaken,were so benign, he took the ground of expediencywith so religious a feeling, and argued with suchmanly yet such earnest sincerity, that if it had beenOct. 31, 1835.p 3322 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1817.possible to have persuaded me out of an opinion sodeeply and firmly rooted, he would have done it. Ourdiscussion, for so it may be called, was protracted till,two in the morning ; and it was so unusual for me toturn night into day in this manner, and so little suitedto my health, that I made it a condition with ourhost from that time forth, whenever I might be presentto be permitted to retire at eleven o'clock, letwho would be there."May 3rd. Callers in morning with Lord Bathurston West Indian subjects then letter-writing then,not till almost six, Exhibition dinner could onlyglance over a few of the pictures I between LordBrownlow and Huskisson near us Charles Long,Sir W. Scott, Sir G. Beaumont, Kemble, Southey,and others." " My next meeting with Mr. Wilberforce,"continues Mr. Southey, " if I remember rightly,was at the dinner of the Royal Academy, the onlypublic dinner at which I was ever present. I went toitwith the late Sir George Beaumont ; your fathersat near us, and Sir William Scott nearly oppositehim. Upon occasion of a glass of hermitage, SirWilliam called to him across the table, and remindedhim that he was the person who in his youth hadbrought that wine into fashion in England. I havenot forgotten the smile with which your father replied,1 I believe I was, Sir William.' '6th. Mr. H. H. breakfasted, and rather bored meon the Catholic Question speaking against the RomanCatholics as if I wanted any fresh reasons againsttheir system. 9th. Roman Catholic Question decided1817. IRISH TITULARS AT LAMBETH. 323I would not speak. Canning poor Peel excellentLord Castlereagh very good. 16th. Dr. Chalmersbreakfasted with me Inglis old Symons and others.Much pleased with Chalmers' simplicity walkedand talked in garden. House late on Clergy ResidenceBill, and slept in town. 17th. Lord Grenville'searly, then Duke of Gloucester meeting ofWest India Committee he generously, and withreally noble managing simplicity, owned LordGrenville differed from him, and afterwards gaveup his idea. Dined Lambeth, public day sat nextthe Bishop of Ossory, who immediately began talkingon Catholic Question, on which he had spoken yesterday,with great frankness, indicating a generousmanly spirit and good understanding. Lords Rolle,Bathurst, and others there, and Sir J. Hippisley, whohad that morning taken the two titulars to Lambeth,where Archbishop very civil to them."Whom think you," he asks Hannah More, " I receivedfive days ago at breakfast ? Drs. Everard andMurray ; the one titular Archbishop of Dublin, theother (Dr. Everard) coadjutor to the titular Archbishopof Shell the latter introduced to me by aletter from Alex. Knox, speaking of him in the highestterms, and adding that the true Sosia (the real liveArchbishop of Shell) had lately told him, ' I delightin Dr. Everard.' I felt myself bound in honesty to tellthem, when by ourselves, and softening it as much as Icould in the manner, that though from political motivesI judged it right not to resist the claims of theRoman Catholics to sit in parliament, this did not arise324 LIFE OF wilberforce. 1817.in any degree from my having a less unfavourable opinionof the Roman Catholic religion than most of theiropponents in the parliamentary application. This ofcourse entre nous ; indeed you are almost the only oneof the Anti-Roman-Catholic-Question people to whomI would have confided my having eaten with these infectiousdoctors. I can truly say that it is my firmopinion, that stopping at the point at which mattersnow are is doing more than any thing else to preservethe Roman Catholic religion in full and active vitality.We ought either to go back or to advance. Iwill frankly own that I am by no means clear, that ifthe elective franchise had not been completely thrownopen to the Roman Catholics, I should consent totheir possession of that privilege. But of all points,that at which we have now rested is, it must be confessed,the worst.Poor Sally More," says his Diary, May 19th,died about a week ago, after long and extreme suffering; yet never impatient, but perfectly submissiveand resigned what a triumph of grace ! All theworld wild about Dr. Chalmers ; he seems truly pious,simple, and unassuming. Sunday, 25th. Off earlywith Canning, Huskisson, and Lord Binning, to theScotch Church, London Wall, to hear Dr. Chalmers.Vast crowds Bolus Smith, Lord Elgin, Harrowby,&c. So pleased with him that I went again ;getting in at a window with Lady D. over ironpalisades on a bench. Chalmers most awful on carnaland spiritual man. Home tired, and satisfiedthat I had better not have gone for edification." " I1817. DR. CHALMERS. 325was surprised to see how greatly Canning was affected;at times he quite melted into tears. I shouldhave thought he had been too much hardened indebate to show such signs of feeling." " All London,"he was soon after told in a very different circlefrom his own, " has heard of your climbing in at thatwindow." With the healthful play of a vigorous mindhe entered readily into the joke. " I was surveyingthe breach with a cautious and inquiring eye, whenLady D., no shrimp you must observe, entered boldlybefore me, and proved that it was practicable."Reviewing the last month upon the 1st of June,he determined to " keep an account, and watch in allways to redeem the time. Having so many break -masters sadly interrupts me. Often they have staid tillnearly one o'clock. Thus every thing falls into arrears.Let me strive to set the main-spring right,and then to mend the works also. God help and directme ; and though I deserve no such honour, enableme yet to do some good. I humbly hope that I havelost my deliberate vain-glory ; but for Christ'shonour I should be sorry to sink, as I am now doing,into disrepute from my own mismanagement or indolence,added to a real decline of powers. May Godpurify my motives, while He prompts, quickens, andstrengthens me for action. I have felt this day morecomfort in religion than for some time past." 44Though these were his reflections, when in the stillnessof his chamber he tried himself by the high standardto which he aspired, the casual expressions of oneDiary.326 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1817of his letters give a truer picture of his actual services.Urging one of his children to steady applicationYou cannot conceive," he says, " with what pleasureI look forward to the time when you will be alle toengage in plans for the improvement and happinessof your fellow-creatures. I cannot but feel it as anhonour, though except to a son I should not mentionit, that when people have any scheme in view that isto do good they come to me as an ally in such a warfareagainst sin and misery." The very next day's Diarysupplies an instance of these customary applications.ff Cunningham came in, and young Mr. W., with acharitable case of a foreigner and his family. I somuch respect young W., a marine lieutenant givingup his half-pay for his father's support, and maintaininghimself as a clerk in a warehouse, and yet busyinghimself for these poor people, that I could nothelp becoming answerable for the 20 he wanted forthem, if I could not get it from the Distressed Foreigners'Institution. 5th. To the annual meeting of theNational Schools," Baldwin's Gardens two archbishopsand many bishops Dr. Bell there respectablemeeting. Then House meeting about CottonMills' Committee. Then thanks to Lord Colchester.Afterwards Secret Committee, whether new or oldone 45 a very foolish debate I thought, and quitegrieved that Babington voted with them."The aspect of the times was again clouded over.At Babington's, the window being open, we heard ashout, which we soon found was produced by WattHis name was included in both lists.1817. SECRET COMMITTEE. 327son's acquittal. The Chief Justice Ellenboroughsummed up strongly against the prisoner, but it is saidthere was a jury-man who was decided to acquit. Howill-judged was it of government to suffer the trial todrag on so ! Never surely was there a criminal convictednever one who did not become popular afterhaving been the subject of a trial for six or sevendays." The Secret Committee was now sitting, andhe attended constantly at its deliberations, in vain endeavouring,on the 18th, " to get Ponsonby and LordMilton to agree to the Report ; they decidedly resolvednot to do so ;" and on the next day " altering the partrespecting the employment of the secret informer."The Report was presented on the 20th, and on the23rd the Suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act wasproposed by government. Mr. Wilberforce reluctantlysupported what he deemed an unavoidableseverity. His freedom from all party spirit gave aweight to his decision, which was keenly felt by opposition.Sir Samuel Romilly directed all his powersof eloquence and reasoning to take off the effect of sounimpeachable a judgment ; and another member inadifferent strain attacked him warmly on the thirdreading with an unworthy sarcasm aimed at his religiouswork. " The honourable and religious member,"as he addressed him amidst cries of order fromall sides of the House, " could hardly vote for anymeasure more thoroughly opposed to vital Christianity."He was strongly tempted to retort on hisopponent the obvious epithet suggested by his openingsarcasm ; but with a rare forbearance he repressedthe impulse to render railing for railing.328 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1817.I shall take no notice' he began,, " of what hasbeen said concerning myself, though I claim no creditfor my silence, for I am well convinced that there isnot a man in the House who would not feel lowered byreplying to such language as the honourable memberhas allowed himself to use." He then adverted tothe measure under discussion, and showed that howeverunwelcome, it was essential to the public safety ;and then as this very necessity had been created bysuch inflammatory addresses as that just delivered,he was led to administer to his opponent the mostsevere rebuke which he ever uttered in the House.How," he said turning round to the precedingspeaker, " how can the honourable member talkthus of those religious principles on which the welfareof the community depends? I would fain believethat he desires as sincerely as I do myself to perpetuateto his country the blessings she enjoys. But if Icould be base enough to seek the destruction of thoseinstitutions which we both profess to revere, I willtell him what instrument I would choose. I wouldtake a man of great wealth, of patrician family, ofpersonal popularity, aye, and of respectable talents,and I am satisfied that such a one, while he scatteredabroad the firebrands of sedition under pretence thathe went all lengths for the people, would in realitybe the best agent in the malevolent purpose of destroyingtheir liberties and happiness."His Diary simply states, " B. forced me up in self-defence,and the House sided with me, though Iforgot what I meant to say." " But never in my parliamentarylife," says a member present, " did I hear1817. POWER OF Self-defence. 329a speech which carried its audience more completelywith it, or was listened to with such breathless attention."" I cannot recall' says another, " the capitalsentence with which he concluded ; and the reporters,for I looked in the papers next morning, did no justiceto its force. But I well remember the mannerin which he worked up his supposition, and thenbrought it home to his opponent. You know B 'smanner when attacked, his head high, his body drawnup. His tall figure as he sat on the upper benchimmediately behind was the higher of the two, evenwhen Wilberforce stood up to speak. But whenafter speaking for a few minutes Wilberforce turnedround to address him amidst the cheers of the House,he seemed like a pigmy in the grasp of a giant. Inever saw such a display of moral superiority in mylife."Nothing can make his uniform forbearance moreinstructive than the knowledge that he at all times possessedthis ready power of self-defence. " If there isany one," said Mr. Canning, (i who understandsthoroughly the tactics of debate, and knows exactlywhat will carry the House along with him, it certainlyis my honourable friend the member for Bramber."One other matter only engaged him in the Houseof Commons before the recess an address tothe Crown to strengthen ministers in their negociationswith the court of Spain. On the 2nd of July,having seen Castlereagh for some time early," hesettled " his " address for Wednesday next." Thenext day he wished to devote to preparation, "but330 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1817.could not give a minute to it. It was really necessaryto write letters to Castlereagh, Bathurst, Vansittart,and Grenville. I was grieved to be so disappointed,when a very friendly letter from Lord Grenvillecheered me, by informing me that he would cometo move a joint address." On the 9th he went " toLord Castlereagh, Mackintosh, and Lord Lansdown's,then home ; and busy till House on my address to theCrown to negociate for Abolition. I saw the Housewas not attentive to me, so I could not please myself,though I did pretty well; but the subject has grownstale and flat." That it should be flat and stale asasubject of discussion, was a happy change from thetime when to name Abolition was to give the signalfor violence or ridicule ; and in its material object hisaddress abundantly succeeded."Three months later he wrote to Macaulay.Stansted, Oct. 9 3 1817.My dear Macaulay,However pressed for time, I must tell youwithout delay, or renounce for ever all claims to beingcapable of the relations of peace and amity, that avery friendly and handsome letter from Castlereaghinforms me, that he has actually received the treatywith Spain (signed) for abolishing the Slave Tradegenerally and finally in May, 1820, and immediatelyto the north of the Line. Also, which is scarcely lessvaluable, that a system of mutual search is agreed tobe established for enforcing the Abolition law. Wellmay we praise God. I do congratulate you my dear1817. SPANISH TREATY. 331friend, and no one has more right than you to be congratulated; for no one has done or suffered more orso much as yourself, in and for this great cause.Farewell. With kind remembrances,Ever affectionately yours,W. Wilberforce."It was indeed "glorious intelligence;" a blessedfruit of many years of labour spent in striving calmlyand patiently to arouse the slumbering moral sense ofa great people. " Let us," is his characteristic callto his fellow-worker, Mr. Stephen, "let us praiseGod for it." 4646 Letter to James Stephen Esq.CHAPTER XXXII.JULY 1817 TO OCTOBER 1818.Recess Charity Letters Temper of mind Pocket-bookGraff ham Stansted Hadrian correspondence and ProfessorshipsJebb Death of Princess Charlotte Letterto Regent and Prince Leopold Christmas employmentsDistressed sailors West Indian Mrs. Fry and NewgateSecret Committee Employment of spies General BoydNational Schools Dissolution of parliament Goes into thecountry Liverpool Casterton Rokeby Rydale LancasterKeswick Southey.THE first few weeks of the recess were spent by Mr.Wilberforce in clearing off the unavoidable accumulationsof the session. They were busy and fatiguingdays, and exposed to continual interruptions from thecalls of charity, against which his doors were neverclosed. " July 21st. The birth-day of my two eldestchildren. I regretted that I was so hurried ; I hadlittle time to give to them, or to prayer for them. Apoor woman called immediately after breakfast, justwhen I had meant to spend a quiet hour in devotion ;but I called to mind Christ's example, and looked uptoHim, hoping that I should please Him more by1817. CHARITY. 333giving up my own plan and pursuing His writing forher." l Such applications formed a large share of hiscommon occupations ; for he was not contented withthe easy service of a trifling contribution to theirpresent wants, but inquired either directly, or by hisalmoners, into the particulars of almost every case.You were so good as to say," he thus writes, " thatyou would examine whether B. was in such circumstancesas to afford fair ground for believing that 100would, as he declares, extricate him from difficulty,and prove permanently useful to him. I own theearnestness of Mrs. B. makes me fear that theiraffairs are in a bad state, but you commercial gentlemenof experience can tell whether a man's affairshave a hectic flush or a pale wasting, or finally, thefacies hippocrates with every prospect of a speedydissolution. Mrs. B.'s father was a trusty, honest,and though a Roman Catholic, a religious man ; andhaving been a faithful servant of my uncle, I think itquite a duty to attend to the state of his progeny ;three or four of whom have been continually applyingto me."He was also writing to the Emperor of Russia,urging him to take such steps in the approachingCongress as should secure the execution of the Abolitioncompact. Of the reception of this letter hereceived from its bearer, the Rev. Lewis Way, abeautiful and characteristic sketch. " Non erat privaticujusdam cum imperator, sed Christian cumChristian amicissima collatio. Mores humanising ;1 Diary.334 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1817.vultus arrives, cor aperture ; lequel ardent ; amorpoena vel potius penitus divines : talis, teste Spirit,memorable hand interlocutors obsignaverunt."To these employments was soon added a kind andconstant attendance on the death-bed of a near connexion.Here he may be followed in a letter to hisfriend Macaulay.Kensington Gore, July 29, 1817.My dear Macaulay,When I first stretched out my hand for thissheathing, I drew it back again in order to replace itwith a larger ; but in stepped judgment or ratherprinciple, which by the way came forward from behindyour image in my mind's eye, as if they hadbeen your constant companions, and forced me to resumemy sheathing, suggesting to me (here shot in aglance at first severe, but instantly sweetening intokindness from the eye of an ideal James Stephenalso) how many unanswered letters I have by me,how many unread papers, unkept appointments, unfinishedbusinesses, &c. &c. Q. E. D. To answeryour* questions. We have not yet settled the ubi,only the quomodo. We shall spend D. V. the vacationof most of my absent children partly at thehouses of two or three friends, partly by the sea, andwe shall settle at Kensington Gore in the autumn.I must think seriously of a publication or two,and as I now work very slowly both from bodilyand mental hindrances, I must not lose much timein beginning. The Hayti Bills are all at Smith's.1817. LOSS OF FRIENDS. 335I have not seen Stephen for near a week, having returnedonly last night from Taplow, where Mrs. Wilberforce'smother and sister are staying at Mr.Neal's. They were to have come on to us, but whenthey arrived at Taplow, her sister was found to havea dangerous cough, and she soon burst a blood-vessel,arid is now lying in a state enviable for the calm andheavenly tranquillity of her mind, but the vile bodygradually decaying, and never likely again to risefrom the bed on which it now reclines. How strikingit is to see a tender-spirited young woman looking thelast great enemy in the face, with as much calm resolutionas was ever shown by any military hero in thefield with far more, indeed ; for far more surely isrequired where all around tends to soften the mind,and give reason its full unruffled exercise, than whenthe drums, and trumpets, and artillery, and the bustleof war has excited all the passions. She has longbeen her mother's consolation and earthly support ;but these services can be rendered by other friends,or even by confidential dependants. There are stillhigher services which so much-loved an object canalone render ; weaning from this world and exercisingfaith, and patience, and child-like confidence and love.The effects of these will endure for ever; and the daywill, I doubt not, arrive, when the mother shall see thather daughter was selected as the honoured instrument,after being her best and most assiduous friend in thisworld, of obtaining for her these still more excellentblessings. O my dear friend, the day is coming when itwill be delightful to follow out all these now mysteriouslines of Providence from the dark cloud in which they336 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1817.are at first wrapped, into the full brightness of celestialglory. This thought was brought powerfully to mymind this morning, when observing that a passionflowerwas about to open we stopped for about fiveminutes, and beheld the complete development ofthe beauties and symmetry of the interior.I hope you are approximating to the centre again,though trusting your excursion extra flammantiameenia &c. would be serviceable to you, I quite rejoicedin your aphelion, and only regretted that youwere forced to return homewards without completingyour Highland peregrinations. Let me have a line tomention your probable time of return; it might enableme to spend a quiet day or two with you, which Ishould greatly relish, and I hope turn to profit. Ithas occurred to me on reflection that we have not beenduly mindful of the importance of improving thefemale character in Hayti. I mean to press stronglyon Christophe that the female sex is undervaluedand ill-treated in all uncivilized countries ; that theyare the formers of the rising generation, and shouldtherefore be fitted for their high office. Do be turningyour mind to the best modes of improving Hayti,and the Haytians. It is a most important subject.I should have mentioned to you sooner a Dr. Walkerof Edinburgh, whom I believe I have cribbed frombeing surgeon at Sierra Leone to be one of theHadrian professors. I desired him to find you out inEdinburgh and confer with you. Find out all youcan about him, and pump out of him all you are able,and also pour in all you can get admitted.I quite envy no, that is not true I enjoy with you1817. TEMPER OF HIS MIND. 337in idea your visit at the Temple. It would and I trustI may justly use the indicative for the optative, and saythat some day or other it will gladden my heart againto revisit those haunts of my younger years. May Godbless you and yours, my dear friend. What a blessingis friendship! How true is the psalmist's exclamation,' How good it is to dwell together in unity ! 'It is in short a heaven upon earth. May we realize ithere, from its being the reflection from the better andless imperfect state of it beyond the mountains.Kindest remembrances to all common friends, andbelieve me ever,Your affectionate and sincere Friend,W. Wilberforce."This was now become the ordinary temper of hismind. The morning clouds had passed away, and hewalked in the fullest sunshine of " peace and joy inbelieving." His earlier Journals contain, as has beenseen, records of hard struggles with " divers temptations;" but the power of the enemy had been longsince rebuked; and after the most close and jealousself-examination he could humbly say, " I prefer spiritualto carnal pleasures, and never suffer any thingsensual to get the advantage over me deliberately.Am I guarded enough on the sudden ? " He was stillever praying to be more fully " quickened, warmed,and purified ;" and at times he complained " fromwhat cause soever it is, my heart is invincibly dull. Ihave again and again gone to prayer, read, meditated,,yet all in vain. Oh, how little can we do any thingVOL. IV. Q33S LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1817.without the quickening grace of God ! I will go againto prayer and meditation. Blessed be God, His promisesdo not vary with our stupid insensibility tothem. Surely God has always blessed me in allthings, both great and small, in a degree almost unequalled,and never suffered me materially to failwhen there has been an occasion for exertion." 2But though occasionally harassed by such " dulnessof heart," his ordinary spirit was far different.The full spring of love, and joy, and thankfulness was'bursting forth into spontaneous expression in his conversation,his letters, and his Journal. All the naturalobjects round him had become the symbols of thepresence and love of his heavenly Father, and likethe opening of the passion-flower, suggested to himsome new motives for thankfulness and praise. tf Iwas walking with him in his verandah," says a friend,the year before, watching for the opening of anight-blowing cereus. As we stood by in eager expectation,it suddenly burst wide open before us.It reminds me, 5 said he, as we admired its beauty,of the dispensations of Divine Providence firstbreaking on the glorified eye, when they shall fullyunfold to the view, and appear as beautiful as theyare complete.' ' " For myself," says one of his letters,(Aug. 28th,) when to his own family he unveiledhis heart, " I can truly say, that scarcely any thing hasat times given me more pleasure than the consciousnessof living as it were in an atmosphere of love ; andheaven itself has appeared delightful in that veryJournal, Feb. ] 1, 1816.1817. HIS HAPPY TEMPER. 339character of being a place, in which not only everyonewould love his brethren, but in which every onewould be assured that his brother loved him, and thusthat all was mutual kindness and harmony, withoutone discordant jarring ; all sweetness without theslightest acescency."There was no obtrusive display of such emotions.True Christian joy is for the most part a secretas well as a severe thing. 3 The full depth of hisfeelings was hidden even from his own family. " Iam never affected to tears' he says more than once,except when I am alone." 4 A stranger mighthave noticed little else than that he was more uniformlycheerful than most men of his time of life.Closer observation 'showed a vein of Christian feelingmingling with and purifying the natural flow of a mosthappy temper ; whilst those who lived most continuallywith him, could trace distinctly in his temperedsorrows, and sustained and almost child-like gladness ofheart, the continual presence of that " peace which theworld can neither give nor take away." The pages ofhis later Journal are full of bursts of joy and thankfulness; and with his children, and his chosen friends,his full heart welled out ever in the same blessedstrains ; he seemed too happy not to express his happiness; his " song was ever of the loving-kindness ofthe Lord." An occasional meeting at this time withsome who had entered life with him, and were now drawingwearily to its close with spirits jaded and tempersworn in the service of pleasure or ambition, brought5 Res several est verum studium. 4 Journal.Q 2340 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1817.out strongly the proof of his better ee choice." " Thissession' he says, " I met again Lord , whom Ihad known when we were both young, but of whom Ihad lost sight for many years. He was just againreturned to parliament, and we were locked up togetherin a committee room during a division. I sawthat he felt awkward about speaking to me, and wenttherefore up to him. ' You and I, my Lord, werepretty well acquainted formerly.' ' Ah, Mr. Wilberforce,'he said cordially ; and then added with a deepsigh, ' you and I are a great many years older now.'Yes, we are, and for my part I can truly saythat I do not regret it.' ' Don't you,' he said, withan eager and almost incredulous voice, and a look ofwondering dejection, which I never can forget"'You must allow that Mr. Wilberforce is cheerful,"said some of his friends to one who had just spent aweek in the same house with him, and who was fixingon religion the old charge of dulness. " Yes," she saidin a tone intended to convey reproach, " and nowonder : I should be always cheerful too, if I couldmake myself as sure as he does that I was going toheaven."Yet with all this constant cheerfulness there was amarvellous sobriety in his religion. His secret recordsof humiliation are aimed at specific faults, anddo not waste themselves in generalities. ct Howsad," he says on one of these occasions, " that I amstill molested by the love of human estimation; sothat when a man whom I think of very mean hit el -Con. Mem.1817. SOBRIETY OF HIS RELIGION. 341let spoke disparagingly of me before others I feltvexed. What weakness ! and all the time abhorringmyself for it too ; what a strange thing is the heartof man ! " Again, " I love human estimation toowell, though I trust I strive against it -, and I have notemptation to seek dishonourable gain. Now howready am I to condemn those who addict themselvesto the latter ! Yet am not I as criminal in loving theformer, for it is the not loving God that is the vice ?O Lord, purify me, and make me meet to be partakerof the inheritance of the saints in light*' 6 Again hecomplains, " What over-valuation of human estimationdo I find within me ! And then also what self-complacentrisings of mind will force themselvesupwards, though against my judgment, which at thevery moment condemns them, and yet my heart thenclaims credit for this condemnation ! Oh the corruptionand deceitfulness of the heart ! " 7The same sober judgment watched over his hoursof unusual religious joy. " Let me put down," hesays this month, 8 " that I have had of late a greaterdegree of religious feeling than usual. Is it an omen,as has once or twice shot across my imagination ahint that my time for being called away draws nigh ?Surely were it not for my dearest wife I could notregret it, humbly hoping, deeply unworthy as I am,that there is a propitiation for our sins, and that themercies of God through Christ would not fail me.But oh let me check the emotions of indolence and6 Journal, March 15, 1812. ' Ib. July 7, 1816.8 Journal, Aug. 4.312 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1817.of trying to have done with the turmoil of this vainworld of perturbations, and give way to a more livelygratitude for the mercies of the Saviour, and a moreactive determination and consequent course of holyobedience arid usefulness. Alas, alas, considering myopportunities, I have been a sadly unprofitable servant.Pardon me, O Lord ; quicken, soften, warm,invigorate me, and enable me to rise from my torpor,and to imitate the example of holy Paul, doing thisone thing, forgetting the things behind, and pressingforward towards the mark of our high calling of GodinChrist Jesus. Alas, I fear I sadly neglect myduties to my children, and also to the poof, forthough I serve the latter more abundantly than byindividual visitation, when with the motive of Christ'sspeech, (Matt. xxv. 40,) I attend to whole classesand masses of them, yet individual visitation has itsgood also. O Lord, teach, guide, quicken me. WithoutThee I can do nothing; with Thee all things.Lord, help, bless, and keep me. Amen."It is well worth the inquiry by what system ofself treatment these happy fruits had been matured.They were not merely the results of a naturallycheerful temper leavened with religious feeling ; theyresulted from close and systematic discipline. Hekept a most strict watch over his heart. He still recordedby a set of secret marks the results of frequentand close self-examination under a number of specificheads. He used every help he could devise for keepingalways on his soul a sense of the nearness and thegoodness of his God. " I used to have an expedient1817. Self-discipline. 343similar to the Jewish philoctetes, (Numb. xv. 38,39,) in order to keep up the sense of God's presence.Let me try it again. I must have Him for my portionand the strength of my heart, or I should bemiserable here as well as hereafter." Another customfrom which he " found great benefit was puttingdown motives for humiliation, motives for thankfulness,and so on, which" he (( carried about with" him,and could look at during any moment of leisure."Such a paper, copied in part from one of earlier date,appears in a pocket-book of this year.HUMILIATION, MEANS OF, AND TOPICS FOR 9Consider all my motives and just causes for gratitude; constant, fervent, self-denying gratitude ; andthen with this contrast my actual state all my meansand motives also to improvement and greater advancein the Christian character. That if all that reallypasses within were visible, all the workings of evilpositive and negative, (especially if compared with myprinciples and lessons to others,) all my selfishnessof feeling, and coldness of affection, too often towardsthose even whom I love and ought to love most, allmy want of self-denial, all my self-indulgence, whatshame would cover me ! Yet that comparatively Icare not for its being known to God. And is thisbecause of His and Christ's mercy ? Oh what baseness! My incurable, at least uncured, love of humanapprobation, and my self-complacency or pain whenmuch granted or withheld, even when my judgment9 Pocket-book, p. 5G.344 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1817.makes me abhor myself for it. (I trust I can say Ido not allow this vicious feeling, but repress it withindignation and shame.) Oh were all that passeswithin in this instance to be seen fully, what shameshould I feel ! Realize this. Look at various otherChristians who have not enjoyed half my advantagesor motives to growth in grace, yet how immeasurablythey exceed me ! " (Here many individuals are mentioned.)How little good have I done compared with whatI might have done ! What procrastination ! Considerin detail how deficient in the duties of an M. P.father, master, friend, companion, brother. Resolutionsbroken. Intemperance often. How sinful thiswhen taken in relation to motives to self-denial, fromlove to Christ and to self-extinction, for me a vileungrateful sinner ! Oh shame, shame !"Early advantages abused, and benefits often lost.What an (almost) hell of bad passions (despairabsent) in my soul when a youth, from emulation,envy, hatred, jealousy, selfishness ! (Yet, alas ! justiceto myself requires my adding how ill-treated here.)Time, talents, substance, &c. wasted, and shockinggoings-on (Christianity considered) : and after therevellings over, as egregious waste of faculties andmeans among the fellows ; card-playing, &c. Consequentcourse of living almost without God in theworld, till God's good providence checked and turnedme, (oh miracle of mercy !) in 1785, through theDean's instrumentality.But, alas ! since I professed and tried to live to1817. MOTIVES TO GRATITUDE. 345God, sometimes only preserved from gross sin andshame by preventing grace. And, alas !-even tillnow how little progress, how little of the Divinenature, how little spirituality either in heart or life,how little of a due adorning of the doctrine of Godmy Saviour ! How much vanity and undue solicitudeabout human estimation ! (Oh if transparent here !)Procrastination, inefficiency, self-indulgence, livingbelow principles and rules. Contrast all this withmy almost unequalled mercies and blessings. Andremember God and Christ foreknew all thy ingratitude.N. B. All thy sins, great and small, areopen to God's eye as at first, entire, and fresh, andunfaded, except as blotted out by Christ's blood.I find it one of the best means of gaining self-abhorrence,after such reflection as above delineated, toconsider and press home what I should think and feelabout another favoured in all respects as myself, whoshould be such in all particulars as I am in point ofsins, negligence, weaknesses, neglect and misuse oftalents, &c. ; and then contrast my sins, with mymercies, my service with my motives, my obligationswith my coldness, the gratitude due with the evil returned.Alas ! alas ! God be merciful to me a sinner.GRATITUDE, MOTIVES TO.Born in the eighteenth century, and in England,when the increased wealth and civilization have enabledme to enjoy so many accommodations necessaryto my usefulness, much more to my comfort.(N. B. Meditate under each head of its opposites,Q 3346 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1817.as first, not in Africa, or Hindostan, or China, or evenin Italy, or France. And second, not when Britainsunk in barbarism and ignorance, or even when fewof the conveniences by which bodily distinctions sogreatly annulled, and mind elevated over body. HadI been born in any but civilized times, I could nothave lived; much less have lived in comfort andaction.)Born an Englishman ; that I was born of parentsreligious according to the old school ; and that I wasmade such as I am, both in body, mind, and circumstances.Blessed with acceptance, early and continued,both in public and private life. Raised to so veryhonourable a station as M. P. for Yorkshire, andenabled to retain it near thirty years, (elected fivetimes, and no prospect of opposition when voluntarilyresigned it,) though from considerations weighed inGod's sight I neglected all the usual attentions to thecounty both generally and individually.Providentially directed to such a pursuit as Abolition,and blessed by success.So many friends, and these so good in themselves,and so kind to me. Scarcely any one so richlyprovided with kind friends. This is a cause forcontinual gratitude.My domestic blessings. How few who marry solate in life have such affectionate wives ! My childrenall kind and loving to me.Above all, my spiritual blessings ; having beencalled, I humbly trust, and drawn by the Holy Spirit,1817. MOTIVES TO GRATITUDE. 347and enlightened., and softened, and in some degreesanctified. It is, I trust, my fixed resolution to desireto please God in all things, and to devote all Ihave and am to his glory, through Christ and by theHoly Spirit ; yet, alas, how little have I of late beenliving a life of communion with God, in faith, andhope, and love, and joy, and usefulness ! God bemerciful to me a sinner.More especially, the astonishing mercy, and long-suffering,and patience, and loving-kindness of myGod and Saviour : foreseeing all my unworthy returns,and yet merciful and gracious to me.The preventing grace of God in some notableinstances, in which I was preserved from sin andshame by his unmerited goodness.So peculiarly favoured by exemptions from failure,or with acceptance and success ; never have I beensuffered to fail egregiously on public occasions, andwhen once or twice brought into temporary ridicule,how soon over !"The friend, whose death-bed he was now cheering,reading and praying with her daily," was upheld tothe last by the same consolations. When her eyeshad been closed in peace, he took his family to spendtheir summer holidays at Stansted, which had beenkindly lent to him by his friend Lewis Way. On theroad he halted a few days at the parsonage of graham,whence he wrote to Mr. Stephen.348 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1817.Graff ham, Sept. 17.My dear Stephen,I never was at a place where my time was solittle at my own command. Dear Mr. Sargent hasmuch to show me in this beautiful country, and I amtherefore forced out in spite of my remonstrances, anddriven in a delightful little open carriage, which toany one who like me cannot bear much exercise andfeels but languid, is the very acme of luxury. Thenwe have some of his good neighbours to dine with us,so that the evening also is expended. But we go toStansted tomorrow, and there I must set to work inearnest. I hope, my dear Stephen, we shall see youthere. It has been giving me regret that I did notthink of extorting from you the promise of a visit.How you would rejoice in ventilating 011 the hillunder which I am now writing ; and when at Stanstedyou are but twelve miles to a horseman or good footmanfrom this place. You would be delighted to seetheSargent with seven children, most of them as fairas the light around them. How I wish you werehere ! Indeed, remembering how much my dear sisterloved Mrs. Sargent, I am powerfully impressed withthe feeling of the pleasure she would have had in witnessingsuch a scene of virtuous domestic comfortand rural beauty. But she perhaps does witness ourenjoyments and partake of them, though with thatcomplacent pity with which we look down upon thejoys of children. May God bless you, my dear Stephen.You must take care of your health. I .Started. 349lieve the pure air of these downs would be mostsalutary for you. Farewell.Even affectionately yours,W. WlLEERFQRCE."He spent a month at Stansted, " making an excursionfor twenty-four hours to Huskisson's countryhouse, where I was most kindly received." " Thisis an entertaining and healthy holiday-place for thechildren." He delighted in receiving almost as muchas giving such proofs of friendship ; and with playfulphilosophy threw aside any of the little troubles itentailed. " Mr. Smith, the steward," are his Stan-stepPark reflections, " was all that could be desiredextremely obliging ; in short, just representing hismaster. He, dear kind man, had endeavoured inevery way to render me comfortable, had left mewine, and even china, plates, &c. ; and the key of allhis libraries, even of the sanctum sanatorium. We ofcourse tried to do as little harm as possible. Thoughat first I thought we must have gone away on accountof the housekeeper's bad temper, which sadly effervesced."10 The same happy spirit breaks out in somehumorous touches in a letter of this date.TO JAMES STEPHEN ESQ.Stansted Park, Sept. 22, 1817.My dear Stephen,I have just left Sir George and Miss Grey,who kindly came over this morning to breakfast with10 Diary, Oct.350 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1817.us. If ever any man seemed made to obtain thewilling subjection which a certain fine-looking Earlis disposed to command, it surely is Sir George Grey.I really could scarce refuse him any thing, so irresistiblypowerful is the effect of his artless, generous,friendly frankness.One word about your coming here. I do notcontest the superior claims of Miller, but I declare itis my real opinion, that spending three or four days inthis dry air, roaming about the woods, &c. would domore good to your health than any other possibleregimen. I must bar the probable objection that wesee so much of you at home. I have sometimes thoughtthat I should have quite a different idea of you, nay,I will frankly add, quite a different value for you, if Ihad not conversed with you by pen and ink when youhave been at leisure, and have let me into your lucubrations.When we meet in or near London we alwayshave points to discuss, &c. so that we are neverable to enjoy a friendly tete-astute expatriation onmoral or any other subjects. On this ground I wouldrather spend a day with you at such a place as thisthan a month in the body or even disk of London,the sun of the system a sadly spotted sun methinks.Here we could have a long walk together, and havetime to ruminate and to discuss. But I will say nomore. It is very doubtful however how long orrather how short a time we stay here ; for as poorMatthew used to say to Miller, f There always aredisagreeableness you know, Mr. Dean.' As for out-kindhost and hostess, Mr. and Mrs. Way, (if being1817. Started. 351absent they can be called such,) nothing can possiblybe kinder ; he has given me the key of a little sanctumsanatorium, which he values beyond all arithmeticalestimate, and where none of the servants, oreven of the family, are permitted to enter but whenhe is present. He left me a case of port, and an orderfor half a buck ; but you would really be amused asmuch as by any part of Smollett or Fielding to witnessan interview between the housekeeper, for I puther first, and Mrs. W. You know the Indians havea way of setting oddly contrasted animals to fightwith each other, and I really long to set our oldcoachman and this fine lady in single combat. ButI am forgetting how much I have to do no, I mustdo justice to myself and assure you I do not forget it,or fail to consider it most seriously. May it please Godto enable me to employ the small stock, whatever itmay be, of talent and time that are left to me, morediligently and effectually than I have done hitherto ;for alas, alas ! . . . Pray for me, my dear friend, as Ido and will for you. God bless you a thousand times.Ever affectionately yours,W. WlLBER FORCE."Another letter will explain the immediate cause ofthe train of thought with which the last concludes.TO THOMAS Barrington ESQ. M. P.Stated Park, Oct. 4, 1817.My dear Babington,You would, I fear, think me exaggerating,if I were to state, as strongly as I have really felt it,352 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1817.my vexation at not having been able to write to you.Even to you I fear my long silence may have appearedunkind ; indeed I have been neglecting not you only,but the greater part of my correspondents. Yet I havebeen daily blamed by my kind friends about me forkeeping so close to my desk, and not taking more airand exercise. In truth this house is not the rightplace for a man who has so large an acquaintance asmyself. You and Mrs. Babington can enter into mysituation better than most people, being apt like myselfto have the number of your inmates augmented in proportionto the size of your house. I have been verybusy on Hayti letters all this week. All my six childrenare at home. The Greys from Portsmouth, allthe Sargent ; then people coming down from Londonfor interviews, &c. &c. Alas ! alas ! ' Oh for a lodge insome vast wilderness ! ' Well, if God be with us, whetherin the bustle or the solitude if we are engagedin the work He has assigned to us, and are performingit in the proper spirit, all is well. But it is now lateon Saturday night, and I must say, farewell. Givemy kindest remembrances to Mrs. Babington, &c. andbelieve me,Ever yours,W. WILBERFORCE."Hadrian business was what now so much engrossedhim. His first consent to enter into correspondencewith .Christophe led to an assurance, " that theywould take any thing from him," and Christophe (bywhom he had been entreated to sit for his picture, arequest made the year before by Blucher) sent him1817. HAYTIAN CORRESPONDENCE. 353in return the only portraits of himself and of his sonwhich he had allowed to be taken. 11 He was on hisguard in. opening this correspondence. On receivingfrom a friend a political communication, which it wasproposed to him to send to Hayti, he replied, (Nov.4th, 1815,) " The general doctrine whether individualsmight hold correspondence with foreign governments,was much discussed, I remember, about the time ofthat notable, and certainly most g unjustifiable, intercoursewhich Fox carried on with Russia for the purposeof counteracting the policy and measures of theministry of his own country. The principle that eachcommunity acted through its own government, whichwas its proper and only legal representation, was heldvery high by Burke and others. If I did what youdesire, I really know not how I could stand up inparliament, and defend myself against the chargeswhich might be brought against us. I cannot thereforethink it right, as I now see the matter, to putmy hand to such a letter."To avoid all misconstruction he " determined toshow Lord Liverpool the Hadrian letters. I think itbest ; he is a man of considerable religious principle,and surely the prospects dawning upon Hayti willprevent his yielding to the highly probable dispositionof too many of the West Indians, to blast these openingbuds of moral and social comfort and virtue." 12This was no exaggerated estimate of the interest ofthe cause. " Were I five and twenty," Sir Joseph11 They are still in the possession of Mr. Wilberforce's family.12 Letter to James Stephen Esq.354 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1817.Banks wrote to him asking for Hadrian information," as I was when I embarked with Captain Cook,I am very sure I should not lose a day in embarkingfor Hayti. To see a set of human beings emergingfrom slavery, and making most rapid strides towardsthe perfection of civilization,, must I think be the mostdelightful of all food for contemplation."Christophe was truly a great man. Born and educatedas a slave, he had raised himself to absolutepower, which he was most solicitous to use for thegood of his countrymen. To educate his people, to substitutethe English tongue for that of France, and theReformed faith for that of Rome, were now his leadingprojects ; and in them he sought for Mr. Wilberforce'said and counsel. His letters every where aboundin truly elevated plans. " He has requested me,"Mr. Wilberforce tells Mr. Stephen, " to get for himseven schoolmasters, a tutor for his son, and sevendifferent professors for a Royal College he desires tofound. Amongst these are a classical professor, amedical, a surgical, a mathematical, and a pharmaceuticalchemist." He entered warmly into Christophe'sviews. " Oh how I wish I was not tooold, and you not too busy to go," he writes to Mr.Macaulay! 13 "It would be a noble undertaking tobe sowing in such a soil the seeds of Christian andmoral improvement, and to be laying also the foundationof all kinds of social and domestic institutions,habits, and manners." " It produces quite a youthfulglow through my whole frame," he writes to Mr.July 19, 1819.1817. CHRISTIANIZING HAYTI. 355Randolph in America, " to witness before I die inthis and so many other instances, the streaks of religiousand moral light illuminating the horizon, andthough now but the dawning of the day, cheering uswith the hopes of their meridian glories." It waswith this end especially that he undertook this newcharge. " Christophe is not himself I fear," he says,governed by religious principles," but he was readyto admit, and ever to uphold religion. " I have succeeded,"he tells Mr. Hey, " in finding a physician,but I still want a surgeon, and much more a divine.Oh what would I give for a clergyman who should bejust such as I could approve !"He wrote at once to Mr. Simeon, to bespeak hisassistance in this search. " When you consider, thatProvidence has thrown in our way an opportunitysuch as has seldom been afforded, of sowing the seedsof civilization, and still more of Christian faith, inthis hitherto benighted quarter of the world, where,when they have once taken root, they will graduallydiffuse themselves throughout all the coloured inhabitantsof the Western hemisphere ', (the numberof souls has been calculated at 3,000,000 ;) and whenyou call to mind also that the opportunity is affordedby the ascendancy and the dispositions of Christophe,(Henry I.) and that we know not how long thisfavourable state of things may continue, or how long Imay live, on whose influence with him much depends ;you will I am sure concur with me in thinking thatthe utmost diligence should be used in endeavouringto find one or two persons, properly disposed and356 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1817.qualified for undertaking this important work. Ishould greatly like to send over some person to instructthe King's son in various branches of useful knowledge.Perhaps the same person who should be atthe head of the system of religious instruction mightundertake this office also. I have no doubt he wouldbe handsomely treated in all particulars. A painterwho lately went over, is to receive 5000 dollars perannum. I should prefer a man of sound sense and ofsome knowledge of the world, provided he were reallya practical Christian, though not a man of showytalents, to any man of great religious zeal, who mightbe likely to push matters further than the state of theKing's mind, or the circumstances and disposition ofthe population in general, would probably bear." 14Would that I had an hour or two," he says toArchdeacon Wrangham, 15 " to write to you on thatmost interesting subject of Hayti. You know Idoubt not enough of the case to prevent your beingmisled by the scandalous falsehoods, which are soshamefully propagated against King Henry's (Christophe's)character. Now give me the best advice whichyour experience (I mean experience in books muchmore than in life) and your reflection suggests, on theimportant question how best and soonest to enlightenand moralize a semi-civilized community. I will sendfor your perusal a private letter to me from Christophe,which will I think at once astonish and delight you.Not but that I greatly doubt whether he can write,To the Rev. Charles Simeon, March 3.To the Rev. Francis Wrangham, Oct. 4.1817. HAYTIAN CIVILIZATION. 357or even read ; at least I am not clear of the latter.But he dictates such letters as show him to be nosavage. Well, he has requested me to send him overseven schoolmasters to teach his subjects by the newmethod to read and write English, arithmetic, &c.Also to send him several professors, &c. Above all,though he must be prudent in his proceedings respectingreligion, and all the religion now professed thereis Roman Catholic, with which the females continueimbued, attending mass, &c. ; yet he wishes them tobecome Protestants, in short English in every thing.I am just about to send him a fifth schoolmaster, anda number of the recent publications for both theliterary and moral instruction of youth. One of themasters after three or four months' instruction, wroteword in April last, that the youth applied to theirwork with almost unexampled zeal, and that their progresswas really greater than he had ever witnessed inthe same time,"If I have not been writing for the British public,"he replies to Mr. Babington's inquiries after his occupationduring the recess, " I have for the Hadrian, ifI may be allowed to use the same figure of speech asChristophe (I beg his pardon, King Henry) himself.Never have I worked harder than at my Hadrianletters, and yet at last the ship went away without muchshe was to have carried. But we shall have anotheropportunity, D. V. in about a fortnight. Really theprospect opens upon me both in colouring, and in thesize of the objects.I have an offer for Hay ti to-day, from a naval officer35S LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1817.ten years a post captain though young, (owing to highconnexions,) of warm piety, and ready to go in order todogood. I have desired that he will come and residewith me a few days : we can then discuss together, andtake each other's dimensions." 16We have been," he tells one of his sons, " harderat work than ever, and still we are in the state inwhich the sea is after a great storm a heavy swellby no means at rest in the haven. For till we hearthe ship has actually sailed, ' more last words ' are continuallyoccurring. And I find this Hadrian connexionwill by no means be an encouragement to indolence.But I trust it will be an occasion for doingmuch good, and I really look up to God with renewedthankfulness ; I say renewed, for His having by Hisgood providence drawn me to the Abolition businesshas always appeared to me to call for the most livelygratitude. Individuals who are not in parliamentseldom have an opportunity of doing good to considerablenumbers. Even while I was writing the sentenceI became conscious of the falsehood of theposition; witness Mrs. Hannah More, and all thosewho labour with the pen. Witness Dr. Jenner, andSir Humphrey Davy, and all the good clergymen,which last class however I meant to except from theremark. But what various and extensive occasions ofbenefitting their fellow creatures are presented tomembers of parliament in this highly-favoured country !And what thanks do I owe to God, for having led mefrom any subordinate line of official business into16 To T. Babington Esq.1817. PARLIAMENTARY USEFULNESS. 359lines of service of extremely extensive usefulness, andless bitterly contentious, till Mr, Marryatt entered thefield, than the walks of politics ! In this Hadrianinstance, we are sowing the seeds of civilization andknowledge in a new society, which (may it pleaseGod) you may live to see exhibiting the new spectacleof a community of black men, of which the masswill be as well instructed as any nation upon earth.I will enclose you some returns of the state of theschools which I have just now received. Pray takecare of them, and return them in three or four days,after showing them to any confidential friends ; but Ithink it is better to keep Hayti in the back ground,till it is able to stand on its legs in a firmer attitude.My dearest boy, remember my counsel. If youcome into parliament, let me earnestly entreat you notto expend yourself in speechifying on questions ofgrand political or rather I mean party contention ; butwhile you take part in the public and general discussionsthat are of real moment, for this is what I havecommonly done, choose out for yourself some specificobject, some line of usefulness. Make yourself thoroughlyacquainted with your subject, and you willnot only be listened to with attention, but you will,please God, do great good. This is the mode inwhich I have often advised young men to proceed, butthey seldom would be wise enough to follow mycounsel, and hence you hear of many of them makingone or two good speeches, and then all is over. Thisis really a sad waste of the means of prodigious usefulnesswhich Providence has put into their power."360 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1817.With such views opening on him, it was not unnaturalthat he should say, " never hardly did I feelso much interested as in finding proper people forChristophe, especially a tutor for his son." This wasno easy task. When he first began the work he hadreceived no remittances from Hayti. He cared littlefor this, as far as it regarded his own risk . . " if Ishould be a few hundred pounds out of pocket, themoney might not be ill spent . . but" he scarcelyknew what to promise others. Soon however he wasintrusted with a considerable sum, which ee provedChristophe to be in earnest;" and he was able to offerliberal terms to the professors. Still it was difficultto find any except men of broken fortunes, who wouldemigrate to Hayti. ft It has often struck me," Mr.Stephen says to him, l7 " that you and all who havethought on the subject without experience, have formedan inadequate conception of the sacrifice involved inacolonial residence. Rely on it that in general thereare only two motives strong enough to keep any manorwoman, without necessity, six months in the WestIndies ; religious zeal, and auri sacra fames." AtHayti moreover all depended on Christophe's life andpower. His demoralized and debased subjects mustbe coerced into morals and civilization ; and hisdeath, or a revolution, would risk the fortunes or thelives of these his stranger guests.Patiently and perseveringly did Mr. Wilberforcestruggle against all these difficulties, not only correspondinglargely with all quarters from which he'7 Sept. 18.1817. HAYTIAN PROFESSORS. 361might gather the assistance he required, but receivingboth at " Kensington and Stansted the differentapplicants, that they might stay with me a few days,and enable me the better to take their dimensions."With all his overflowing kindness he was a shrewdobserver of men's characters, and where he trustedto himself seldom imposed upon. Scarcely ever dida complaint escape from him in all this disagreeableservice ; and once only does he tell Mr. Stephen, " S.,whose weakness and vanity are doing all the harm theycan, has positively haunted us of late." So closelydid he labour at the small French writing of thislong correspondence, that his eyesight was permanentlyinjured.He had now returned into the neighbourhoodof London, after spending a few days at WoodHall Park, that he might get more undisturbedtime to complete his Hadrian letters. " I have beenexcessively busy of late, and in the line of duty.But my devotional time has been too much brokenin upon ; and this must not be. Much harassed byapplications for recommendations to Hayti, by peopleof whom I know nothing." 18 He went on the 25thof October "to Battersea Rise, where most kindlyreceived Mr. Jebb and his friend, and particepsconcilium, Rev. Mr. Forster, his curate, there.Former confined to his bed. Much chat in the evening.26th. Mr. Forster preached morning. Sat up too late,but the conversation really important. 29th. Morningas usual. Dinner, Lord Guilford, Mr. Mortier, who allw Diary.VOL. IV. R362 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. Isis.night and breakfast next morning, and was very entertaining.Jebb down yesterday Lord Guilfordvery entertaining. 30th. To Kensington Gore afterbreakfast. Nov. 4th. W. set off for college.Talked much to him to-day ; telling him the chiefevents of my early life. I could not sleep quietly foranxiety ; yet dear means to give me pleasure. Ifear he will be overborne from not forbearing to exposehimself to temptation. I told him often themain matter was to put the guard in the right place.6th. Heard for certain, what before reported, thatPrincess Charlotte died about five hours after thebirth of a very fine, but still-born boy. She bore herlong sufferings admirably. About ten days before,she had remarked, f Certainly I am the happiest womanin the world, I have not a wish ungratified surelythis is too much to last.' The loss most deeply felt ;their life had been truly exemplary charitable, unostentatiouskindness to all the poor around Claremont."" I must say," is the postscript of a lettersent on this day to Mr. Babington, " alas ! for Clare -mont ; yet surely this is an event which reasoning onScripture principles we may easily comprehend, bothin the probable meaning of personal mercy, and national,as well as domestic, punishment."I thought," his Diary continues, 19 " in the night ofwriting a letter to the Prince Regent, hoping to findhis heart accessible, and put down some notes for it :but this day scarcely spent so profitably as Sundaysshould be. Too little private prayer and communion9 Nov. 15.1817. DISTRESSED SAILORS. 363with God aimed at. Oh remember thy high callingand the precious promises, 2 Cor. vi. at the end, and1 John iii. 1, 2, of fellowship with the Father andChrist, and Psalms Lxiii. Lxxxiv. xxxvi. O sursumcorda." ee Sent off," he says soon after, " a suitableletter with my Practical View to Prince of Coburg.May God prosper it ;" and the notice of a " kindanswer in which he promises to read it," is followedby the prayer, " May God bless to him the perusalof it."Christmas soon closed in upon him amongst hisusual domestic and charitable occupations ; ." watchingover " his " children" " setting them to work,"more especially in the evening, " each having his book "or " taking them to see some jugglers ;" 20 . . . not forgetfulto entertain strangers ; " Rev. Mr. Faure withus Dutch clergyman, who sent me lately my bookon Christianity translated into Dutch going toCape of Good Hope as clergyman; his father livesat Stillenborch ; I hope pious, and says many of theministers are so in Holland, though much infidelitytoo ;" . . . or actively employed in devising schemesfor the relief of any suffering with which he hadbeen made acquainted. <f Dec. 24th. To Lord Sid-mouth'sabout the poor sailors and others in distress.Lieutenant Gordon kindly offered to inquire for meand ascertain. 27th. Much talk with LieutenantGordon about the poor sailors, who are starving withcold and hunger : by his own visitation many of themprove to be not merely sailors of the royal navy, butsDiary.R 2364 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1817.petty officers; one a black man, who such in theShannon when she took the American frigate wroteletters by him to the city aldermen, Macaulay, &c.Collected a small private meeting and Stephengoing to Croaker a hulk set up by the Admiralty forthe poor fellows." 21 He " heard " soon after with delightof " the success of the poor sailors' relievingplan," from which small beginning sprung all thoseinstitutions which are now so frequent at our outportsfor the reception of these gallant, but too generallythriftless men.But though thus zealous in every good work,the year closed upon him with many humiliatingthoughts of his own unprofitable service and thegoodness of his God. " I am much affected," hetells Mr. Stephen, " with Lord St. John's death,once the inmate of my house for months together.He, his elder brother, and Chaplin, (called scar'c %xn v , strong Chaplin,) all gone, and I still onearth." " Having so little time," says the record ofhis most secret feelings, 22 " I must not write my eyestoo being indifferent, and this is always awkwardwhen meditation brings tears into them, and whichhurt them as much almost as any thing. But what,alas ! could I put down but what too often before. Ihave been extremely engrossed by business, madelate at night, and so my private devotions have beencontracted. Let me guard against procrastination;strive to be punctual and diligent ; to grow in grace,living closer to God. Let me strive, though my91 Diary. Journal.1818. WEST INDIAN TACTICS. 365children are with me,, to prepare for the meeting ofparliament. Above all, let us live in Christ to Godand all will be well. O God, I go to prayer. Pardon,bless, sanctify me, and make me meet for a betterworld. My health is clearly not so good as itwas, but I hope I regret it only as indicating mybeing called away before my work is done. Alas,alas ! how much more might I have done, if I hadbeen duly diligent and self-denying ! But let mework at the eleventh hour. Lord, work in and by me,Amen." 23 " Amidst all my weakness, I can look toGod through Christ, with humble hope, and evenpeace and joy in believing. Lord, what I know notteach Thou me. Wherein I am lacking, supply mewith all needful supplies of grace and strength. Icast myself on Thy precious promises, and claim Thyoffered salvation."The year 1818 was an important era in the WestIndian struggle ; for though no ameliorating measurewas actually carried, the friends of Africa wereled into new counsels, and assumed a new position.The opposition made to the Registration Act forcedthem to establish its necessity, by going into an examinationof the actual state of the slave population ; andthese inquiries revealed at once such an amount ofcrime and cruelty, as proved that there was no curefor the evils of the system, short of its entire subversion." Our grand object, and our universal language,"says his private memoranda, 24 " was and is, toproduce by Abolition a disposition to breed instead ofw Journal. 24 MS. Notes.366 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1818.buying. This is the great vital principle which wouldwork in every direction, and produce reform everywhere."This had been hitherto their only aim ; butafuller view of the secret iniquities of the colonialsystem, too surely convinced him that even this wouldnot heal all its evils ; and now therefore for the firsttime the word emancipation occurs amongst his secretcounsels. Yet as another instance of the practicaland cautious character of all his efforts, he thoughtnot in emancipation of depriving the owners of WestIndian properties of their present right to the labourof their slaves, but only of granting to the slave suchcivil rights, as should bring him under the protectionof just and equal laws, and make him a member ofthe commonwealth instead of the chattel of an absentmaster.The fine shadings of these altering views, andtheir various colours as they pass into each other,cannot be so well exhibited as by free extracts fromthe private Diary in which they are recorded at themoment, mingled with the intervening objects whichfilled up his time. The year opened with his receivingan account, " Jan. 7th, of the dreadful murderof a poor slave buried without a coroner's inquestbut dug up, and found all mangled yet broughtin by the jury, Died by the visitation of God. Thentried to fasten the crime on his own driver, bythe evidence of the poor slave to whom the deceasedwas chained. But matter came out which led to hisown trial, and he was sentenced to three months' imprisonment.Yet the governor seems merely to have1818. ABOLITION CONSULTATIONS. 367sent word that a trial for murder, but that the jury onlybrought it in manslaughter. Alas ! alas ! I must notwrite for the sake of my eyes ; but my mind becomesso much affected by the sad state of those poor injuredwretches that it keeps me awake at night. Ohmay God enable us to possess the nation with a duesense of their wrongs, and that we may be the instrumentof redressing them. But, alas ! I grow sadlyincapable ; may I yet be strengthened to render thisservice.17th. The two American deputies, from the FreeColoured Colonization Society, at Kensington Goreto accompany me to Gloucester House; the Dukebehaved very civilly to them. Afterwards took themto Lord Bathurst, who very civil to them, and at thedoor introduced them to Lord Liverpool, whom wemet, and who also was very civil to them. He appearedvery self-complacent as if he knew he haddone a welcome thing, as indeed he had, by givingHalifax living to Knight. 30th. To Stephen's tomeet at dinner Sir James Mackintosh, Sir SamuelRomilly, William Smith, Brougham, and Macaulay -an Abolition consultation. We had much talk afterdinner ; they were for my moving for papers, I own Iwas more for a full inquiry into the state of the slaves,and for a radical improvement. In the morning Ihad conferred with Watson about getting witnesses.31st. To Castlereagh's after breakfast ; long talkabout Spanish treaty. He truly enough intimatingthat we ought to do him justice in our treatment ofit in the House ; remarking, how apt people in this368 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1818.country to be eager before, but to forget when theobject is gained. Also impressed me with a dangerof pressing for too entire a change, in short for slaves'emancipation, till Abolition by other powers securedthe French, Dutch, and American right of search.Much struck with his remarks and information.Feb. 3rd. Dinner at home Mr. and Mrs. Buxton,Mr. S. Hare, jun. Mrs. Fry, Miss PriscillaGurney very interesting talk indeed, and agreed tomeet tomorrow at Newgate."4th. Breakfast Lieutenant Gordon, who told usmuch, and showed the Sailors' Association to havedone much good. Went with our party to meet Mrs.Fry at Newgate. The order she has produced iswonderful a very interesting visit much talk withthe governor and chaplain Mrs. Fry prayed in recitativethe place from its construction bad."6th. To Freemasons' meeting for new churches.Archbishop of Canterbury in the chair many of thebishops. The Duke of Northumberland moved theresolutions. I chosen Vice President with a multitudeof high-churchmen, and great men said a fewwords.9th. Secret Committee. House Spanish treatybetter off than expected only four opposed us.Mackintosh and Bennett supported very handsomely.Marryatt and Gordon also. M. and opposedmost invidiously, on the two grounds of the money,and helping Spain against her colonies.10th. Secret Committee. House on Lord A.Hamilton's motion about tampering with Scotch evilSPIES. 369hence, but expected it would be late and perhapsa doubtful question, so staid away to save myself,(I ought to do it more frequently,) and do homebusiness.11th. Secret Committee. House Fazakerley'smotion spoke, and better than usual avowed openlymy abominating the employing of spies and informersaltogether, on the grounds of religion and morality,and sound policy." " I am astonished," he said, " thathonourable gentlemen do not see that these arecrooked paths. Certainly the employment of suchengines cannot be justified upon religious principles.All the ways of falsehood and deceit are hateful tothe God of truth." " I forced some others to speakout, and I really hope I shall be able to become aninstrument in beating out the system, and of doingthereby more service to my country than I almostever yet effected. But though I spoke better thanusual, what I said not being palatable to either party,I was less than usual encouraged. O let me learnmore to look upward for my reward. Canning veryclever, and sometimes quite admirable, but too artificial: Tierney terribly bitter, and Bennett verycoarse, but very strong. Lord Milton forgot we werea Secret Committee. I came home near two with Canning;I found him remembering Lord Milton's supportof him in the Portugal business, and therefore saying,though he would cope with his arguments, he wouldalways treat him personally with respect. This quitepleasing ; so grateful. But poor Canning sadlyloose in his reasoning ; I spoke to him more openlyR 3370 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1818.as we came home. Poor fellow, he had neitherfather nor mother to train him up. He was broughtup partly I believe with Sheridan. I always wonderedhe was so pure.13th. Mrs. Fry called early about a poor womanunder sentence of death for forgery of the setthat so improved in externals. Our murderouslaws prevent prosecutions, and often harden convicts'hearts. Mr. Way called and told me of the insurrectionin Berbice. Alas, this I fear will make againstus ; though it ought to have an opposite effect. Wentto Committee Lord Milton made a very handsomeapology for his having mentioned what he did theother night.14th. Lieutenant Gordon at breakfast generouslyoffering to go out to the West Indies if he couldthereby bring out the oppression and cruelty which isnow veiled over. But Stephen says nothing couldbe brought to light. It is shocking that we nowknow of one of the most horrid murders ever perpetrated,and tried to be fastened on another ; yet wecannot bring it out because we should ruin our informant.Secret Committee then dined with Dukeand Duchess of Gloucester, but could get no opportunityof talking to her Lord Sidmouth, Lord andLady Ellenborough, Melville, and others.17th. Up late from having been awake thinkingof the slaves' wretched sufferings, and partly the twopoor women about to be hanged for forgery this day.Alas, how bloody are our laws ! Secret Committee,and House Lord Folkstone's motion for referring1818. WEST INDIAN PLANS. 371petitions to Committee. Spoke from being called upby Sir Francis Burdett.19th. Captain Arabian called about Sir SydneySmith's affair. Then called Lord Grenville's aboutWest Indian business, and with him to Lord Lans-down's,where Greville, Babington, Macaulay, Harrison,A eland, Brougham, &c. After much consultationwe agreed to Lord Grenville's motion, that weshould get a committee to inquire what was done inconsequenceof the recommendation two years agofrom ministers to enforce registration, and improve thereligious and moral state of the slave population. Consultedtogether after the House, on the best coursefor t "us as to West Indian slaves ; and Broughamrepeated what Stephen had before truly said, thatwe are much better acquainted with the whole subjectthan Grenville. On reflection I am against proposinga general committee now, and rather for bringingforward various motions, in order to make thecountry aware of the real state of the slaves and freecoloured people, and for contending for various principles,as independence, and non-partnership of governor,and even still more of judge. Also marriage,schools, overseer being incapacitated when cruel, &c.March 4th. Buxton's Joseph Gurney andLord Rocksavage, breakfast. Then callers. Letters,and a long one to Dr. Chalmers, justifying myselffrom the charge of some persons in Scotland, thatI had been inconsistent in speaking against spies,and voting against Fazakeiiey's motion. 2 ' 5 It went85 Vid. Correspondence, &c.372 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1818.altogether on a false assumption. Poor dinedwith us; it is quite melancholy to see him. Whenyoung he was, I understand, cheerful and pleasant,but there was nothing solid ; nothing of vestedlabour ; and now all is flat and feeble.5th. House on Phillips's motion spies' and informers'examination. Wished not to speak, andmeant ; but at last forced up, and went off, throughGod's goodness, better than expected. Never did Igive a clearer vote ; for never would there have beena more long, intricate, complicated, unprofitable inquiry.Tierney gave the last prick, which forced meto rise ; though not at all ill-naturedly I am glad tosay. Nor w r as I ill-natured I hope : thank God Idid not feel so."But though not ill-natured, his reply was strikinglyeffective. Mr. Tierney's language had seemed toothers rough and overbearing, and they waited withsome anxiety for his reply. " I am not at all affected,"he said, " by the tone of easy confidence whichhas been assumed, because I am too well practisedin debate not to know that gentlemen never talk inthat manner till their cause is desperate." Then,after observing that the motion which he was calledupon to support was even more objectionable thanthat which had preceded it, he turned the attack whichhad been made upon himself into an argument againstthe spirit of party. " I and my right hon. friend whospoke last are old soldiers in parliamentary warfare,and I certainly feel no anger at what he has said,because I know it is nothing more than it is expected1818. HIS WEIGHT IN PARLIAMENT. 373he should say as the leader of opposition. But to whata pitch has party virulence come in this House, when,unless a person is systematically opposed to government,it is maintained that he cannot form an honestopinion on what is presented to him in parliament!"This was one of the many occasions which incidentallydiscovered the weight which uniform consistencyhad given his opinion. The friends of governmentcharged opposition with having framed themeasure to catch his vote ; and Mr. Tierney in replydeclared that there was no one in the House, who,when he came fairly out, could render such effectualservice to the ministry. Mr. Perceval's supportershad before this charged him with doing governmentmore harm than the most systematic oppositionist.At that time indeed he was member for Yorkshire ;but in giving up that county he had since done whatone of his friends then told him " no one else couldafford to do," and yet retained his former influence.This was so evident as to strike even a casual observer." When Mr. Wilberforce," remarked CountPecchio, " passes through the crowd on the day ofthe opening of parliament, every one contemplatesthis little old ma worn with age, and his head sunkupon his shoulders, as a sacred relic ; as the Washingtonof humanity." Yet powerful as he was in theHouse, Mr. Southey was not wrong in thinking hisparliamentary interest by no means commensuratewith the weight with which his opinion came to thepublic ; that being far greater than of any otherindividual." 2646 Letter of R. Southey Esq. Dec. H, 1817.374 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1818.7th. Rather wasted time with dear Bishop ofGloucester, who called and consulted about his answerto Whitehead's charge. Then wrote to Chalmers,explaining about the Spies motion that I declaredI would support proposition to prosecute. To Speaker'slevee. Home with Canning we agreed that forthe raw material of a Speaker, the finest elementswere in Lamb.8th. Sunday. Lay awake several hours in thenight, and very languid this morning. My mind isvery uneasy, and greatly distracted about the course tobe pursued in the West Indian matters. It is hardto decide, especially where so many counsellors. Thisis clear, that in the Scriptures no national crime iscondemned so frequently, and few so strongly, as oppressionand cruelty, and the not using our best endeavoursto deliver our fellow-creatures from them.Fer. vi. 6, ' This is a city to be visited ; she is whollyoppression in the midst of her.' Ezek. xvi. 49, of Sodom'scrimes : ' Neither did she strengthen the handsof the poor and needy.' Zeph. iii. 1 ; Amos iv. 1, 8, &c.I must therefore set to work, and, O Lord, direct,and support, and bless me. If it please Theenot to let me be the instrument of good to these poordegraded people, may I still be found working, likedear Stephen, with vigour and simple obedience, remembering,' It is well for thee that it was in thyheart.'11th. Sadly distressed in mind about the propercourse as to West Indian matters, but I believe it iswiser not to bring the subject forward just now, whenthe public mind, and too many of our friends, are1818. GENERAL BOYD. 375full of the Indemnity Bill. Many of the oppositionare our friends. Presented General Boyd'spetition."You can tell me," he writes to Mr. Grant, " howbest, if at all, I can serve General Boyd, whose memorialI will enclose. Dr. Morse, of the UnitedStates, a warm friend of this country, and, I hope, apious, active man, has recommended to me this GeneralBoyd, and his fellow-traveller, Mr. Storer, a tutorof one of their colleges ; and I wish, if I can, to showgratifying attentions to Dr. M.'s recommendation. Iam clear, that we ought to endeavour by personal andindividual civilities to Americans, to cultivate thegood-will, and mitigate the prejudices and jealousy, ofthe people of that country. I trust true religion isincreasing there."ee 16th. House on various matters. I forced to divideas a mere joke, though 'some I find have misunderstoodit into ill-usage. Slept at lodgings, and mysleep accidentally disturbed. How little a thing willmolest me swagger as I may a poor creature at best !Dear, good Vansit tart's proposition for new churches.17th. General Boyd's Committee. House wheresadly late. Thought it right to attend the Housewhen Vansit tart moved the Report of his Church Bill.26th. Gloucester House to dinner smaller partythan usual Lord Limerick, Lord Stuart, (I sat nextto him, and talked a little seriously to him, for whichthe Duke thanked me afterwards,) Baron de Bode,Lord Shaftesbury, who told me the combined army'sgoing upon Paris was in obedience to a letter from376 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1818.the Regent, written without even advising with hisministers.28th. I still am in no little embarrassment whatcourse to pursue as to the West Indian question. Thedenunciations not only against those who are guiltyof the positive acts of oppression, but against thosewho connive at its continuance, are so strong that Iam truly uneasy at my having suffered so much timeto pass away without having done any thing for relaxingthe yoke of the most degrading and bitterbondage that ever ground down the human species.Yet valid objections have always occurred againstevery specific plan. Oh may I be directed right 1 Iquite long to bring some measure forward. Lord,guide and strengthen, and warm me with true Christianlove of Thee, and desire to benefit my fellow-creaturesfor His sake. 31st. Much impressed byMr. Buxton's book on our prisons, and the account ofNewgate reform. What lessons are taught by Mrs.Fry's success ! I am still warmed by the account.Were I young, I should instantly give notice of thebusiness, if no one else did.April 1st. Mr. Storer and Everett, Americans,breakfasted. Latter Greek professor in their CambridgeUniversity has been two years travellingone year and a half at Gottingen University. Hetold me much of the scepticism of the professors,Inkhorn especially Seller's opinions sad worklong talk with him. The Morning Chroniclefull of very middling wit, grounded on my adventurewhen forced to vote, and B.'s attack on1818. VOTES TO THE PRINCES. 377vital Christianity. Poor fellow, I wish he knew itsbenefit ; surely his injustice is great in wishing themob to believe me a friend of spies, when I was thefirst who condemned their use altogether, and by sodoing compelled others to do the same.13th. Gen. Boyd's Committee. House whichin a storm about additional allowance to Princes.14th. After breakfast went to Stephen's to writeletters and prepare for my motion. Eat a little coldmeat in the carriage was to bring on my motion forWest Indian papers. But first I found the House inawhirlwind about the motion for increasing the incomesof the Princes, and when at last that was putoff, I thought the members so full of that businesswhich was to come on tomorrow that they wouldnot give their minds at all to my subject. I shallavoid the risk of clashing with Sir Samuel Romillywho comes forward on Thursday, and the House willbe wakened to the subject by his motion.15th. Breakfast Mr. W. Parnell the new M. P.for Wicklow (who by the way spoke the same afternoon,almost immediately on taking his seat). Mr.Dale and others callers hearing my dear boys theirScripture. Writing letters at Stephen's. House, onthe grants to the Princes on their marriages. Votedagainst the Duke of Clarence's 10,000, and for6000 per annum ; which carried by 195 against 184.Did not speak, partly because I might have incurredthe imputation of revenge.16th. Expected Sir S. Romilly's Slave motion,but the Princes' grants discussion consumed the378 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1818.whole evening. Voted for and carried spoke also-theDuke of Cambridge's 6000 per annum. Dukeof Clarence declined the settlement in civil terms.22nd. In Stephen's library for quiet, and preparingfor discussion in the House on West Indianaffairs. My motion for papers explaining aboutRegistry Bill. Then Romilly's about Dominicacases of cruelty. I spoke long but not well toomuch matter imperfectly explained, and without duemethod. But the mercenary feelings of some, andthe prejudices of others, with the cry against me,make the reporters so inattentive to me that they donot affect to report what I say. May God only enablethese poor injured creatures to find a deliverer :what men say of me is little in some views it iseven gratifying. I used to fear I was too popular,and I remember, ' Commit thy way unto the Lord ;trust also in Him,' &c. Only forgive me my ownmany defects, infirmities, and negligence.24th. I could not sleep last night for thinking ofpoor H. Skelton, with whom John Sargent had beenyesterday in Newgate, and described her unutterableagony to suffer this morning for forgery. To EducationCommittee, by Brougham's desire thenlodgings, where wrote and dined on cold meat. TheCourier of yesterday contains a most bitter attack onme and others for our West Indian interference ; Ialmost am glad of it. Surely God will assert his owncause ; when the powers of darkness thus come forwardand instigate their agents, He will overpower them.I have no fear, though my poor weak body, and1818. NATIONAL SOCIETY. 379decayed faculties, may not enable me to see in thisworld the triumph.May 1st. Simon staying in the house officiatedat family prayer devotional, but not sufficientlypractical ; stating warmly the privileges and enjoyments,and in a degree the character of Christians,but none of those urgent admonitions and warnings,which Scripture contain, nor those exhortations topenitence. When clear from people, to Freemasons'Hall. Meeting of the friends of National Schoolscalled together to replenish the treasury Duke ofYork in the chair Archbishop of Canterbury, York,and Bishop of London, and ten or twelve more. LordHarrowby moved the first resolution, which given meto second. All circumstances considered . . my havingbeen canvassed by the Archbishop himself, my beingsuspected, though falsely, of loose attachment to theChurch because I do not hate Dissenters . . I gave50, more than I could well afford, and doubledmy annual subscription ; but we are not to suffer ourgood to be evil spoken of. Dear Acland did verywell Duke of York kindly obliging as alwaystalked with Marsh Bishop of Llandaff, and Luxmore ofHereford, about Cambridge regulations, lodgings, &c.10th. Determined to come in again for Bramber,at least for two years, under some strange circumstances.Thus Providence seems to fashion my ways,and if I should go entirely out of public life in twoyears, I hope to have previously sown the seeds andlaid the foundation of the West Indian reform. Ishall then, if I live, be sixty, as much as most men's380 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1818.seventy. But my times, O Lord, are in Thy hand.Oh how truly may I say, that goodness and mercy havefollowed me all my days ! What cause have I to bethankful for kind friends ! Lord Gambier most affectionate,Stephen most disinterested, and kind, andgenerous. Babington and Inglis, Charles Grant andMacaulay too, and Col. Barry truly friendly, frank,and kind. Surely no man ever had such undeservedmercies. Praise the Lord, O my souL17th. Trinity Sunday. Blessed be God, I felt todaymore sensibly than of late the power of divinethings. Was it the present reward of not yielding tothe impulse which I felt, but upon good grounds, to belonger in bed ? I remembered Christ's rising longbefore day, and got up. Babington sent me a kindletter, warning me of H.'s excessive and vindictiverage, and intention to charge me with duplicity (Iam sure I can say in the presence of God, none wasintended) about the Bill for permitting the removalof gangs of slaves from the Bahamas to Guiana.Lord, undertake for me ; let me not bring discrediton Thy holy faith. Thou hast the hearts of all underThy power, O turn them favourably towards me. Atleast let me not discredit Thy cause. I will not thinkon this business until tomorrow : but to-day I maysay, ' Lord, be Thou my surety for good.' Howmany are the passages in the Psalms which give comfortunder the assaults of unreasonable and violentmen ! How strongly have I felt the double manwithin me to-day ! I really despise and abhor myselffor the rising of thoughts referring to human esti-1818. GENERAL BOYD. 381relation ; which nevertheless will rise even as to thisvery self-abhorrence, and so on ad infinitude. Ohwhat poor creatures we are ! This should make us longfor a purer heart and a better world.19th. Sir A. Johnston about Madagascar boy,and Hayti. Then lodgings, where met General Boydand Storer Mr. Rush, American minister, asamicus curia. I hope he found he was wrong, morethan he would before own, yet I cannot believe himdishonest."20th. General Boyd's Committee to receive hisanswer a sad business. Then House on Romilly'smotion. 27 I spoke but very indifferently Marryatthowever, and his principles, were deserted.26th. Mons. Picket and grandson from Genevabreakfasted he spirited, talked of plays and playersSiddons-theatre less profligate than formerly.With Mackintosh to Chancellor of Exchequer's aboutSir Sydney Smith's affair, meaning to bring it beforethe House. Then Nevis Committee went to business,examining Weeks Romilly cannot attend.June 1st. I meant to slip away early to Stephen'sroom and finish the Report for Boyd's Committee,when in came poor old Arthur Young, and I couldnot turn him away. Then Sir J. Mackintoshafterwards to Stephen's, and then to Boyd's Committee,where high compliments paid to the Report asacomposition, but its justice denied. Sir R. F. andLord B. especially violent against poor Boyd, andreally unfair to him.27 On the treatment of slaves in the island of Nevis.382 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1818.2nd. At the Report. Then at twelve to Boyd'sCommittee disagreeable contest again till four, whenwith Mackintosh to Lord Liverpool about Sir SydneySmith ; meaning to petition the House tomorrow ifwe can't get him relieved without. Eat cold meat,lodgings, and House. Heard Burdett on ParliamentaryReform moving for universal suffrage andannual parliaments, and Cochrane seconding; withtears taking leave of the House. Then Brougham'sexcellent reply.10th. Kept at home by letters till time for theHouse. Spoke of French Slave Trade, and LordCastlereagh promised fair. Indeed he has done allhe could. The Regent came to the House, and, as Ilearned afterwards, not only prorogued, but dissolvedthe parliament the first time since Charles theSecond's reign. Tierney resented it. Went withGovernor Farquhar, Sir Alexander Johnston, andDuchess of Beaufort, to see Borough Road school :meaning afterwards to see the Baldwin's Garden centralschools, but too late. Samuel Thornton resignsout of kindness to Sumner. Dear Babington retiresfrom Leicester we are all grieved beyond measure.Sad work, my old friends leaving me.12th. Auxiliary Bible meeting for Kensington,c. I forced to take the chair whole went offadmirably no stuff Dr. Henderson interesting.16th. William Allen and Mr. BoOcock (freshfrom Africa) with a dreadful account of the FrenchSlave Trade depredations. Allen's account of thecomfort of Owen of Lanark's people delightful ; but1818. NATIONAL SCHOOLS. 383not owing to his lessons ; there are several good peoplethere. Heard for an hour and a half out of doorsDavison's Essay on the Poor Laws. Very clever,and some masterly passages.July 4th. General Boyd this morning kept meabove an hour. Perhaps I did wrong in thinking itpossible a man of so little clearness of head could hemade to take a fair view of his own case. I believeand hope he has a generous, honest heart ; but surelynever was there a stronger instance of the effects oflistening to tattle than the accounts to which hegave credit ; and when told that 10,000 was all wecould get, he at once declared he should reckon sucha sum an insult.7th. After breakfast with Duchess of Beaufortto National School ; but too late, and all the childrengone so we staid till they returned at two,, and chattedwith them but time lost though I thought itright, if only as a compliment to the National Schools,to take the Duchess to them, having taken her to theBritish and Foreign. Duke de Roman was to havemet us but did not come."He was now leaving the neighbourhood of London.The quiet of this place," he says at Elmdon on the17th of July, " is quite delightful after all our bustle.The colour of the ground is quite changed by yesterday'sdelightful rain." 28 His spirit expanded amidstrural sights and sounds, and his heart overflowed withthankfulness to the Giver of all his mercies. Helonged to teach all around him his own song of gratis384 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1818.tide, and could scarcely bear its absence. ' Mostkindly received," he says after visiting an early friend,by T., and he lives most comfortably, to the fullof that word I might say splendidly ; but it is grievousand very injurious to spend day after day enjoyingevery indulgence without the mention or apparentthought of the Giver of all good, and the Object ofall hopes. Oh if a fellow creature had given us everything,how should we have talked of him ! What exuberantoverflowing of gratitude should we have witnessed! It is a delightful place, and a magnificenthouse. But I find it hurt my own mind : I felt lessfrom the non-recognition of Christ the latter daysthan the first and second. Oh that I might more andmore walk by faith habitually ! " " Alas, poor G.,from spending all his time in hunting and farming, isgrown empty and stupid."He was now halting at Elmdon on his way towardsthe Lakes. " There are two places," he had said inearlier life, " to which, if I ever marry, I will take myw if e to Barley Wood, and Westmoreland." ButWestmoreland he had never yet found time to visitsince his marriage ; and even now, the fresh arrival ofsome Hayti parcels made him " grieve in secret overthis Lake expedition." Mr. Southey had endeavouredto engage for him a house at Keswick ; and, thoughunsuccessful, enticed him onwards by letter. " I amvery sorry that you are not in this delightful countryduring this delightful weather. We are enjoying areal honest, old-fashioned summer, such as summerswere forty years ago, when I used to gather grapes1818. SOUTHEY. 385from my grandmother's chamber window warmweather for polemical writing ; and yet little as suchwriting is to my taste, I have been employed in it forthe last week. B., with his usual indiscretion, thoughtfit to attack me from the hustings. It was whollyunprovoked, as I had taken no part whatever in theelection, and every thing which he said of me wasuntrue. So I am giving him such a castigation as henever had before, and which it is to be hoped may-lasthim for his life." Ten days later he writes again.The heat of the summer is checked, and we are enjoyingsun and showers, with just such a temperatureas makes exercise pleasant, and allows one to enjoy alittle fire at night. I am as true to the hearth as acricket or a favourite spaniel, and reckon it a privationwhen the weather is too hot for enjoying thisindulgence."Some continuous extracts from his Diary duringthis excursion, will show the natural working of hismind in a time of relaxation. Leaving Elmdon onthe 10th, he reached Seaport House, near Liverpool,upon the 1 th of August. " When we got uponthe paved roads, our inch-pin twice came out, andour spring-straps broke. A kind Providence favouredus, that no accident. Praise the Lord, O my soul.12th. Morning and evening prayers. How gratifyingthat we have some Christian merchants ! Mostkind treatment. Staid at home for writing. Mr. J.remarkably pleasant overflowing, and sparkling allthe while. In the evening got into an argument aboutDr. Johnson's religion. Mr. J. showed me after-vol.iv. s386 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1818.wards Dr. Johnson's affecting farewell to Gingham.May you and I find some humble place in the betterworld, where we may be admitted as penitent sinners.Farewell. God bless you for Christ's sake, my dearGingham.'13th. To Liverpool in Mr. Gladstone's carriage,and saw the Botanical Garden very fine. He andMr. Roster kindly meeting us. Up late from havingslept ill. ***** This sadcircumstance poisons all my comfort, though I turnmy mind from it."No man more diligently practised this wise andhealthy philosophy. " In the night," he tells a friendto whom his heart was open, " a certain subject is aptto get the better of me and keep me awake ; not somuch from direct distress as from its being so interesting"that it occupies the mind, and the effort ofthought which is required for turning to another subjectwakes me." These wakeful nights were a greatdrain upon his strength, but careful self-discipline hadtaught him the true Christian alchemy which can extractfrom all outward things the elements of gratitudeand praise. " I am up late," says his Journal,from having a very sleepless night, though blessedbe God a very comfortable one no pain and even noanxiety ; my mind meditating gratitude to God forall his mercies, and thinking over passages of thePsalms." It was a striking sight on such a morningto contrast his " hunted " and languid frame with thefull burst of thankfulness and joy, which seemed toflow most freely when the weakness of the body1818. ROKEBY. 387showed that it sprung from a spiritual and heavenlysource. The prayer for Thursday in his forms offamily devotion taken down by a visitor on one suchmorning in this very autumn, affords perhaps thebest example of this happy state of mind. But toreturn to the Diary.14th. Liverpool again, and saw the Athenaeum,Town Hall, &c. Called on Roscoe, Mr. Hors-fall,&c,15th. Got off at half-past eleven travelled onshaking roads, and alarmed about the wheels firingwaiting for horses, so it was half-past eight when wereached Lancaster, and nearly dark. Just walked tocastle and church, and saw the mountains at a distance.Mr. Joy kindly came to us. Reached Cas-mertonat midnight most kind reception.16th. William Wilson's sermon excellent, thoughtoo Calvinistic. Afternoon better, and his examiningand talking to the children excellent.17th. Afternoon to Kirby Lonsdale Missionarymeeting. I spoke miserably half asleep forced toit.Dear Bickersteth and Mr. Sibthorpe there.18th. Off at half-past eleven for Rokeby, andnot in till half-past ten four hours and a half eachon two stages of eighteen or nineteen miles horseswretched most kindly received. Dr. Woollaston andMr. Blake here. Morritt's family nephew a fineyoung man, and two nieces sweet girls.19th. Long home walk delightful banks ofGreta through stony bed." From this hospitablehouse he interrupts a business letter to his friends2388 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1818.James Stephen, with "How I wish you were here, notonly that I might see you, but that you might see thesublime and beautiful scenery of this charming place !A highlander long absent from his native land,coming out of the south with a companion, broke outon arriving here, with ( Oh this I understand, thisriver Greta talks Scotch.'21st. Get little done. The weather cloudy butfair. Carriage, and walking by the river GretaOriginal woods grand views. Dr. Woollaston andMr. Blake left us to-day for London. Woollastontalked more last night and this morning, and wasvery agreeable looks forward to greater and greaterdiscoveries, except perhaps in astronomy. WalterScott and Mrs. and Miss, and Captain Fergusoncame to dinner to stay some time Scott very entertaining,full of stories which he tells excellently.22nd. Off at eleven, and at Casterton by eight.Henry Venn, Miss Elliott, and our two boys fromDunham joined us.24th. Having only this day to spend at Casterton,and Mr. Wilson going off to Preston, I was forced tostay with him in the morning, and afterwards to walkwith the rest ; meaning to have another day for mybirth-day keeping. Alas, what reflections force themselveson my mind !25th. Off about eleven, and to Kendal, andRydale about half-past five, delighted with the place.Miss Wordsworth our kind provider already with us,and most kindly assiduous.30th. Morning at church at Grasmere heard1818. RYDALE. 389Mr. , a southern ; a sort of a Foundling Hospitalsermon.Sept. 2nd. R. and S. off to see Keswick." Theywent longing to see Southey, but charged not to callupon him A " lest seeing lads of your age, should toopainfully remind him of the son whom he has lost.5th. I took a two hours' walk by Rydale andGrasmere, and a good deal tired." It was not a littleaffecting to see him retracing with delight all hishaunts of earlier days another man in many things ;his body bent and weakened, but his mind furnished-and matured ; his soul purer and well established aftermany struggles ; but having passed through all thebustling scenes of an unquiet life with the simplicityof early tastes and affections unimpaired, pointingout to his children every well-remembered beauty, andteaching by them golden precepts and a most eloquentexample the secret of his own calm and happy temper.Why should not you buy a house here," one of hischildren asked him as they walked, " and then wecould come here every year ? " "I should enjoy it," washis answer, " as much as any one, my dear, but we mustremember we are not sent into the world merely to admireprospects and enjoy scenery. We have noblerobjects of pursuit. We are commanded to imitate Him,who came not to be ministered unto, but to minister.It doubles my own enjoyment to see my dear childrenenjoy these scenes with me ; and now and then whenwe need rest from severe labours, it may be permittedto us to luxuriate in such lovely spots, but it is tofit us for a return to duty; and we must bear in390 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1818.mind too that at present we are in a world which isin a measure under the wrath of God, and there ismuch mercy in every natural beauty that is left in it.We may be contented to wait for full enjoyment tillwe get above to that blessed place, where the desireof our gracious God to bless us shall meet with noobstruction, and His love shall have no check upon itsfull exercise."Yet he tasted thankfully of present pleasures. " Ido not often," he tells Mr. Stephen, " get out of thegarden for any various wanderings, but whenever Ido extend my walk, as to-day for instance, when Iwas seduced from pacing it upon the terrace with myreader at my side, and get among the rocks, and scalethe mountains, I quite long to have you with me."7th. Busy till one. Then on Windermere. Dinedin the boat, under the lea of the great island. Homelate, a delightful evening. Yesterday evening charming.Walked out at night and saw the moon and aflood of light from Wordsworth's terrace. 20th. Fairat church-time, and I went to Grasmere, whereread a common-place sermon at cantering or rathergalloping pace ; he preached last Sunday a sad triflingsermon on repairing Chester cathedral; and beforethat, one chiefly taken from Hall's on the PrincessCharlotte, utterly unintelligible to the bulk of hishearers. He dined with us, and I was sorry to findhe already knew Cooper's Practical Sermons. Ihoped they would have approved themselves to himbut, alas ! In the afternoon I walked to two or threecottages, and talked on religion to the people." His1818. STATE OF THE POOR. 391fervent spirit could scarce be contained in the fullsight of such a state of things. " Our population' Mr.Southey told him, " is in a deplorable state both as tolaw and gospel. The magistrates careless to the lastdegree ; whilst the clergyman of has the comprehensivesin of omission to answer for. The nextgeneration I trust will see fewer of these marryingand christening machines. The manners of thepeople have dreadfully worsened during his long sleep.Even within my remembrance there has been a greatchange."During his short stay amongst the Lakes he didwhat he could to check this evil. He strove to rousethe slumbering energies of all whom he could reachor influence, and in all his scenery excursions visitedthe poor himself. " Went to see Language went intoa cottage and a dame's school : the resident in theformer seemed dejected; had lost her husband inAppleby gaol, and nine children remained. Thepoor woman kept a little shop." c9 He was nowmeditating an excursion to Muncaster and Keswick.I am almost as much a fixture' Southey wrote inanswer to his inquiries, " as my great neighbourSkiddaw himself ; so that whenever you visit Keswickyou will be certain of finding me . We have had alonger continuance of fine weather in this countrythan any person can remember. Saturday was ourfirst wet day . . . The clouds have risen this evening,and we have at this moment some of those beautifulappearances which a stranger would think well pureDiary, Sept. 24.392 LIFE OF Wilberforce. 1818.chased by a wet day. I hope this is indicative ofanother change."On the 28th of September he set off " byBoughton for Muncaster, over Astonished, very neardark. The ladies terrified about the water, but notfearing the descent of the hill. Through God's goodnesswe arrived without the smallest accident, thoughthe ladies sadly terrified; and when a manifestlyhonest voice told us close to the river that there wasperfectly safe passing for an hour to come, their feelingsburst forth in tears. This natural, and a goodissue of a critical danger. Most kindly receivedMorritt there his nephew Stanley, a gentlemanlyyoung man, Mr. Stow, Lord Muncaster's executor,Lord and Lady Lindsay, and five children. Staid atMuncaster till Friday ; strongly pressed to staylonger, but could not. Morritt very cheerful, unassuming,full of anecdote, and a good deal of knowledgeliterary of the old-fashioned Church ofEngland religion, and high-spirited as to integrity,generosity, gratitude, friendly attachment, &c. Mostkind to his family and friends. Never did I see sucheffects of light on the mountains, except perhaps onthe Marine Alps from Nice, as here in the afternoon.The ladies went out daily in the carriage to some orother of the grand scenes. I commonly walked withMr. Stow and Lord Lindsay, and wrote letters."One of these gives an interesting picture of the feelingswhich these old scenes rekindled in his mind.1818. REVIEW OF LIFE. 393TO SAMUEL SMITH ESQ. M. P. WOOD HALL PARK.Muncaster Castle, Cumberland, Oct. 1, 1818.My dear Friend,I should be strongly urged to take up my pento write to you, were it only to satisfy the feelingswhich are daily produced in me as I revisit the variousscenes of this delightful country, over which you andI rambled two and forty years ago. What reason,my dear friend, have we both to consider as addressedto ourselves the injunction of Holy Scripture, ' Thoushalt remember all the way which the Lord thy Godled thee these forty years ! ' but there the parallelceases, for the passage goes on, f through the wilderness,'whereas both to you and to me (as you I doubtnot are as ready to admit as I am) life has been anythingbut a wilderness. In truth it has not been acountry flowing with milk and honey only, but withevery other benefit and enjoyment which the heart ofman could wish for, and more than any would bepresumptuous enough to request. You may conceiveon reflection what interesting recollections are calledforth in my breast, when I recall to mind the sceneswe visited, the objects which then engaged ourminds, the conversation which passed between us, (Iam now within a very few miles of Wastdale Head,the valley in which we slept, or rather passed thenight, in the same wooden crib after piercing throughthe Gorge of Borrodale,) and then when I proceedto review the long line of subsequent events, whatdo I see, but the continual bounty of the great LIFE OF Wilberforce. 1818.gainer of all things? What reason have, I to adoptthe language of the psalmist, f Surely goodness andmercy have followed me all the days of my life ! ' Icannot but add, Oh that my gratitude were morecommensurate with the vast and unceasing kindnessand long-suffering (for long-suffering also I mustadd) of my unwearied Benefactor ! But how I amrunning on ! I have abundantly proved the truth ofthe remark with which I opened, that I was stimulatedto write to you by my feelings alone. Farewell,my dear friend, and believe me,Yours sincerely and affectionately,W. Wilberforce."Another letter dated the same day is an instance ofthe various claims upon his thoughts which foundhim out at Muncaster as surely as in London.Muncaster Castle, Oct. 1, 1818.My dear Macaulay,K , a young man who was rakish and indistress, is now stopping in Madeira, on his way tothe East Indies. He now professes to be penitent ;praises Doddridge's Rise and Progress, &c. I hopeall may be well, but dare not be too sanguine. Willyou mention him, and forward the enclosed, to somepious man (Edwards I think is the name) resident inMadeira, who, if K. be really religiously impressed,may help to kindle the smoking flax.I am ever affectionately yours,W. Wilberforce,"1818. SOUTHEY. 395What emotions are called forth by my review ofthese well-known scenes ! Do not you remember ourmeeting here ?" " I wish you were by my side," heagain tells Mr. Stephen, " that you might admire themagnificent mountains, that in a more than triplepile, are rearing their sublime points before me, andguarding as it were the peaceful vale which theyterminate."On the 2nd of October he " reached Keswick afterdark by Ennerdale-head and Lower-water, and gotto very comfortable lodgings. I found afterwardsthat Mrs. I., our hostess, had been a pretty youngwoman, whom I remember forty-two years ago asPolly Keen of Hawkshead; now she is a toothless,nut-cracker-jawed old woman, but quite upright andactive. 3rd. On the lake with poor Thomas Sutton,who now seventy-five or six, but still active. Toorough ; and rain coming on, I walked from Lowbornand caught no cold, D. G.Sunday, 4th. Appearance of the clouds and vapours,half concealing, half disclosing the mountains,most wonderful from the churchyard. The servicecoldly performed by the vicar, an easy, good-naturedman, but I fear a poor creature. Keswick worse nowas to morals than thirty years ago, and still more forty.So says Southey, who has lived there fifteen years ; heis always at church. Wordsworth too at Grasmere, notso it is said formerly. Read prayers, &c. to my familyin the afternoon. Spent the following week at Keswickvisited Southey, who very pleasing, light as abird in body, and till the loss of his son, I hear his396 LIFE OF WILBERFORCE. 1818.flow of spirits astonishing. He is a man of extraordinarymethod and punctuality ; hence booksellerslove to have to do with him. His library excellent ;filled with curious Spanish and Portuguese manuscriptvolumes. He allots one time .before breakfast)to poetry, another to history, and so on. HisHistory of Brazil is that to which he looks for fame.He is kind, hospitable, generous, virtuous, and I hope,religious, but too hasty in his judgments, and too rashin politics. Hence he would be a dangerous counsellorthough an able defender." 30R. and S. got to Rydale on Thursday night, andare staying with the Wordsworth. I heard just beforeI went, that the daughters of a shopkeeper whohad lately returned to Keswick with an acquired fortunehad set up a Sunday school. I called on themand gave them 2 for it, and encouraged them. Thevicar would not join though they are churchwomen. Iwas much inclined to stay till Monday in order tosee after the school on Sunday, but could not sendfor the two boys to us. I tried to urge to religiousefforts for the town, but could not prevail onhim ; he pleaded want of time, no co-operators, &c.I long to settle there and try to do some good, thoughI see the difficulties great. On the 22nd a Biblemeeting is to be held, Richmond having written to theDissenting minister not well judged. It caused memuch pain and self-reproach afterwards that I had notfixed to stay over Sunday. May God forgive me. O letus yield to the still small voice, and make doing religiousgood overbear at once all other considerations."3 Diary, Oct. 10.1818. SOUTHEY. 397Four days later, on the eve of his departurefrom the Lakes, this Keswick visit was returned.Southey with us much delighted with him." WhatSouthey thought of him may be told in his ownwords. e< I saw more of your father during his shortresidence in this country, than at any or all other times ;and certainly I never saw any other man who seemedto enjoy such a perpetual serenity and sunshine ofspirits. In conversing with him you felt assured thatthere was no guile in him ; that if ever there was agood and happy man on earth, he was one ; and thateminently blessed as he was with a benign and easydisposition, the crown of all his blessings was that inwardand undisturbed peace which passeth all understanding.I recollect one circumstance during his visit tothe Lakes, which shows the perfect reliance his servantshad upon his good nature, forbearance itmight have been called in any other person, but inhim it was no effort. The coachman came in to saythat some provision concerning the horses had beenneglected, and your father with a little start of surprise,replied, ( that indeed he had not thought of it.'6 No ! ' said the coachman, and ( since you have beenin this country, you have all of you been so lake,and valley, and river, and mountain mad, that youhave thought of nothing that you ought to havethought of."END OF VOL. IV.