MANNERS AND CUSTOMSOFTHE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS,INCLUDINGTHEIR PRIVATE LIFE,GOVERNMENT, LAWS, ARTS, MANUFACTURES,RELIGION, AND EARLY HISTORY ;DERIVED From A Comparison OFTHE PAINTINGS, SCULPTURES, AND MONUMENTS STILL EXISTING,WITH Tick ACCOUNTS OF ANCIENT AUTHORS.3lnu0trateB bg iDratnirtcs of tl^osc Subjects.By J. G. WILKINSON, F.R.S. M.R.S.L. &c,AUTHOR OF "a GENERAL VIEW OF EGYl'T, ANDTOPOGRAPHY OF THEBES," &C.IN THREE VOLUMES.VOL. I.LONDON:JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET.MDCCCXXXVII.London :Printed by A. Spoitiswoode,New-streets Square.THE Gey CENTERTOHIS GRACEHUGH DUKE OF NORTHUMBERLAND, Keg.My Lord Duke,In dedicating to your Grace the accompanyingWork, 1 am anxious to show howfully I appreciate the encouragement youhave always given to science and literature,as well as the interest you take in Egyptianresearches ; and to offer a testimony of myrespect, and of the gratitude I feel for muchpersonal kindness and attention.I have the honour to subscribe myselfYour Grace'svery obedient humble Servant,THE AUTHOR.London,September 1. 183G.A 2PREFACE.In order to form an accurate opinion of the mannersof an ancient people, it is of paramount importanceto inquire into their origin and history,and to trace the progress of those steps whichgradually led to their improvement and civilisation.To judge impartially of their character, we mustexamine the comparative state of other neighbouringand contemporary nations, and measure itby the standard of the era in which they lived.We should also bear in mind the general habits ofthat portion of the globe whence they derivedtheir origin, or which they inhabited, and, in contemplatingthe customs of an Eastern people, avoidas much as possible the invidious comparison ofEuropean and Oriental manners. Many of thoselaws or customs which are wise and beneficial tosociety in one part of the world, are deemed superfluous,and even injurious, in another ; and thesame system, which by some is looked upon as indispensablefor their welfare and happiness, wouldA 3VI PREFACE.be rejected by others, as incompatible with thefeelings of an independent spirit.The necessity of discrimination on this pointmust, therefore, be evident to every one, who considersthe subject with a view to truth and impartiality; and, in order to enable the reader toform a just opinion of the character of the Egyptians,I commence the present work with a briefaccount of the general history and early advancementof that ancient state. But if, as mustnecessarily be the case, this account is deficientand unsatisfactory, I plead as my excuse thescanty means of information afforded either by thewriters of antiquity, or by monumental record ;and trust that the reader will indulgently considerthe difficulties which present themselves in so intricatea question.If, too, in the date assigned for the accession ofMenes, and the era of the 18th dynasty, as wellas some other points of chronology, I differfrom the learned Professor Rosellini, it should beremembered that many doubts and discrepanciesoccur both in chronology and the details of events,even in what is considered the known history ofother nations.It would doubtless be satisfactory both to thereader and themselves, if all writers on the subjectof hieroglyphics, and of ancient Egypt, wereagreed, and if all tlicir investigations were attendedwith the same resists; but, since a diversityPREFACE. Ellof opinion on a difficult question has a tendencyto elicit truth, and finally to establish accurate andimpartial evidence, we may cease to regret that itprevails at the commencement of these inquiries.And, indeed, it is highly satisfactory to find thatthe researches of Dr. Young, Champollion, RosesMajor Felix, and my own, have, in most instances,led to similar conclusions.Professor Rosellini is a man of erudition and agentleman, and one whose enthusiastic endeavours,stimulated by great perseverance, are tempered byjudgment, and that modesty which is the characteristicof real merit. To be engaged in thesame pursuits with him must, therefore, be highlysatisfactory, from the persuasion that, however wemay differ on some questions, our opposite opinionswill be maintained with those feelings which oughtto actuate men who labour in the same field, andfor the same object.Egyptian history, and the manners of one of themost ancient nations, cannot but be interesting toevery one ; and so intimately connected are theywith the scriptural accounts of the Israelites, andthe events of succeeding ages relative to Judaea,that the name of Egypt need only be mentionedto recall the early impressions we have receivedfrom the study of the Bible.Another striking result derived from the examinationof Egyptian history, is the conviction,that, at the most remote period into which we haveA 4Vlll PREFACE.been able to penetrate, civilised communities alreadyexisted, and society possessed all the featuresof later ages. We have been enabled, with a sufficientdegree of precision, to fix the bondage ofthe Israelites and the arrival of Joseph ; and thoughthese events took place at an age when nations aregenerally supposed to have been in their infancy,and in a state of barbarism, yet we perceive thatthe Egyptians had then arrived at as perfect a degreeof civilisation as at any subsequent period oftheir history. They had the same arts, the samemanners and customs, the same style of architecture,and were in the same advanced state ofrefinement, as in the reign of Remeses II. ; and novery remarkable changes took place, even in evervarying taste, between the accession of the firstOsirtasen and the death of that conqueror, whowas the last monarch of the 18th dynasty. Whathigh antiquity does this assign to civilisation IThe most remote point, to which we can see, openswith a nation possessing all the arts of civilisedlife already matured ; and though penetrating sofarinto the early history of the world, we find thatthe infancy of the Egyptian state is placed considerablybeyond our reach. And, if Egypt presentsno other attractions, the certainty of its being theoldest state, of which we have any positive andtangible records, must awaken feelings of interest,to which no contemplative mind can remain indifferent.PREFACE. IXIt is to be regretted that the partial details, relatingto the reigns of the early Pharaohs, givenby Herodotus and Diodorus, do not sufficientlyagree with the more authentic information derivedfrom the monuments, so as to be embodied withthis last, as a continuous history ; but, in order notto omit the accounts of those two writers, I haveintroduced them separately ; which, though insome measure it breaks in upon the thread of thehistory, does not perplex the reader by the examinationof controverted points, and he is enabledto form his own opinion respecting their statements,and the information derived from othersources.I cannot conclude without expressing the obligationsI owe to the valuable assistance affordedme by Lord Prudhoe, Mr. W. Hamilton, and SirWilliam Gell. But, while it is a pleasure to offermy acknowledgments for their kindness, it is melancholyto be obliged to accompany them withfeelings of deep regret at the death of so excellenta friend as Sir W. Gell. In him the literary worldhas sustained a great loss : but friendship and gratitudecombine to increase my sorrow ; and I cannever forget that, for all the satisfaction I havederived from the prosecution of researches to whichhe first directed my attention, — however unimportanttheir results, — I am indebted to his kindnessand instruction. To many has he lent his powerfulassistance in those studies, whose advancement hisPREFACE."classic" talents so ably promoted : no distinctionof nation ever prevented his generous mind fromaiding others in investigating subjects of whichhe possessed such an extensive knowledge, andno deficiency of good feeling and liberality checkedhis exertions, or damped his zeal, in furtheringthe object of those who followed the same pursuits.Multi ille bonis flebilis occiput."No. S,'08. Sort of harp ami tambourine from Dcndcra.INTRODUCTION.It was originally intended that this work shouldnot exceed two volumes ; until finding the materialsaccumulate much beyond my expectations, Iwas under the necessity of extending it to three ;and have, even now, been obliged to omit manysubjects, and to defer the mention of them to afuture occasion.This will, I trust, plead my excuse for not describingthe religious ceremonies of the Egyptians, theagriculture of the country, and some details, thatcould not have been comprised within the limitsof these volumes, unless treated in an imperfectand brief manner, which their importance wouldnot sanction.The first chapter contains remarks on the earlystate of Egypt, with the lists of kings given byManette, Herodotus, Diodorus, and other authors ;and a conjecture is offered on the origin of theShepherd Kings. I suppose them to have comefrom Assyria, and to have invaded and taken possessionof Lower Egypt; and suggest, that this eventVOL. I. [a 6][Viii] INTRODUCTION.happened about the period of Semiramis's reign.Some objection, however, may be offered to thisconjecture, especially on the plea of the invadershaving been a pastoral people, while the Assyrianswere an agricultural nation, with all the institutionsand customs of a civilisation, already faradvanced, in the time even of Semiramis. Wemight, therefore, look for them among the wanderinghordes of Asia ; and rather suppose them tohave been a Scythian tribe, who, at that early epoch,already commenced the casual inroads, which theyare known to have made in the same direction atsubsequent periods.The decision of this question I leave to thelearned reader ; all that can be positively assertedon the point is, that they have left no traces of theiroccupation of the country in the existing monuments,and the notion of their having been thefounders of the pyramids is devoid of every shadowof probability.The second chapter comprises the history ofthe country from the accession of the first kingMenes, to the conquest of Egypt by Alexander ;in which, after showing the great obscurity whichprevails in the early part of Egyptian history,previous to the reign of Osirtasen I., I have drawnup an account of the monarchs, who ruled thecountry, from the existing monuments, and theauthority of ancient writers ; and, at the same time,iiilrodiiccd separately that part of the same period.INTRODUCTION. [ix]given by Herodotus and Diodorus, which cannot bemade to accord with the monuments.In the third chapter, after some remarks on thenature of the country, its population, and some ofits productions, I show that the people were dividedinto four great classes, with numerous subdivisions,according to the peculiar occupations of each ; inwhich a strong resemblance may be traced to thecastes of India.The king, his duties, the respect paid him byhis subjects, their regard for his memory ; thepriests and their peculiar habits ; the military class ;the army ; the weapons they used in battle ; andtheir mode of warfare are then noticed ; and theenemies with whom they fought, their prisonersand slaves, conclude this chapter, and the firstvolume.The fourth chapter treats of the husbandmen,with other members of the second caste ; the lawsand government of Egypt in early times, and underthe Romans. In the next, the houses, villas,gardens, vineyards, and the process of makingwine and beer are described. The sixth containsan account of the furniture of their rooms, theentertainment of guests, their musical instruments,and dances ; and, in the last chapter ofthe second volume, their vases, the preparationand serving of dinner, their games, exercises, andamusements, in the house and out of doors, aredescribed.[x] INTRODUCTION.The eighth chapter contains the chase of wildanimals, fowling, and fishing.The ninth treats of the arts of the Egyptians ;the early use of glass, and those manufactures,in which the sculptures and ancient writers showthem to have excelled ; the mode of engraving andsculpturing hard stones ; their fine linen and otherstuff's ; the papyrus, and manufacture of paper ;potteries ; boats and ships employed in war, and onthe Nile; and the use of tin and other metals.In chapter the tenth, the style of art at variousepochs, the early use of the arch, the mechanical skillof the Egyptians, some inventions of an early period,their dresses, the study of medicine, and numerouscustoms are introduced ; and the Appendix, containingan account of the principal objects ofantiquity deserving a visit in the Valley of theNile, terminate the third volume.The Appendix is preceded by a wood-cut, givinga topographical survey of the pyramids, and thetombs in their immediate vicinity, constructed byme in 1826 ; with the names of two Ethiopiankings ; one of whom, Ergamenes, is mentioned byDiodorus as a cotemporary of Ptolemy Philanderplus.CONTENTSOFTHE FIRST VOLUME.CHAPTER I.PageEgypt the Land of Ham or Them - - 2Egyptians and other Inhabitants of the Valley of theNile not African Races . . if,,Asiatic Origin of the Egyptians. Egypt considered by someto be in Asia. - - - - - 3Ethiopia or Cush - - - - 4The Thebaid, the Parent of Egyptian Science, whence thePrecedence of the Upper Country. Herodotus's Theoryof the Delta's Formation requiring an immeasurable Time 5Foundation of Tanis and other Places near the Sea, at theearliest Periods. Upper Egypt not peopled while theDelta was a Marsh - - - - - 5Meaning of the ^gyptus of Homer, and the Position ofPharos - - - - - 7The Changes caused by the Deposit of the Nile, vary inLower Egypt and the Delta. Obelisk of Osirtasen L atHeliopolis - - - - - - 9The Deltas of other Rivers differ from that of the Nile. TheDelta formed long before Egypt was inhabited - - 10Ethiopia frequently used for Upper Egypt or the Thebaid 11Xll CONTENTS.PageEarly State of Egypt, when Joseph arrived. Man in theinfant State of Society - - - - 13The Hunter, Shepherd, and Agriculturist - - 14The Richness of the Soil of Egypt tended to its early Civilisation.Primeval History of States uncertain and fabulous- - - - - 15Original Form of Government in Egypt, a Hierarchy andafterwards a Monarchy. No Egyptian Deity ever supposedto have reigned on Earth - - - 16The Story of Osiris purely allegorical, and a profound andcurious Mystery. Mistake of Herodotus in the WordPiromi - - - - - 17The Dynasties of Manette. The 18th partially agreeswith the Monuments. Number of Kings between Menesand the Persian Invasion, and the Time elapsed - 18The Pyramids, the oldest Monuments in Egypt. Theirprobable Date. Little known before Osirtasen I. - 19Shepherd Kings uncertain, not the Jews - - 20Foreign Conquests of the Egyptians date as early as theReign of Osirtasen I. - - - - 21Monuments before Osirtasen's Reign. The Invasion of theShepherds, previous to the 17th Dynasty - - 22List of Kings from Herodotus and Diodorus •■ - 24Dynasties of Manette - - - - 25Great Uncertainty in Manette's Dynasties - - 35Theban Kings according to Eratosthenes - - 37The Shepherds probably Assyrians - - - 38CHAP. ILHistory of Egypt and List of Kings from Menes to the Endof the 17tli Dynasty . - . 40Accession of Osirtasen I., 1710 n. c. - - 43State of Civilisation and the Arts at that Period. Game ofDraughts, and other Amusements - - - 44Early Wars. Mines in the Desert - - - 45Ports on the Red Sea, fur Commerce with arabia - 46List of the Kings of the 18th Dynasty - - - 47CONTENTS. XlllPageAmass, the Leader of that Dynasty, the "new King" ofScripture - - - - - 48Cause of the Treatment of the Jews - - - 49Crude Brick Remains in Egypt - - - 50Birth of Moses. Amunoph I. married an Ethiopian Princess 51A Queen contemporary of Thothmes IT. and III. Glassalready invented - - - - - 52The Shadows for Irrigation. Conquests of Thothmes III. 53Pharaoh, according to Moses, not drowned in the Red Sea 54The Exodus - - - - - 55Monuments of Thothmes III. The Sphinx bears the Nameof his Successor - - --56Amunoph III., and his Brother, whom I suppose to be Da-nous- - - - - - 57Conquests of the Egyptians in Ethiopia and Asia. Use ofIron - - - - - 59The Tombs of Kings before Amunoph III. are not met with 60Revolt of Syria, and the March of Osirei into Asia - 62Remeses the Great ; his Son supposed to be Sesostris. Originof the Confusion respecting that Monarch - - 64His March through Syria, and hieroglyphical Record of thatFact - - - - - - 65Fought with the Scythianss. Cavalry (vide p. 289.) - 66Egyptian Chariots, the Testudo, and Scaling Laddervide p. 360.) - - - - . 67Battle Pieces at Karnak. Alliances of the Egyptians - 68Canal of the Red Sea - - - ~ - 69Commenced by Remeses the Great - - - 71Duties of Children in the East. Office of Fanbearer - 72Length of Remeses' Reign. Buildings erected by him - 73Distribution of Lands. Geometry. Land Tax - 74Pthahmen his Son ; erected Two Obelisks. The last Kingof the 18th Dynasty - - - - 7519th Dynasty - - - . . 76Lord Prudhoe's Opinion respecting the Kings in whoseReign the Bondage and Exodus took place - - 77The Exodus placed by him under Pthahmen. Pthahmen-Septa the Sethos of Manette - - - 81XIV CONTENTS.PageHis Name excluded from the Lists of Kings ; probableReason of this. His reign inglorious, like those of hisTwo Successors. Succession and warlike Preparationsof Remeses IH. - - - - - 82Extent of his Conquests - - - - 83Change in the Style of the Sculptures - - - 85Close of the most glorious Era of Egyptian History. Conquestsof the Egyptian Kings not mentioned in the Bible 86Successors of Remeses HI. Comparative View of EgyptianHistory, from Menes to Sethos, from Herodotus andDiodorus - - - - - 88Menes diverts the Course of the Nile and founds Memphis 89This Bend in the River may be traced near Kafr-el-Iyat.The Lake at Memphis and Temple of Vulcan, the Workof Menes, Change he introduced in the Habits of thePeople and Curse of his Memory, by Tnephachthus, atThebes - - - . - 90Queen Nitocris revenges her Brother's Death - - 91Moeris, the Lake or Canal, and Labyrinth he made - 92The Canal perhaps commenced by Menes. The Bathe ofDanville conjectural. Strabo's Account - - 94-Mnevis and Sasyches, Egyptian Lawgivers. Shepherds - 95Sesostris. Fleet in the Red Sea. His Conquests and Stella; 96The Colchians, an Egyptian Colony. His Stelae in AsiaMinor - - - - - 97One of them still seen in Syria near Beiroot. Diodorus'sAccount. Foundation of Thebes - - - 98Children educated with Sesostris. His Army and March 100Fleet of Sesostris. Treachery of his Brother - - 101Erects Statues and Obelisks at Memphis and Thebes - 102Darius admits that Sesostris surpassed him, having vanquishedthe Scythianss. Work of his Captives - - 103Canals he cut, and Wall along the Edge of the Desert - 104<Cruelty of Sesostris. Loses his Sight. Acheron his Sonsucceeds. Recovers from Blindness - - - 106Amass deposed by Actisanes. Communes Capital Punishments.Sends Culprits to Rhinocolura - - 107CONTENTS. XVPageIsmandes, Mendes, Osymandyas. Tomb of Osymandyas 109Colossal Statue - - - - 1 10Revolt of the Bactriansns. His Lion - - - 111Great Hall or Hypostyle. Figure of Truth and Judges - 112Gold and Silver from the Mines of Egypt. The Libraryand Planisphere taken away by the Persians - - 113This Tomb apparently the Memnonium - - - llPlan of the Memnonium compared with it - - 116Story of Helen's Arrival with Paris in Egypt - - 118Her Detention and Restoration to Menelaus. Proteus - 120Rhampsinitus; his Monuments ; his Riches - - 121The Robbery of his Treasury, and a Thief taken in a Trap 122The Artifice of his Brother - - - - 123Pardoned and rewarded by the King. Rhampsinitus'sVisit to the Lower Regions - - - - 125Cheops builds a Pyramid. Cephren. Mycerinus. Myce-rings's Affliction at the Loss of his Daughter - - 127The Courtesan Rhodope : Different Opinions of Historiansrespecting the Successors of Mycerinus. Tnephachthus'sCurse of Menes, now not met with in any Temple ofThebes - - 129Bocchoris the Wise. Asychis and Any sis - - 130Asychis introduces a Law respecting Debt. Builds a Pyramidof crude Brick. Brick Pyramids now remaining 131Sabaco the Ethiopian. Different Opinions of his Character.Retires after Fifty Years from the Throne of Egypt - 133End of the comparative Chronology of Herodotus andDiodo-rus, and Return to the 20th, 21st, 22d, and 23d Dynasties 134Sheshonk, or Shishak, plunders Jerusalem. His Captivesat Thebes. The Name of Yooda Melchi, or the Kingdomof Judah - - - - --136Construction of my Chronological Table. AstronomicalCeiling at the Memnonium. Zerah, King of Ethiopia - 13724'th and 25th Dynasties. Bocchoris ~ - - 138Sabaco could not have put Neco to death ; he is the So ofS. S. Shebek, or Sabaco H. Sethos - - 139Tirhakah, Contemporary of Sethos. Sethos's Treatment ofXVI CONTENTS.Pagethe Military Class. Marches to attack Sennacherib by theCommand of the God Pthah . 141Tirhakah defeats Sennacherib. The Story of the Priestsof Memphis about the Miracle of Rats. ExtravagantDates of ancient Authors - . 142Tirhakah's Name at Thebes. His Conquests. The TwelveKings according to Herodotus - - - 143Their Friendship and the Accidents which led to their Conducttowards Psamaticus, one of their Number - 144Psamaticus banished to the Low Lands of Egypt ; consultsthe Oracle of But (Latona) - - - 145Enters into a Treaty with some lonians and Carians, and dethronesthe Eleven Kings. Rewards their Services. TheAncestors of the Interpreters taught Greek by them - 146Diodorus's Account more probable. According to it, Psama-ticus, having the District near the Mediterranean, establishedcommercial Relations with the Greeks andPhoenicians, and afterwards availed himself of their Aidindethroning his Colleagues . . 147The Title Melek given to the Twelve Kings - - 14926th Dynasty. Reign of Psamaticus. Edifice where Apiswas shown - - - - - 150240,000 Soldiers desert from Psamaticus, and retire toEthiopia - - - - - - 152Name of the Part of the Country they inhabited. Azotustaken - - . 251Experiment to ascertain the oldest Language - - 155Liberal Policy of Psamaticus towards Foreigners, followedby Amass and Nectanebo. The advance of the Scythianssstopped by Psamaticus. Neco K. - - - 157Neco's Fleets in the Mediterranean and Red Seas. Voyageof Discovery round Africa. Other Expeditions for thesame Purpose - - - - 158Neco, the first who sent Persons to double the Cape ofGood Hope. An Objection offered by Herodotus, astrong Confirmation of the Truth of the Information helead received - - - - - 160Canal to the Red Sea from the Nile - - - 161CONTENTS. XVllPageExpedition of Neco against Carchemish on the Euphrates 162Interference and Defeat of Josiah not alluded to on theMonuments - - - . 154Defeat of Neco by the Babylonians ; consequent Capture ofJerusalem by them - - - - - 166Jehoiachin deposed by Nebuchadnezzar. Captives taken toBabylon. Message to Psamaticus II. from the Leansrespecting the Olympic Games - - - 167Apries or Pharaoh-Hophra obliges the Chaldeans to raisethe Siege of Jerusalem - - - - 168Prophecies relating to this Period. Prosperous Commencementof Apries's Reign - - - - 169Recovers Phoenicia and Palestine. Expedition against theCyreneans. Revolt of the Army - - 170Amass sent to recall the Troops to their Duty ; is chosenKing by them . . - , . 171Cruel Treatment of Patarbemis by Apries. Amass defeatsand takes Apries prisoner, and succeeds to the Throne 172Apries put to death - - - - - 173Prophecy concerning him and others, in Jeremiah and Ezekiel,relating to the Events which followed his Dethronementand Death - - - - 176, 177Nebuchadnezzar probably placed Amass on the Throne ofApries - - - - - 178Title of Melek given to Amass. Psamaticus III. and Apries,if the same. Amass married the Daughter of Psama-ticus III. Herodotus, Athenaeum, and Diodorus's Accountof his Rise - 179Flourishing Condition of Egypt under Amass ; how reconciledwith Prophecy - - - - 180Amass takes Cyprus. Settlement of Greeks at Naucratis,and his Liberality to the Greeks - - - 182Amass and Polycrates. Their Friendship. Amass writesa Letter to him - - » - 184Polycrates follows his Advice, and throws his Ring into theSea. Story of the Fisherman - - - 1 86His Ring discovered on opening the Fish. Amass disclaimsall Friendship with him - - - 187VOL. I. aXvi CONTENTS.PageDiodorus gives another Reason for this Step. Polycratesan Encourager of Learning. Visit of Pythagoras andSolon to Egypt - - - - 1 88Monolith and other Works of Amass - - - 190The Sphinx. Tomb of Amass at SaTs --192Quarrel between Cambyses and Amass. Amass sendsthe Daughter of Apries to Persia - - - 193Invasion of Egypt by Cambyses. Causes of this War.Death of Amass. Phanes . 195Victory of Cambyses. The Treatment of his Heralds atMemphis. Takes Psammenitus Prisoner - - 197Psammenitus pardoned. Conspires against Cambyses, and isput to death. 27th Dynasty. Name of Cambyses - 198Names of other Persian Monarchs found in Egypt. Darius'sRule mild - - - - - 199First Revolt of the Egyptians. Reconquered by Xerxes.Second Revolt . . . . 200Inarus and Amyrtaeus elected Kings. Defeat of the Persians.A second Army sent by Artaxerxes, whoconquers Egypt - - . 201Inarus crucified. Amyrtaeus flies. Project of Rebellionabandoned till the tenth Year of Darius Notus. Concessionsof the Persians. Discontent of the Egyptians 202Third Revolt. Amyrtaeus reinstated. The 28th Dynasty isof this King alone. His Buildings. Treaty with theArabians. Succeeded by Nepherites, first King of the29th Dynasty . - . . . 203Psamaticus mentioned by Diodorus. His Cruelty to Lanius.Not noticed by Manette . - - . 204Manethos, 28th and 29th Dynasties - - - 205Acoris succeeds Nepherites. Short Reigns of Psammoutis,Nepherites II., and Mouthis - - - 20730th Dynasty, in Nectancbo's Reign. Vain Attempt of thePersians to recover Egypt - - - - 208Nectancbo's Edifices. Ilia Dream preserved in a curiousPapyrus. Succeeded by Tachos - - 209Agesilaus arrives in Egypt to assist Tachos. Is treatedCONTENTS. XIXPagewith contempt. Deserts the King, and aids Nectaneboto dethrone him 210Nectanebo II. obtains the Throne. Ochus or ArtaxerxesIII.succeeds Artaxerxes Menon, and leads an Army intoEgypt - - - - - - 211The Persians are victorious. Nectanebo flies into Ethiopia.Cruelties of Ochus - - - - - 212Apis served up at a Banquet. Ochus represented as aSword in the Catalogue of Egyptian Kings. The 31stDynasty. Conquest of Egypt by Alexander - - 213CHAP. III.Egypt properly so called - - - 215Extent of Egypt - - --216Number of Towns in Egypt ; and Population in formerTimes - - - - - 217Accumulation of Soil in the Valley of the Nile. Increasingextent E. and W. Cause of its Downfall. Position ofTowns on the Edge of the Desert - - 219Supposed Encroachments of the Sand. M. de Luc's Notionsrespecting this and the Oases - - . 221Narrow Tract of Land in Nubia - - - 223Revenues and Commerce of Ancient Egypt - - 224Trade with Arabia and India. Seaports on the Red Sea 226The Leucos Portus, and Portus Multi of Pliny. Imports.Emerald Mines - - - - 231Riches of Egypt. Gold Mines. Their Position known - 232Silver and other Mines. Produce of Egypt sufficing forgreat Population. Lower Classes ; their Condition - 234Egypt happy under the Pharaohs. Discontented underforeign Rulers - - 235Castes of Egypt. How divided according to different Authors- . . . . 236Difference of Opinion ; probable Division into four greatCastes. The first, or Sacerdotal Order. Different Gradesof Priests . - . . . 237a 2XX CONTENTS.PageSecond Caste, the Military and others. Third and fourthCaste. Subdivisions of the Classes - - - 238Swineherd held in great contempt. Soldiers with theHusbandmen. The four Hindoo Castes - - 239Megasthenes on the Indian Castes - - - 240Megasthenes's Account continued. The Egyptian Nobles 24'4;All the Egyptians equally noble. The King chosen fromthe Sacerdotal or Military Orders. Chief of Religionand State - - - - - - 245Hereditary Succession. Queens - - - 246Usurpations by a powerful Chief. Synesius's Account of aRoyal Election . 247The Kings obliged to conform to the Law of the Land - 248A Military Prince on ascending the Throne instructed inthe Mysteries of the Religion. Care of their Education,and Choice of their Associates - - - 249Duties of the King. Rules for his Conduct and daily Occupation- - - - - - 250Prayer for the King. His Praises . 251The Priest reviewed the Character of Kings. ResponsibleMinisters . ^ , . . 252Regulations concerning the Conduct of the King and hisModeration in living . . 253Respect for the King. Their Gratitude and Reverence forthe Memory of a good King. Public Mourning at hisDeath - - - - - - - 255The Funeral. Any Person might accuse the deceased, andprevent his receiving the customary Funeral Honours.The first Caste, the Priests 257Colleges of Priests. Priestesses. Fallacies of Amun - 258The Tombs mentioned by Diodorus. Error of the Greeks 259Women versed in religious Matters. Priestesses mentionedin the Rosetta Stone - - - - 261The OHice of Priest descending from Father to Son. Privilegesof the Priests . - . 262Portion of the Land allotted to the Priests. DifferentGrades of Priests - 263CONTENTS. XXIPageChief Priests. Precedence of Priests in different Towns.Prophets . . . . 264.The Mysteries, greater and less. Not every Priest initiatedinto them . . . . 266In later Times even Greeks admitted. Education of theEgyptians. Geometry. Arithmetic. Astronomy - 268Exclusiveness of the Priests. Their Conduct perhaps illiberalin this Respect - - - - 271Some Excuse for them to be made, considering the Characterof the Egyptians - - - 272Aurelian's Remark on the Egyptian Character in his Time.The Priests might have instructed the People in thePrinciples of their Religion - - - 273The abstemious Habits of the Priests - - - 274Beans, Onions, and some other Vegetables forbidden.Onions among the Offerings - . 276Ablutions. Purification. Dresses. High Priest clad inaLeopard Skin . - . . 278Linen, Cotton, and Woollen Dresses. Sandals. Beds - 280Extent of their Possessions. Acted as Judges and Legislators.The Military Order - - - 282Provisions made for the Soldier in Land. Military Education. - - 283Obliged to be ready for Service. Garrisons. Allowanceof Land and Rations - - - - 284Could not be arrested for Debt. Standing Army of410,000 Men, who inhabited certain Nomes of Egypt 285Their Right in the Soil a political Measure. Forbiddenmechanical Pursuits. Exercises tending to strengthenthe Body - - - - - 286Auxiliaries, disciplined. Retaining their Arms and Costume.Hired to serve . 287Relieved the native Troops in Garrison Duty at Home.The Strength of the Army consisted in Archers. Regimentsof Heavy Infantry. Egyptian Cavalry - - 288One Instance of an Egyptian on Horseback - - 289Egyptian Infantry divided into Regiments. Phalanx - 292a 3Xxi CONTENTS.PageStandards belonging to different Corps - - - 294Bearers of Flabella near the King's Person. Troops summonedby Trumpet. Arms , - 297Their defensive Arms. The Shield - - - 298Shield suspended by a Thong - - - 300The Handle how placed - - - 301A lighter Kind of Buckler, of rare Occurrence - 302Some cumbrous Shields, seldom used - - 303The Bow. String how fixed ; differing from that of someAsiatic People - - - - commodeof stringing the Bow - - - - 305Another Method of stringing it. Guard on the Wrist, anda Groove of Metal on the fore Knuckle in which theArrow rested . . . 306Sometimes a Chasseur carried spare Arrows in his Hand,while shooting. Mode of drawing the Bow - 307Greek Method. Use of the Bow among the Scythianss andPersians. Egyptian Bow String. Arrows of Wood andReed - - - - - 308Arrows tipped with Stone ; used also by the Persians, andeven by the Greeks. Metal Heads of Arrows - - 310Quivers; how carried. Bow Case attached to Chariots 311Archers of Infantry had a different Bow Case. TheirWeapons. The Spear - - - - 312The Javelin - - - - 313Slings looked upon with contempt by the Greeks - - 316Swords; how used. Daggers - - - 318Dagger of Berlin Museum. Elasticity of its Bronze Blade 320Knife. Falchion ; a favourite Weapon. Officers, howArmed - . . . 321The Hatchet 322The Battle-axe, varied in Form ; some with long, others withvery short Handles. One in Mr. Salt's Collection - 324The Pole-axe. The Mace. One Kind armed with a Ball 326The great Execution done by such Weapons in early Times.Another Kind of Mace or Stick - - . 328The curved Stick or LissaUy still used in Ethiopia, and byCONTENTS. XXlllPagethe Ababdeh and Bisharieen. The Helmet quilted, andof Metal - - - - 329The Origin of Crests. The Cuirass or Coat of Armour ofMetal Plates, or quilted - - - 331Hempen Armour used by the Greeks. Arms of differentEgyptian Corps. Heavy and light Troops - - 333The Chariot Corps. Chariots, each carried Two Persons.Curricles of Towns. Attendants, or running Footmen 335Charioteers ; their Post honourable - - - 337Whips. A Hero often dismounted and fought on foot - 339No Seats in their Chariots - - - - 341Chariots of Wood. The different Parts --34-2Ornamental Appendages of the Chariot. Egyptian Citizensunarmed - - . - - 347Framework of Wood. Binding and Ornamental Parts ofLeather - - - - 348War Chariots had Wheels of Six Spokes. Curricles frequentlyFour. No scythed Cars - - - 350The Harness - - - - - 351The Traces. Greek and Roman Cars, Parts of. Note - 353Egyptian Chariot and Horses, according to European Modeof drawing . . - 354Housings and Ornaments of the Horses - - 355No Blinkers. The Bridles. No Egyptian Car with morethan two Horses . - - 356Cars of foreign Nations - - - 357Persepolitan Chariot. Egyptian Chariot Corps, heavyand light - - - - 358Light-armed Chariot Corps. The Shield connected withthe Idea of a Siege. Sieges - - - - 359Use of the Testudo or xeXwvvj. Attack of a fortified Place 361Warlike Engines used in Sieges . 363Use of Stones in Battle, a primitive Custom not common tothe Egyptians. Enemies with whom they fought - 364Helmets. Crests when first used. The Shairetana. TheirArms and Costume - . . - 366Allies of the Pharaohs, at a very early Period. The Toke4XXIV CONTENTS.Pagekari. Their Head-dress much like that of some PersepolitanFigures . . « - 367Used Carts, which accompanied their Army, like theTartars - - - - - 369Other Enemies. Peculiar Features of some of them - 370The Reboo, a powerful People of Asia. Long Wars withthem - - - - - 371The Point or Pouont, an Asiatic Nation. Early Warswith them - - - - - 374The Shari, not Bishari, also Asiatics - - 375The Rot-fi-no ; long Wars with this People of Asia - 376Their Tribute, their Costume, and that of their Women.The Toersha - - - - - 378The Mashoash and Kufa - - - - 379The Kheta or Sheta, supposed to be Scythianss ; a formidableEnemy. Had strongly fortified Towns, on a greatRiver, with Bridges over the Fosses - - 381Their disciplined Troops and large Bodies of Infantry andChariots. They were composed of two distinct Tribes 383Probably Scythianss. Other Asiatic Tribes. Some of Syria 384Distinction maintained by the Egyptian Artists in theirCostumes and Arms. The Face was often Characteristicof the four general Divisions of the People of the N.and E. Ethiopia and the Interior of Africa - - 386Lemanon, probably Lemanon, and Kanana, Canaan. BlackNations. The Cush or Ethiopians - - 387Their Dresses. The Tribute they paid to Egypt - - 388The Allies of the Egyptians - - - 389March of the Egyptian Army. Generally commanded bythe King in Person •■ - - - 390Mode of commencing the Attack. Bodies of Archers - 391Prisoners, Booty, and Encampments. Their Humanity 392Treatment of the conquered. Occasional Harshness, offrequent Occurrence among other civilised People - 396Return and Triumph. Passing through tributary Countries.Reception in Egypt - - - 399Thanksgiving for Victory. The Troops required to attend 400CONTENTS. XXVPageThey presented themselves without Shields, carrying aTwig. The Bay Tree. The Olive - - - 401The Egyptian Soldier not armed, except on Duty. Captives- - - . 402Women as well as Men Slaves. Black and White Slaves 403Traffic in Slaves. Joseph sold into Egypt. Military Lawsand Punishments - - - - - 404LIST AND EXPLANATIONOP THEPLATES, WOOD-CUTS, AND VIGNETTES OF VOL. LFrontispiece, or Plate 2. Supposed appearance of the court,built by Psamaticus at Memphis, where Apis was keptwhen exhibited in public. Herodotus describes it ashaving figures instead of columns ; but as there is noauthority for figures on all the four sides of a court, Ihave been obliged to suggest and introduce columns,and confine the figures, in accordance with the rules ofEgyptian architecture, to the upper and lower ends ofthe court. Herodotus says it stood before the of the Temple of Pthah. Strabo would lead usto suppose it was before that of Apis, a building lyingcontiguous to the Temple of Pthah or Vulcan, which iscertainly more probable. Herod, ii. 153. Strabo, 17.Vide p. 151. of this volume.CHAP. LPage1. Vignette A. View of the Pyramids, during the inundation,from near the fork of the Delta. On the hill,in the right-hand corner of the vignette, is a ruinedpyramid of very ancient date, but not noticed by anyancient author. Vide Egypt and Thebes, p. 'MG.23. Wood-cut, No. ]. A dagger from Mr. Salt's collection,referred to in p. 321. 'i've handle is covered with silver,LIST AND EXPLANATION OF THE PLATES, ETC. Xxvistudded with nails of the same metal, the pommel beingof bone.39. Female shooting at three targets : referred to at the endof chap. V. Vol. II.CHAP. II.40. Vignette B. Peasants rescuing cattle and goats fromthe inundation, a scene witnessed by me in the Delta,and very similar to a painting at Beni Hassan representingthe same subject.44. Wood-cut, No. 3. Men playing at draughts and mora.This will be more fully described in chap. vii.46. No. 4. Chariot, with an attendant holding the horses : referredto in p. 335. Vol. I.106. Plate 1. llemeses III. bringing his captives to Thebes,others being bound beneath his chariot, and followedby his sons in the capacity of wanderers : referred to inp. 72. Vol. I.116. Wood-cut, No. 5. Plan of the Memnonium, or Palace-temple,of Remeses the Great at Thebes, showing itsresemblance to the description of Osymandyas' tombin Diodorus.214. No. 6. Alabaster pillow for the head: referred to inp. 281., and in chap. vi. on the furniture of theirhouses.CHAP. III.215. Vignette C. View of the ruins of Phase, above the firstcataract of the Nile, from the N. W.256. Wood-cut, No. 7. People throwing dust upon their headsin token of grief. Herodot. ii. 85. Diodor. i. 91.260. No. 8. Sacred offices held by women.277. No. 9. Mode of tying up onions for some offerings, andpriest clad in a leopard skin.279. No. 10. Priests in leopard-skin dress.287. No. 11. Asiatic allies of the Egyptians.XXVlll LIST AND EXPLANATIONPage289. Wood-cut, No. 12. Egyptian on horseback; the only instancein the sculptures.291. No. 13. Disciplined troops. Part 1. Bowmen. Part 2.Spearmen and Trumpeter, with an officer in the rearholding a stick.293. No. H. Phalanx of heavy infantry.294'. No. 15. Different standards. Fig. 1. A king's name.Fig. 12. A boat. Fig. 17. A boat, in which is the kingseated, and a sphinx before him. This is the oldest instanceof a sphinx, being of the time of the king whosename is given in Jig. 1., a predecessor or a contemporaryof Thothmes III.296. No. 16. Officers of the royal household. Fig. 1. is a sonof the king.298. No. 17. Shields covered with bull's hide. Figs. 1, 2,and 3. are bound with metal.299. No. 18. The boss of an Egyptian shield, if a depressionin it can be so called.300. No. 19. The thong or belt of the shield for suspendingit ; and the prow of an Egyptian galley.No. 20. Instance of a concave shield, suspended by thethrong.No. 21. Grasping a spear, while the shield is supportedon the arm, or by the thong.No. 22. Handle of the shield, how placed.302. No. 23. Bucklers of unusual form.303. No. 24'. Large shields, which only occur in one place.304'. No. 25. Nut at the two extremities of the bow belongingto the Koofa, an Asiatic people.No. 26. Egyptian bows found in the tombs, and .\ presented in the sculptures.No. 27. Mode of stringing the bow.{No. 28. Another mode.No. 29. A guard worn on the bowman's wrist.307. No. 30. Spare arrows sometimes held in the hand.No. 31. Arrows made of reed and tipped with stone.No. 32. Arrows of this kind found in the tombs.310. No. 33. Metal heads of arrows found in the tombs.301.I{309. I :OF THE PLATES, ETC. XXIXPage314.r Wood-cut, No. 34. Javelins and javelin head.\ No. 34 cf. Spearhead and drumstick found in the tombs.315. No. 35. Heads of small javelins in the Fenwick Museum,and a javelin represented at Thebes.316. No. 36. Slingers. I^iff. 1. carries a bag across hisbreast containing the stones. Fig. 2. is in the shroudsof an Egyptian vessel.«51 S J ^°' ^^" •'^^'^^ of using the dagger, in stabbing an enemy.L No. 38. Daggers in their sheaths, from the paintings.319. No. 39. Mode of wearing a dagger.320. No. 40. Dagger with its sheath, in the Berlin Museum,found at Thebes.323. No. 41. Axes or hatchets: vide others at the end ofchap, iii., wood-cut, No. 73 a. No. 4. bears the nameof king Thothmes III.325. No. 42. Battle axes. Fife. 1. in Mr. Salt's collection.Figs. 3, 4, 5, 6. from the paintings.326. No. 43. Pole-axes from the sculptures.327. No. 44. Maces, with and without the ball at their lowerextremity.329. No. 45. Curved stick, club, or hassan.331. No. 46. Quilted helmets, from the paintings.333. Plate 3. Arms and armour. Figs. 1. and 2. Quivers.Fig. 3. A knife. Figs. 4 and 5. Falchions. Figs.3, 4, and 5. appear to be of steel from their colour ; theyare of the early time of Remeses III., or b. c. 1230.Fig. 6. Coat of armour. Figs. 7, 8, and 9. Other coatsof armour, perhaps quilted. Fig. 10. Probably anotherkind of covering for the body.334. Wood-cut, No. 47. Soldiers of different corps, with theirvarious arms and dresses.336. No. 48. Princes in their chariots, \wjig. 1. two personsare represented in the chariot besides the charioteer.338. No. 49. The son of Remeses the Great conversing withhis charioteer, his insignia of office being suspended behindhim. Vide p. 72. Vol. I.339. No. 50. Whips.340. No. 51. Whip suspended to the hand of the archer.XXX LIST AND EXPLANATIONPage34.3. Wood-cut, No. 52. Making the pole and other parts ofa chariot, showing the pole to be of wood.-^ m f F^gs- Ij 2. Chariots drawn in perspective.-^^-y^p-gg^ 3^ 4,^ Saddles and part of the yoke.{No. 53 a. A war chariot with bow cases and completefurniture.No. 5Sb. A chariot of the Rot-ii-no, an Asiatic people.Sq. No. 54. Bending and preparing the woodwork of achariot.350. No. 55. Cutting leather, and binding a chariot. Theknife c, held by Jtg. 2., is precisely similar to that usedby us for cutting leather, a, a stand, b, the body ofthe car. d, a stand and board for cutting upon, e, standover which they bent the leather, g, soles of a pair ofsandals, and /, an entire skin, the usual emblems of thetrade. ^, k, o, quiver and bow-cases.352. No. 5Q. Saddle of a horse yoked to a Persian car.354. No. 57. An Egyptian car and horses in perspective, derivedfrom a comparison of different sculptures. Thespokes of the wheels in this are squared, but they aregenerally round.357. No. 58. Car and bow, in the collection at Florence, supposedto be of a Scythian people ; from Professor Roseswork.358. No. 59. Persepolitan car.360. No. 60. Attacking a fort under cover of the testudo, orX^'kaivt} : covered by a body of archers, represented bythe Jigs, h b.362. No. 61. Assault of a fort. The testudo and scalingladder. Figs. 1, 2, 3, and 4. are four of the sons of kingRemeses the Great, each commanding a testudo, a, b, c,and d. 5. One of the Shairetana allies of the Egyptiansclimbing up the rock by means of a short spike of metal,forced into the fissures of the stone. 6. Another of thesame nation, with the round shield. 7, 8, 9. Egyptianlight infantry and archers. 10. Two of the royal princesscaling the walls : one is apparently thrown down, andthe ladder is falling, alluding, perhaps, to some accidentOF THE PLATES, ETC. XXXIPagewhich really occurred. 11, 12. Heralds sent out of thefort to treat with the Egyptians, i, k, m, towers of thefort. /, the keep on which is hoisted the standard, n,pierced with arrows, the sign of their defeat.365. Wood-cut, No. 62. Some of the people of Asia, withwhom the Egyptians were at war. Fig. 1. The SharesFig. 2. The Tokkari. Fig. 3. The Sha therest of the name being lost. These three were at onetime allies of the Egyptians. Fig. 4. The Reboo. aappears to be tattooed or branded; the custom ofbranding themselves was said to have been common tothe Assyrians. Fig. 5. The Fount. Fig. 6. The Shari.Fig. 7. The Rot-n-no with their women, e.367. No. 63. Persian head-dress resembling that of the Toke368. No. 64. Persepolitan figures. Fig. I. The head-dresses ofthis and o^ Jig. 7. are very similar to that of the Tokkari.Fig. 2. has a round shield like many Asiatic tribes representedin the Egyptian sculptures. Fig. 4. The kelt,similar to those frequently seen in the sculptures ofThebes. Fig. 6. Dress with sleeves : the cap like thatof the Shari and others.368. No. 64a. Other Persepolitan figures, with similar caps.369. No. 65. Carts of the Tokkari, which followed their army,and in which they are seen carrying off the women andchildren, at the moment of their defeat. Carts or waggonsin like manner attended the Scythian and Tartar armies.377. No. 66. Prisoners of Tirhaka, represented at Thebes,probably after the defeat of Sennacherib.379. No. 67. The Toersha and Mashoash, other Asiatic tribesat war with the Egyptians.382. No. 68. Phalanx of the Sheta, probably Scythianss, drawnup as a corps de reserve on the opposite bank, to opposethe army of Remeses the Great. The town is surroundedby a double fosse, over which bridges, Jigs.2 and 3. are thrown : the earliest indication of their use,dating about 1350 b. c.Xxxi LIST AND EXPLANATION OF THE PLATES, ETC.Page385. Wood-cut, No. 69. Other enemies of the Egyptians.Fig. 1. The Koofa. Figs. % 3, 4, 5. The two tribes ofthe Sheta, or Scythianss, distinguished by the formsof their shields. Fig. 6. The Asmaor, perhaps of Samaria.Fig. 7. Lemanon, probably Mount Lemanon.Fig. 8. Kanana, probably Canaan. These eight areAsiatic people. Fig. 9. Blacks of the interior of Africa.Fig. 10. The Trees, and Jig. 11. the Tareao, Africantribes. The name o^jig. 12. is lost, ands. 13. «, h, c, d,are Cash or Ethiopians, a is clad in a skin, like Jig. 12.and c, d are chiefs, as the hieroglyphics, jo, above them,state.391. No. 70. A body of archers acting in line.394. No. 71. A guard mounted at the gates of an encampment,a a, are representations of shields, indicative ofa battled wall, b b, a. wicker gateway.403. No. 72. Men and women of the Rot-n-no, an Asiaticpeople, sent to Egypt, probably as slaves.404. No. 73. Black slaves with their women and children.406. No. 73a. Arms of the Egyptians, from the collections ofMr. Salt and S. D'Athanasi, and from Thebes. Theman on horseback injg. la. or 2. is the only instance ofit in early times: that of the wood-cut. No. 12. beingof Roman date. Fig. 3. A dagger, probably of Romantime. The handle oi" Jg. 7., which is all bronze, wasprobably inlaid. They are referred to in pp. 313, 314.316.319. 321.323.DIRECTIONS FOR PLACING THEPLATES.VOLUME I.Plate 2. Supposed appearance of the Court where Apis wasexhibited in Public - Frontispiece.Pate 1. Remeses III. returning with his Prisoners Page 106Plate 3. Arms and Armour - . . . 332Plate 4. Tributes brought to king Thothmes III., at the end ofVol. I.VOLUME n.The Harpers of Bruce's Tomb - Frontispiece.Plan of a House - to face page 94-Plan of the Town of Alabaster - 106Patterns of Egyptian Ceilings - - 125Ground Plan of a Villa - - 132Egyptian Elevation Plan from which it is taken 132Wine-presses - - - 152Fauteuils from the Tomb of Remeses III. atThebes - - - 196A Party of Guests - - - 222Arrival of Foreigners in Egypt - 296VOLUME in.Plate 17. Painted Capitals of Columns, and piece of ColouredGlass - - - Frontispiece.Plate 15. Chase of the Hippopotamus - Page 71Plate 16. Boats with coloured Sails, from the Tomb of RemesesIII. at Thebes - - 21 1Plate 13.Plate 5.Plate 6.Plate 7.Plate 8.Plate 9.Plate 10.Plate 11.Plate 12.Plate 14.MANNERS AND CUSTOMSOF THEANCIENT EGYPTIANS.ERRATA IN VOL. I.Introduction, page 10. line 18. for "terminate," read "terminates."Page 12. line 3. for "Herodotus," read "Aristotle;" and line 7. forAristotle" read " Herodotus;" and transpose notes | and ^ •and for " Herod, ii. 16." read " Herod, ii. 15."29. line 2. for " the whole of the above-mentioned kings is 192," read"the number of the above-mentioned kings is 200."92. Note 3. after "root of emerald," add "or glass." Notes 4. and 6.for " Plin. xxxvi. 19." read <' Plin. xxxvi. 13."93. line 14. for " Nomes of Egypt," read " Nomes of central Egypt."line 20. for "the lake Moeris," read "the lake, or rathercanal, Moeris."96. note 3. for " Sosostris. Inherit," read " Sesostris inherit."117. line 2. for " ts ft ppurov," read '' Tnpippvrov."128. note 3. for "spectator," read " spectator," in a few Copies.226. line 12. for "eastern coast," read "western coast."298. lines, for "quilted a headpiece," read " a quilted headpiece."350. note §, for "end of Chap. V." read "beginning of Chap. VII."Osirtasen I.The oldest and most authentic record of theprimeval state of the world is unquestionably theScripture history; and, though the origin of itsearly inhabitants is only traced in a general andcomprehensive manner, we have sufficient data forconjecture on some interesting points.VOL. I. BMANNERS AND CUSTOMSOF THEANCIENT EGYPTIANS.Vignette A. The Pyramids, during the Inundation, from near the Fork of the Delta.CHAPTER I.Origin of the Egyptians. — Sloio Increase of the Delta. — ThejEgyptus of Homer. — Ethiopia sometimes put for the Thebaid.Early State of Society. — The Hunter, Shepherd, and Agriculturist.— Hierarchy of Egypt. — Menes the first King. —Neither Osiris nor any other Deity ever supposed by the Egyptiansto have lived on Earth. — Period elapsed from Menes tothe Persian Invasion. — Oldest Monuments of Egypt. — ThePyramids. — ; Osirtasen Contemporary of Joseph. — The PastorKings not the Jews. — Early Advancement of Egypt, from theMonuments and Scripture History. — Nothing certain beforeOsirtasen I.The oldest and most authentic record of theprimeval state of the world is unquestionably theScripture history ; and, though the origin of itsearly inhabitants is only traced in a general andcomprehensive manner, we have sufficient data forconjecture on some interesting points.VOL. I. B2 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. I.I am fully aware of the profound metaphysicalimport of the first book of Moses, but the allusionsto real events are no less obvious and important ;and it is to these alone that I shall have occasionto advert in the present inquiry.Every one who considers the features, thelanguage, and other peculiarities of the ancientEgyptians, will feel convinced that they are notof African extraction, but that, like the Abyssiniansand many inhabitants of the known valleyof the Nile*, they bear the evident stamp of anAsiatic origin; and Juba, according to Pliny t, affirmsthat "the people of the banks of the Nile,from Syene to Meroe, were not Ethiopians i, butArabs." And if feature and other external appearancesare insufficient to establish this fact, theformation of the skull, which is decidedly of theCaucasian variety, must remove all doubt of theirvalley having been peopled from the East : and somemay even consider it directly alluded to in the bookof Genesis §, where Ham, the son of Noah, and hisimmediate descendants, are said to have inhabitedthe lands of Ethiopia, Egypt li, Libya, and Canaan.The name of Ham is, in fact, the same as thatof Egypt, Khcm, or Cham ; and Moses may havepointed out the eastern origin of the EgyptiansThat is, the Neel-cl-Azrck, 'the Blue,' or more properly 'thelick Nile,' ill contradistinction to the Nccl-cl-Aliiad, 'the White(|{ivcr) Nik'.' Azrek is coiiiiiioiily used to signify hack as well as hie.f I Mill. il). vi. .'{4-. :| 'J'liat is, lihirhx. ' § (Ji-ii. x. 1—6.11 Mizraim, or Mizriin, a phial wont applied to K;,'\pt ((ieii. 1. 11.cf jjfissini), is the Tlihrcw mode of expressing the ' two rei;ioiis of ll>^\ pt'Cso commonly met with in the hieroglyphics), or the ' two Miss,' a namestill used hy the Aral)s, who call all Egypt, as well as (Cairo, Mnsr orMiss. Thiimmim or Thiiiim is in like manner 'the loo truths.'1 Ham is also put for Egypt, as in I'salm Lxxviii. 5\- and other partsof Scripture.CHAP. I. ORIGIN OF THE EGYPTIANS. 3by introducing him as a son of Noah. But itis more reasonable to suppose that a colony ofAsiatics settled in Egypt at a subsequent period,and that to this cause we ought to attribute themarked distinction between the head of the Egyptiansand the Blacks. Conjecture, however, is unableto fix the time when the event took place ;and though it may be ascribed to an era when partsof the earth were already thickly peopled, yetprobability suggests that it occurred when nationswere in their infancy, and at a period far beyondthe reach of history.There has always been a striking resemblancebetween the Egyptians and Asiatics, both as totheir manners, customs, language, and religion ;and some authors have considered the valley theyinhabited to belong to Asia rather than to Africa* :others, again, have divided the country into twoparts, the east and west banks of the Nile, assigningthe former to Asia, the latter to Africa, andtaking the river as the boundary line of the twocontinents. In manner, language, and many otherrespects, Egypt was certainly more Asiatic thanAfrican ; and though there is no appearance of theHindoo and Egyptian religions having been borrowedfrom one another, which many might beinduced to conclude from their great analogy insome points, yet it is not improbable that thosetwo nations may have proceeded from the sameoriginal stock, and have migrated southwards fromtheir parent country in central Asia.Plin. V. 9.B 24i THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. I.It has been the opinion of many that colonisationand civilisation descended the Nile from Ethiopia,and that the parents of Egyptian science camefrom the land of Cush. But this notion appearsfrom modern investigation to be totally at variancewith fact; and the specimens of art that remainin Ethiopia are not only inferior in conceptionto those of the Egyptian school, but are deficientin that character which evinces originality. Indeed,I question if the name Ethiopians wasexclusively applied to the inhabitants of the countrylying beyond Syene ; and there is abundantreason to believe, as I shall presently show, thatEthiopia, when mentioned in the sacred historyand by many profane authors, in conjunction withEgypt, frequently signified the Thebaid, the schoolof learning and the parent of Egyptian science.Ethiopia, though a vague name, was applied tothat country, lying beyond the cataracts, which inthe Scriptures, and in the Egyptian language, iscalled Cush; and black people*, designated asnatives of "the foreign land of Cush," are generallyrepresented on the Egyptian monuments,either as captives, or as the bearers of tribute tothe Pharaohs.That civilisation advanced northwards from theThebaid to Lower Egypt is highly probable ; andthe custom of giving precedence to the title*' Upper Country," in the hieroglyphic legends,Plutarch says K^jpt was called Clicmi (y'//*') from the blackness(x«/it) of its soil. May not Ethiopia, 'the bidck country,' have been atranslation of f 'hcnii ?HAP. I. SLOW PROGRESS OF THE DELTA. 5may be adduced as an argument in favour of thisopinion. But the period at which this civilisationcommenced is not within the Emits of history ;and neither this nor its gradual descent northwardsare subjects on which we can speculatewith certainty or satisfaction. And, indeed, if welisten to Herodotus, and other writers who maintainthat the Delta is of recent date, we are ledto the necessity of allowing an immeasurable timefor the total formation of that space, which tojudge from the very little accumulation of its soil,and the small distance it has encroached on thesea, since the erection of the ancient cities withinit, would require numerous ages, and throw backits origin far beyond the Deluge, or even theMosaic era of the Creation.Tanis, now San, and in Hebrew Zan or Than(Zoan), at a very remote period of Egyptian historywas already founded upon a plain or *' field,"at some distance from the sea shore ; and the vestigesof its ruins are still traced within a few milesof the coast The lapse of 3190 years, from thedays of the great Remeses, has neither made anysensible alteration in the circumjacent levels, norprotruded the land to any distance beyond it intothe sea ; and if in such a length of time the alluvialdeposit of the Nile has been unable to work aPsalm Lxxviii. 12. and 43. ' In the field of Zoan,' ]2?:2 ni©3.■f That is, of the lake Menzaleh. Theseus (Thinness) stood inthat lake, or marsh, and consequently much nearer the sea. Again,Canopus, and many other towns and buildings of which vestiges remain,were, as at present, immediately on the sea shore, in the time of thePolemics and Pharaohs, upwards of 2000 years ago.B 3b THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. I,sensible change, how can it for a moment be supposedthat a period of a thousand years, whichelapsed between the Deluge and the early part ofthat king's reign, would suffice for the formationof the icicle Delta ? Remarks which apply with stillgreater force to Perusing, Taposiris, and Canopus,which actually stood upon the sea shore : for, asthe learned Chart justly observes, since theEgyptians themselves reported the Fanatic Mouth,and the towns of Busiris, Taphosiris, Brutus, andPelusium, to have existed even in the early timeof Osiris and Horus, they must have known themnot to be of recent date ; and Homer allows Menelausto have come to Canopus.* And that Taniswas already built in the age of Remeses theGreat, we have evidence from the sculpturedmonuments now existing in its ruins, in additionto the positive authority of Scripture, Moses himselfassuring us that it was founded long before theExodus, seven years after the town of Hebron. tIt is, then, evident that neither was the periodclassed between the Deluge and the building ofTanis sufficient to form the Delta, nor the constantaccumulation of the alluvial deposit of theNile capable of making so perceptible a changein the extent of that district, as to authorise us tosuppose the upper parts of the country peopledand civilised, while the Delta was a marsh ; howBotliart's Sacra, lib, iv. c. 24.•j- NiimlicTs, xiii. 22. ' n(l)r<»n was l)uilt seven years before Zoaii.'Il ali'e;i(ly existed in the ila\s of Ahriihani. 'And Sarah died in Kirjath-alia : the same is Hebron.' (Jen. xxiii. 2. eons. Josh. xv. I.'J. andJudg. i. 10.CHAP. I. PHAROS OF HOMER. ,much less then can we suppose Ethiopia to havebeen already inhabited by the ancestors of thefuture colonies of Egypt, while that part of thevalley lying below the cataracts of Syene was undergoingits formation ?Much consequence has been attached to anexpression of Homer, that '* the distance from theIsle of Pharos to AiyuTrrog was as much as a vesselwith a fair wind could perform in one day ; " andthis is constantly adduced as a decisive proof of thegreat accumulation of alluvial soil in the Delta*,and of its rapid advances into the Mediterranean,since the era of the Trojan war. But a very imperfectacquaintance with the situation of the Isleof Pharos, and the nature of the ground on whichAlexandria is built, ought to have prevented soerroneous a conclusion ; and if we readily accountfor the misconstruction of the AiyuTrrou Tr^ovrapoiSsfof the poet, we are surprised at the notion whichextends the river and its alluvial deposit over thespace between the Canopic mouth and the Pharos,hitherto unwashed by the fertilising waters of therising Nile. And if a certain deposit does take placein the harbour' of Alexandria, it is very trifling, andby no means capable of having united Pharos tothe shore, which was done artificially by means ofthe Heptastadium, whose increased breadth, owingto many subsequent additions, now forms the baseof the chief part of the modern city. AncientPlutarch tie Side. s.40.f Odyss. A. 355. By the harbour and fresh water at the I. ofPharos, Homer evidently alludes to the site of the modern Alexandria,close to the island.B 48 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. I.Alexandria, the successor of the town of Racotisstood on the rock of the Libyan desert, which isstill beyond the reach and above the level of theinundation ; and the distance from the line ofthe coast to Pharos is the same as in the daysof Homer. The error respecting its having beena day's journey from Egypt originated in themisinterpretation of the word AiyuTrroSy which isused by the poet to designate both the Nile andEgypt ; and that the river was so called in ancienttimes is testified by the authority of Diodorus, whostates that Nileus, one of the early monarchs* ofthe country, transferred his name to the stream,"which previously bore that of ^gyptus."tArrant again justly observes, that "the river,now called by the Egyptians and others Nile, isshown by Homer to have been named ^gyptus,when he relates § that Menelaus anchored his fleetat the mouth of the ^gyptus ; " and the bare inspectionof the verse to which he alludes sufficesto prove his remark to be correct. It is, then, tothe Nile, not to the coast of Egypt, that Homeralludes : and thus the argument derived from hisauthority must cease to be brought forward in supportof the great encroachments of the Delta, andDiodorus places Iii as the predecessor of Chembrcs, who erectedthe great p\ raiiiiil.■\- ISIanctlio says Egypt took its name froiii Scthosis, who was alsocalled yl^Liyptiis, and was brother of Annals. .losi-phus contra Ap. lil).i.c. 15. AmIiis (Jilliiis tells us I'>{:.V|)t was fornicrly named Aera. (xiv. (i.)X Carr. I'^xped. Alex. lib. v. and lib. vi.§ Odyss. A. 477. and S. 257. : —Ilf/iTrrrtioi o' AiyvTTTOV nififinTij)' iKnitinOa,CHAP. I. ALLUVIAL DEPOSIT OF THE NILE. 9of the constant advance of the land into the recedingsea.To any person who has examined the levels ofthe alluvial deposit of the Nile in various parts ofits course, as from the first cataract to its mouth atRosetta*, it is well known that the perpendicularstratum of soil, if I may so call it, decreases inthickness as it approaches the sea ; and thus atElephantine the land has been raised about ninefeet in I7OO years, at Thebes about seven, and soon,gradually diminishing to the mouth. There,indeed, the deposit is lessened in a very remarkabledegree, much more than in the same decreasingratio, in consequence of the greater extent of theland, east and west, over which the inundationspreads ; so that, in a section representing the accumulatedsoil and the level of the low Nile, theangle of inclination would be much smaller from thefork of the Delta to the sea, than from the Thebaidto the Delta. And this is satisfactorily proved by theincrease of the banks and the surface of the countryat Elephantine, Thebes, Heliopolis, the vicinity ofold Cairo, and other places, where the positions ofancient monuments attest the former levels of theland's surface, and enable us to ascertain the increasewithin a known period. Around the baseof the obelisk at Heliopolis, erected by Osirtasen I.about 1700 years before our era, the alluvial soilhas accumulated to the height of five feet tenThe banks during the low Nile are upwards of 30 feet high inparts of Nubia, in middle Egypt 20, and decrease as they are nearer themouth.10 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. I.inches* ; and, comparing this with Elephantine,we shall find that a monument placed there at thesame period would have been buried to the depthof about nineteen feet. Heliopolis stood to thesouth of the Delta ; and the diminution northwards,for every mile, in an expanse of increasing breadth,must have been proportionably greater as it approachedthe sea, till at the shore it became almostimperceptible, even after the lapse of many ages.Having endeavoured to show that no argumentcan be derived from the appearance of the Delta,to favour the supposition of this district havingbeen formed at a period when the upper part ofthe country was already inhabited, it is necessaryto observe that I limit my remarks exclusively tothe Nile, whose nature is very different from thatof most rivers, and particularly those whose deltashave been created and rapidly increased by materialsbrought down by their waters, and depositedat their mouths. These, consisting of trees andother vegetable productions, have tended to formhere and there a nucleus for the construction ofislands, afterwards connected with the mainland,and consolidated by alluvial deposit and freshmaterials constantly adhering to them ; but thispeculiarity is totally unknown at the mouth of theEgyptian Nile.Jt is not my present intention to enter into anyspeculation upon the Ibnnalion of the alluvial land• In my Egypt and Tlielics C|). .'{ 1 .{.) I lia c hail ' Itctwccn seven andL'iglit feet.' This was iVoni inroiiiiation I received at Cairo, and, suspectingit to be erroneous, I sent to have it ascertained, and found it to[)e a» stated above.CHAP. I. EGYPTIANS AND ETHIOPIANS. 11of Egypt, and its Delta ; and much less shall Iattempt to fix the time required for such an event.This would be irrelevant and presumptuous, even ifwe were not limited to the period elapsed betweenthe Deluge and the age of those early Pharaohs, inwhose time all the country, as it now exists, wasdensely peopled. Nor would any one be permittedto assert the priority of a nation from the apparentantiquity of the soil which clothes the rocks of thecountry. But of this we may be assured, that theformation of Egypt and its extensive Delta arebeyond the reach of our inquiry, and of a datelong anterior to the epoch at which that countryor Ethiopia were inhabited.With regard to the word Ethiopia, used byancient authors, we have many reasons for supposingit was sometimes intended to designate,or was confounded with, the Thebaid or UpperEgypt. The expression of Pliny, " Ethiopia wasevidently renowned and powerful, even to thetime of the Trojan war, . . . and extended its empireover Syria," though he is speaking of EthiopiaProper, can only have been borrowed from a traditionrelating to the Thebaid, since the Dissolutemonarchs ruled and received tribute from Ethiopia,and actually did extend their dominion over Syria ;which the Ethiopians could not have done withoutfirst obtaining possession of Egypt, and that,too, at a period when the Pharaohs were in thezenith of their power. Nor is the assertion of theprophet Nahum, that Ethiopia and Egypt were thePlin. vi. 35,12 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. I.strength of No, less remarkable ; N6, or, as theHebrew gives it, Na-amen, being the name of y||Thebes.* According to Herodotus, *the The Ayx^kv^ibaird was formerly called Egypt ; " the rest ofthe country being deemed of minor importance,and the Thebaid bearing this name "par excellence : ^^^and Aristotle says, that " Egypt in ancient timeswas called Thebes." t Whence it may be supposedthat Lower Egypt was conquered by, or annexedto, the Thebaid, or, as it was then styled, Egypt jand, if this be true, we can have no hesitationin ascribing to it the precedence of the uppercountry.The question respecting the comparative antiquityand civilisation of the Egyptians and Ethiopianshas now become obsolete. I do not, therefore,detain the reader by any mention of the numerousarguments to be adduced from the monuments ofboth countries, to decide the priority of the Egyptians,which even those ancient writers, whose authoritysome have supposed to militate against thatopinion, do not fail to prove : Diodorus § allowingNahum, iii. 8, 9. This passage is very interesting. ' Art thou betterthan populous No, that was situate among the waters, that had thewaters round about it ; whose rampart was the sea, and her wall wasfrom the sea ? Ethiopia and Egypt were her strength : Put and Lubinwere thy helpers.' The word onu'' Inriiii, 'the rivers,' is the Hebrewplural of the Egyptian word lAPO, ' river,' applied to the Nile. Theword sea is, in the Hebrew, water or waters, and does not apply exclusivelyto the sea. ' Populous No' should be No or Na-anni, takenfrom" the Egyptian III N Amon, or AAIOYN-III, 'the abode of Amun,'or Diospolis.V-f- Herod, ii. ^GJ^I j Aristotle. Mctcorol. lib. i. 14. — " Apxamv i) AiyvnroQ Oijfai kuXok-fiivni"§ Dioil. i. .'jO.CHAP. I. EARLY STATE OF SOCIETY. 13that *' the Thebans consider themselves the oldestof men, and affirm that philosophy and astrologywere invented by them," in no way acknowledgingthe Ethiopians as their predecessors : and Herodotus*distinctly stating that the manners of theEgyptian troops who deserted from Psamaticus hada very sensible effect in civilising the Ethiopians.Of the state of Egypt at the epoch when thearrival of Joseph, or the Exodus of the Israelites,took place, some little information may be obtainedfrom the Bible, and from the monuments that remain,both of which bespeak a people already faradvanced in the arts and customs of civilised life.And though we must remain ignorant of theirorigin, and of the form of government at the commencementof Egyptian history, we may venture toexplain, from reason and probability, some of thecauses of their early and rapid progress.The wants of man in the infant stage of societyare simple and easily satisfied, and he desires littlemore than what suffices for his maintenance andself-preservation. The rudest state is that of thehunter ; and the produce of the chase affords himall that he requires for food and raiment. Hisarms, or some ingenious contrivance for seizinghis prey, are almost the sole objects for which anyeffort of the mind is roused ; and, contented withthat land in which he chances to have been born,he seldom quits it in search of a more eligible spot.The shepherd, on the contrary, is frequently aHerod, ii. 30.14 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. I.wanderer, and the choice of his temporary abodedepends on the abundance of food or superiorityof pasture it affords to his flocks. This, and themeans required for his own subsistence, are hischief care ; and he seeks not to improve his condition,or to advance beyond the state in whichhis forefathers have lived. Like the linter, hemakes no progress in civilisation ; and we observe,that, though surrounded by opulent andindustrious nations, the Arab, to the present day,despises customs which he feels not the inclinationto adopt.Accidental circumstances generally have atendency to form the different states of society ;and that country which, from its nature, wasadapted to the chase, would be inhospitable tothe shepherd, and totally unsuited to the pursuitsof the agriculturist. This last is the statemost capable of improvement. In it, civilisationis encouraged, the industry of each individual isbeneficial to the whole community, and the facilityof providing for their wants enables a great numberof persons to employ themselves in other occupations.And, since the mere tillage of the soilmay be j)crformcd by a small portion of the population,the surplus is led to devise some method ofprofiting by their spare time and labour ; and theenergies of the mind are called forth, both tocreate and to sii))ply inuncrous artificial wants.Mechanism, the division of lands, the rights of]property, the exchange of commodities, and manyother steps towards the improvement of society.CHAP. 1. EARLY STATE OF Society. 15are the result of this mode of living ; and variousinstitutions, unknown to the hunter and the shepherd,succeed each other in proportion to theadvancement of the rising state. It is, then,evident, that those countries, where agriculture isthe chief occupation of the people, must makerapid progress in civilisation, and, consequently,rise to opulence and power ; and we may reasonablysuppose Egypt was one of the first to benefitby the advantages of its fruitful soil. *Assyria is another notable instance of the samefact ; and its fertility was unquestionably the causeof its early improvement and prosperity.But the primeval history of stales, especially atso remote an epoch, must necessarily be a matterof pure conjecture, since they are beyond the reachof authentic records ; and if those nations themselveshad handed down to us what they deemedtheir real annals, we should find them so complicatedand improbable, that it would be out of ourpower to separate truth from fiction. Such is thecharacter of the uncertain fragments of Manette,preserved by later writers ; and even the earlyhistory of the Greeks is so encumbered with allegory,and a mysterious system of mythology, thatit is difficult to distinguish between real events andreligious fable : a mode of uniting history andmetaphysical theory not peculiar to the Greeks,but adopted by other, perhaps by all, nations ofThe exchange of commodities with other nations not only tends tobenefit each in a commercial, but in a moral, point of view ; and it isprobable that Egypt trafficked with the Tyrians, as well as with thepeople of Arabia, at a very remote period.16 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. I.antiquity ; and, wherever we have been able toexamine the basis on which it was constructed, astriking similarity is observable in its general outline.Whether Egypt was originally governed by anhierarchy or a monarchy, is still a question ; yet,from the circumstance of the earliest names enclosedin ovals being preceded by the title priestinstead of king, we might infer the possibility ofa priestly form of government ; and the account ofManette, and other writers who mention the ruleof the gods, would seem to sanction, or even require,such a construction. The succession of thedifferent gods to the sovereignty of the countrywould then be explained by that of the respectivecolleges of priests ; though the duration of theirreigns is totally inconsistent with truth or probability.It is true that infant states are more usuallygoverned by some individual, pre-eminent for hisabilities either as a statesman or a warrior, than bya body of persons with equal authority ; but, as theformer opinion appears to be less at variance withwhat history has imparted to us, it is more reasonableto conclude that, like Judaea before the time ofSaul, Egypt was ruled by an hierarchy, until theaccession of its first king, Menes.Any attempt to fix the precise era of this poeticalchange must be fruitless and unsatisfactory : if,however, it is beyond our reach, there are positivegrounds for the conviction, that no Egyptian deitywas ever supposed to have lived on earth * ; and theVide Herod, ii. 143. The priests ;iso assured him that no deity hadever lived on earth (ii. 11'-^.); and Inarch (de Isid. v. 2].) observesthat the iidial)itants of'tlie ThchaVd entertained the same opinions.CHAP. I. NO GODS LIVED ON EARTH. Ijstory of Osiris's rule in this world is purely allegorical,and intimately connected with the mostprofound and curious mystery of their religion.And so great was their respect for the importantsecret, and for the name of Osiris, that Herodotus*scrupled to mention him ; and Plutarch t says theEgyptian priests talked with great reserve even ofhis well-known character as ruler of the dead.The Egyptians justly ridiculed the Greeks forpretending to derive their origin from deities.They showed Hecataeus and Herodotus a series ofthree hundred and forty-five high priests, each ofwhom, they observed, was ** a man, son of a man,"but in no instance the descendant of a god : thuscensuring the folly of Hecataeus, who claimed adeity as his sixteenth ancestor. Such is the meaningof the expression in Herodotus t, "a promis,son of a promis : " and it is singular that thehistorian should not have understood the significationof the word rome (man, or piromi, theman), as the sense alone suffices to point it out ;and his translation proves how ignorant he was ofthe language of the country in which he travelled.Indeed, the information of Herodotus wasfrequently of a very imperfect kind, owing sometimesto an excess of credulity, of which the humorousEgyptians gladly took advantage in aGreek, and sometimes to a want of scrutiny, asmay be seen in the account he gives of the sourcesof the Nile.§Herod, ii. 80. ct alibi. t Pint, che Is. s. 79.% Herod, ii. 143. § Herodot. ii. 28.VOL. T. C18 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. 1.The kings of Egypt are arranged by Manettein twenty-six dynasties, from the time of Menesto the invasion of Cambyses, which happenedB. c. 525 ; but whether any dependence can beplaced on the names and number of the kings beforethe accession of the eighteenth dynasty, is amatter of great doubt ; and some of the authorsto whom we are indebted for the fragments of hiswork disagree in their arrangement. Nor do themonuments render us any assistance in this portionof the early history ; though the great similarityin the names and order of the monarchs, in theeighteenth and some of the succeeding dynasties,suggests the probability of the original work of Manettehaving been derived from authentic sources.One great difficulty arises from the long durationassigned to the Egyptian monarchy : the sum ofyears from Menes to the Persian invasion being,according to Manette, about 4750 years, withoutreckoning the fourteenth dynasty ; and Herodotus'account, who was assured by the priests that 830kings succeeded that prince*, requires, on an averageof fifteen years to a reign, about 4950 yearsfor the same period. A similar objection appliesto the statements of Diodorus and other writers ;but, as the examination of controverted questionscan offer little interest to the reader, I shall onlyventure a few remarks on the period previous tothe arrival of Joseph.L. ii. s. 100. lit' may mean 330 kinj^s from Mcncs to Amass,though he says to Mccris ; and in s. 1+3. he speaks of 315 kings and highpriests, and in s. 14-2. of S+l generations before Sethos. He confoundsreigns with generations.CHAP. I. THE PYRAMIDS. 19The oldest monuments of Egypt, and probablyof the world, are the pyramids to the north ofMemphis ; but the absence of hieroglyphics and ofevery trace of sculpture precludes the possibility ofascertaining the exact period of their erection, orthe names of their founders. From all that can becollected on this head, it appears that Suphis andhis brother Sensuphis * erected them about theyear 2120 b. c.f ; and the tombs in their vicinitymay have been built, or cut in the rock, shortlyafter their completion. These present the namesof very ancient kings, whom we are still unable torefer to any certain epoch, or to place in the seriesof dynasties ; but whether they were cotemporarywith the immediate predecessors of Osirtasen t, orruled the whole of Egypt, is a question that I donot as yet pretend to answer.Previous to the accession of the first Osirtasen,who probably lived about 1740 b. c. and was thereforecotemporary with Joseph, we have little toguide us upon the monuments of Egypt ; but wemay safely conjecture, from the state of thoseerected during his reign, that the Egyptians wereSensuphis signifies the brother of Suphis, agreeing with the relationshipmentioned by Herodotus between Cheops and Cephren, Theywere succeeded by Moscheris or Mencheres, the Mycerinus of theGreek historian. Suphis, according to Manette, was the second kingin the fourth dynasty of Memphis,f This is following Eratosthenes, who places Suphis or Saophis thefourth before Apappus, whom I suppose to have been the cotemporaryof Abraham, b. c. 1920. For if Jacob's arrival, b. c. 1706, is referredto the reign of Apappus, the antiquity of these monarchs is unnecessarilyincreased, and the additional 214 years augment our perplexities on thesubject.J If we may believe Josephus, Manette speaks of kings of theThebaid and the rest of Egypt uniting in a common cause ; andthereby shows the existence of cotemporary dynasties.c 2^0 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. I.already far advanced in the arts of civilised life, andhad arrived nearly at the same state in which theycontinued during what may be styled the Augustanera of the eighteenth dynasty. This is further confirmedby the scriptural sketch of Egyptian mannersin the time of Joseph j but we have nothing to leadto any conclusion respecting the exact duration ofthe previous reigns, the organisation and progressof the political state of the country, or the periodfrom which its civilisation dates its commencement.Nor can any thing satisfactory be derived fromthe imperfect history* of the shepherd kings givenby Manette, or at least by his copyists : and hisaccount of their aggressions is not sufficiently clearto enable us to determine whether he alludes tothe Assyrians, Phoenicians, or Arabs That theywere not Jews is evident ; though, as I have alreadyobserved in a former work, the Exodus ofthe Israelites may possibly, through the inattentionof some authors, have been confounded with theexpulsion of the Pastor tribes : and their abominationof shepherds necessarily originating in seriousinjuries received from them, as it already existed inthe time of Joseph, proves their hostile invasionsto have happened before that period.About the epoch of the Jewish captivity, Egyptmust have been engaged in a war with somepowerful enemies, since the reason of the oppressMany histories of Egypt were wrilteii al (liflcrunt periods, bynative as well as iorei<^n authors, which luivc iinlortniiately been lost.Conf. Cicero, de Republ. iii. H. ' Ilia incognita gente r,gyj)liorum,(sua? pliirimonnn et succiiloruni et venturing nuiiioriuin Uterus continent.'f Herodotus elis Sennacherib) ' king of Arabia and Assyria.' (lib. ii.141.CHAP. I. THE SHEPHERD KINGS. 21sion exercised against the unresisting Hebrews isstated to have been the fear of their uniting withthem * ; and, indeed, it appears from the sculpturesof Beni Hassan, that the Egyptians already, as earlyas the reign of Osirtasen, had extended their armsinto Asia, had thence brought many captives toEgypt, and had perhaps enrolled some of the conqueredpeople in their army, as was frequently thecase at a later period. This war with foreign nationsis another strong argument against the opinionof Josephus that the Jews were the Shepherds,and the pretended power of his countrymen at soearly an epoch is inconsistent with reason and probability.The Jews, even in the most flourishingstate, when in firm possession of the promised land,and united under one king, never did arrive at thedegree of power which he has ascribed to themin Egypt ; and the whole is at variance with Scripturehistory.There is great difficulty in assigning a dateto the irruption of those invaders, and their occupationof Lower Egypt. The forty-three Pastoror Shepherd kings, placed by Manette as contemporariesof the same number of Theban princes,who composed the seventeenth dynasty, ill agreewith the monuments that remain ; since OsirtasenI., who must have been one of the cotemporaryEgyptian monarchs, ruled the lower as well as theExodus i. 10. * Lest when there falleth out any war, theyjoin also unto our enemies, and fight against us.' According to Manette,the Egyptians had obtained possession of Libya long before thisepoch, since he speaks of the Libyans revolting from the first king of thathird dynasty Vide infra, p, 26.c 322 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. I.upper country. What may have happened beforehis accession, 1 do not pretend to decide ; but thepyramids, and the tombs in their vicinity, which Iconceive to have been much anterior to his reign,are evidently Egyptian ; and as this circumstancerequires a long period of tranquillity and freedomfrom aggression, previous to the reign of Osirtasen,the seventeenth dynasty of shepherds is renderedstill more doubtful. It is, however, remarkable,that no buildings of a date prior to the reign ofOsirtasen I., excepting the pyramids, some tombsand grottos, now exist in Upper or Lower Egypt:and hence these questions naturally arise : — DidOsirtasen expel the invaders from Lower Egypt, andafterwards erect the edifices to which the obelisksat Heliopolis and in the Fyoom once belonged?and if so, wliy have we not pointed allusions tothose battles and welcome victories in the tombs ofBeni Hassan ? Or are we to attribute the absenceof monuments before the reign of Osirtasen totheir great antiquity and consequent dilapidation ?The last is more probable, since those bearing thename of Osirtasen only consist of a few brokencolumns at Karnak and the two obelisks abovementioned; the grottos of Beni Hassan being hewnin the imperishable rock : and, indeed, withoutthem his name would have been almost as littleknown as those of other kings who preceded him.Nor could the loss of the early monuments havebeen the result of the irruption of the Pastors ;since we do not even find any remaining at Thebes,which is beyond the ]point whither the invadersCHAP. I. BEFORE THE 17TH DYNASTY. 23appear to have penetrated, and, consequently, outof the reach of destruction.I am, therefore, of opinion that the irruption ofthe Pastors was anterior to the erection of anybuilding now extant in Egypt, and long before theaccession of the seventeenth dynasty * ; but, untilsome further light is thrown on the subject, eitherby the monuments or some equally authentic source,it will be better to commence our history of Egyptwith the reign of that monarch whose records exist,and from whom we can establish a regular succession.I shall, however, first introduce the namesand order of the sovereigns mentioned by Herodotus,Diodorus, Manette, and Eratosthenes, witha few remarks on the probable origin of the shepherdkings ; and then proceed, in the next chapter,to a comparison of the names occurring onthe monuments, with the catalogues of the priestof Sebennytus, and other ancient authors.And in order to present a comparative view ofthe succession from Menes to the invasion of Cambyses,according to Herodotus and Diodorus, Ishall arrange the names given by those historiansseparately in opposite columns.The old chronicle gives four Memphites to the seventeenth dynasty,and eight Tanites to the sixteenth, which I have followed in preferenceto the forty-three of Manette.Egyptian (dagger, length 11| inches. Salt's Collection.c 4THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. IEgyptian Kings, according to Herodotus.Menes.pi 8 Ethiopians andQueen Nitocris. (The Nitocrisof ]\Ianetho is placed in the 6thDynasty, and after Supplies thefounder of the great pyramid.)°<Moeris, built the Labyrinth andexcavated the lake Maris.Sesostris, the great conqueror.g Heron, his sonA Memphite, whose name accordingto the Greeks is Proteus.Rhampsinitus..S Cheops, built the great pyramid andW reigned 50 years.uO~~^ Cephren, his brother, built the 2d pyra-g mid and reigned 56 years.•s5j Mycerinus, son of Cheops, left a pyra-S mid.Asychis.Anysis, who was blind. The Egyptiancrown passed to an Ethiopianline.Sabaco, the Ethiopian, retired after 50years.Anysis restored.Sctlios (Sc-pythia) the priest of Vulcan(Phtha or Pthah) cotemporary ofSennacherib) and Tirliaka.According to Diodorus: *Menes, or Menas.Then 2 of his de "j During a period ofdescendants. |- more than J ,400Then 52 Kings. J years.Busiris.Then 8 of his descendants ; the last ofwhom bore the same name as thefirst •!•, and was said to have foundedThebes. His 8th descendant, whobore the name of his father, Chorus,reputed to be the founder ofMemphis.Then 1 2 generations of Kings.Myris, dug the lake above Memphis.Seven generations of Kings.Sesoosis I. the great conqueror.Sesoosis II.Many kings succeeded him.Amass, who was conquered by Artisans.Actisanes the Ethiopian.Mendes, or Marries, an Egyptian,who built the labyrinth as a tombfor himself.An interregnum for 5 generations.Aetna, or Cetes, who is Proteus.Memphis.Seven Kings of no note, from one ofwhom, Nileus, the river was calledNisus, having formerly borne thename of vEgyptus.Tiie eighth was Chcinbes, or Chemist,the Rlemphite. He reigned 50 years,and built the great pyramid.Cephren, this brother, reigned 56 years;others say he was his son, and callhim Chabry'is.Mycerinus, or Clericus, son of thefounder of the great pyramid. Hel)egan a third, and died before it wasfinished.Tnephaclithus, the Tcchnatis of Plutarch.Bocchoris the Wise, his son.After a long time, Bacon the Ethiopian.An interregnum of 2 years.• It is singular that Diodorus does not introduce the name of Osymandyas in this listif kings, though lie mentions him as a Thcban monarch in his description of that city,t Some suppose him to have been Busiris II.CHAP. I.MAMETHOS DYNASTIES.Egyptian Kings, according to Herodotus.The 12 Kings reigned over Egypt,divided into 12 parts * (or nomes).Psammitichus, one of the 12, 54 years.Necks, his son, reigned 1 1 years.Psammis, his son, 6 years.Apries, his son, 25 years.Amass, having usurped the throne, 44years.Psammenitus, his son, reigned 6months.According to Diodorus.Twelve chiefs (monarchs) 18 years.Psammetichus the Sprite, one of them,54 years.After 4 generations, cameApries, who reigned 22 years.Amass, 55 years.The Dynasties of Egyptian Monarchs, according toManette (on the authority of Africanus and Eusebius),are as follows : —est Dynasty of 8 Kings, either Thinites orTfiebans.Name.Duration of Reign,yrs.1. Menes, the Thine, succeeded theDemigods, killed by a hippopotamus2. A th 6th is, his son, built the palace atMemphis, and wrote the anatomicalbooks, being a physician3. Concedes (Kenkenes), his son4. Venephes (Enemies or Venephres),his son, raised the pyramids nearthe town of Cyclone (Cocoa orChloe). A great plague in Egyptduring his reign5. Usaphaedus (Saphaidos or Usaphaes),his son . - . -6. Miebidus (Nieces or Niebais), hisson - - -7. Semempses (Semenpses or Menses),his son. A terrible pestilence ragedin Egypt . . -8. Breaches (Ubienthes or Vibethis),his son „ . -- 26Total- 253Observations.Called a Theban byEratosthenes, andapparently so accordingto the monuments.Eusebiusmentions 7 or1 7 sons of Menes.According to Africanus253, Eusebius252 ; the sum beingreally 263.The same division of Egypt into 12 provinces, or belies, was retained tothe time of the Memlooks.THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. I.2c? Dynasty of 9 Thine Kings.Name. Duration of Reign.1. Boethius the first (or Socius). In hisreign the earth opened at Bubastis,and many were killed2. Caeechos (Chorus or Echoes), underhim the bulls Apis in Memphis, andMnevis in Heliopolis, and the Men-designgoat were appointed to begods . - -3. Binothris (or Biophis), under whomit was enacted that women mighthold the reins of governmentr According to Eusebius, these"4-. lias three, and their four success.Sethenes J sors, did nothing worthy of6. Cheered commemoration, and he omitstheir names.7. Nephercheres (the seventh successorof' Biophis, according to Eusebius).Fabulists reported the Nile to haveflowed with honey during elevendays . . - -8. Sesochris, who was 5 cubits (7 ft.6 in.) in height, and 3 in breadth ;or, according to Eusebius, 3 palms -9. Cheered (or Reveres). Name omittedby Eusebiusyrs.- 30Observations,Altogether - - 3023d Dynasty, of 9 Memphite Kings.1. Recherches (Cherishes or NichesIn his reign the Libyansrevolted from the Egyptians ; butalarmed by an unexpected increaseof the moon submitted2. Tosorthrus (or Sesorthus), calledAsclepiusby the Egyptians, from hismedical skill. He introduced themode of building with hewn stone,and patronised literatureThis introduction ofthe worship of sacredanimals is remarkable.Eusebius gives 297years.CHAP. I.MANETHO*S DYNASTIES.Name.Duration of Reign.Observations.3.Tyresr ^yrb.4.MesochrisEusebius mentions5.Soy his (Sophiaor Zouphis)six others after Se-sorts,who wereJ not famed for anymemorable exploit :*196.TosertasisThis name reminds us7.Achesand he omits theirof Osirtasen.8.Sephuris -names.9.Cerpheres --Altogether - - 214Eusebius gives the total197 years.eth Dynasty, of 8 Memphite Kings of a differentbranch.1.Sorts - - - - 29Eusebius omits the2.Suphis. Built the largest pyramid,which Herodotus says was constructedby Cheops. He was arroganttowards the gods, and wrotethe sacred book, which is regardedby the Egyptians as a very preciouswork* - - - - 63name of Sorts, andconsiders Suphis the3d of this Dynasty.3.Suphis (the 2d) '-4.Mencheres5.RhatcesesThe names of these are6.Bicherisomitted by Eusebius."227.Searchers -8.Thampthis - .-Altogether - - 284According to Eusebius5th Dynasty, of 9 Elephantine Kings.448 years.1.Searchers2.SpiresEusebius reckons3.Nephercheres (or31 Elephantine4.Nerchepheres)Shires (Sisichis or <kings, but omitsall their names,and introduces>Osiris)Othius and Phil.Ceres (or Schemes)ops into this .Natures (or Rathu-nasty.ris)I7.Mencheres (or Marchers) - - 98.Tancheres (or Teachers) - - 449.Onus (Unus or Annus) - - 33Altogether - - 248The sum is 218.This is very contradictory.THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. I.6tk Dynasty, of 6 Memphite Kings.Name.Duration of Rei"1. Othoes (Othius or Shoes) killed by hisguards - - - -2. Prius - - . .3. Methusuphis - - -4. Phipps (or Phipps), who began toreign at the age of 6 years, andreigned until he completed his toothyear5. Menthesuphis .6. Nitocris.* The handsomest woman ofher time, of a florid complexion andflaxen hair ; built the third pyramidyrs.9i.Totalth Dynasty, of 70 Memphite Kings, ivhoreigned 70 days ; or, according to Eusebius,5 Kings, who reigned 15 days or years.8lh Dynasty, of 27 Memphite Kings, whoreigned 156 years. Eusebius gives 5 Kingsand 106 years.9th Dynasty, of 19 Heracleopolite Kings, whoreigned 409 years ; or, according to Eusebius,4, tho filled J 00 years.1. The first was Achthoes (Achthros,Ochthovis, orOchitois). More cruelthan all his predecessors; and, havingperpetrated many crimes inEgypt, he was seized with madness,and afterwards killed by a crocodile.IQth Dynasty, of 19 Heracleopolite Kings,who reigned 1 85 years.Observations.Omitted by Eusebius.As Eusebius callsPhipps the 4thKing, he evidentlyintends to place himin the Sixth Dynasty.Is he not thesame as Apophis?Nitocris, or Minervavictrix (potent).Should be 197.• This name is either Neit-gori, or Neit-acri.was also called Neit-ucfi.The Queen of Psamaticus 3dCHAP. I.DYNASTIES.w11th Dynasty, of IQ Diospolite Kings, whoreigned 43 years.Name. Duration of Reign.yrs.Of these, Ammenemes reigned - - 16[The whole of the above-mentioned kingst)Q(^ is"*©^, who reigned during the space of2300 years, and 70 days.* This terminatesManette's first book.]SECOND BOOK OF Manette.11th Dynasty, of Diospolite Kings.Sesonchosis (Geson-Goses, or Seasonsson of AmmanemesAmmanemes (or Ammenemes), slainby his eunuchs . - -Sesostris conquered all Asia in nineyears, and Europe as far as Thrace,every where erecting monumentsof his conquests over those nations.Among the people who had actedbravely, he set up memorials of aphallic nature ; but among the degenerate,female emblems engravedon stelae. He is considered by theEgyptians to be the first after Osiris.His stature was 4 cubits, 3 palms,and 2 digits (about 6 feet 10 inches)Achates (Labors, Tamarisk, or lombards),built the labyrinth in the Ar-invitenome as a tomb for himself -Amperes (orMeres)AmmenemesScemiophris(Skemiophris),his sisterEusebius omits thenames of these three,and says the successorsof Lombardsreigned 42 years.AltogetherObservations.According to Eusebiusthese 16 yearsare not included inthe total of 43.If this is the Matrisof Herodotus, he isperhaps correct inmaking him theirsuccessor ofSesostris.According tobias 245.The total of the sums given by Africanus is only 2287 years 70 days; or,corrected, 2261 years 70 days. Eusebius has omitted two of these sums; but,assuming them the same as those of Africanus, his total of years would be 2059and 75 days.THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. I.Isti Dynasty, of 60 Diospolite Kings, whoreigned 453 years.\^th Dynasty, of^Q Xoite Kings, who reigned134 years. Eusebius says 484; anotherreading gives 184.\Bth Dynasty, of the Shepherds. According toEusebius of Diospolitans, who reigned 250years.Name. Duration of Reign.These were 6 foreign Phoenician Kings,who took Memphis.1. The first was Sites, from whom theSaite* nome borrowed its name.The Shepherds founded a city inthe Sethroite nome, from whencethey invaded and conquered allEgypt -2- Been (Non, Anon, or Byron) -3- Pacha (or Pachas)4« Stain . - .5. Archies (or Inches)6. Apdphis (or Aphorism)JTS.Altogether- 284Aiiogeiner - --zo'b\6th Dynasty, of^^ Hellenic Shepherd Kings,who reigned 518 years. Eusebius gives 5Theban Kings, who reigned 1 90 years.1 6th Dynasty, of 43 Shepherd Kings and 43Theban Diospolites. Eusebius introducesthe Kings of the \5th Dynasty of Africanus,whom he calls Phoenician Shepherds.1 ll Dynasty of ylfncanus.yrs.Tlic cotemporary reignsof the Shepherds andTliebans lasted - 151(He omits their names.)Mill Dynasty of Eusebius.yrs.1. Sites - - 192. 13noii (Anon) - 403. Archies (Aiwphis) 304. Apojjhis (Archies) - 14Observations.TotalProbably meaningLower Egypt, whicheven in the timeof the Romans wasdistinguished fromthe Thebaid by thename Egyptus.Aphoph signifies agiant.According to Eusebius250.Differing from the totalof the 15 Dyn.of African us.Very improbable.CHAP. I.MANETHO S DYNASTIES.According to Africanus, of1 6 Diospolite Kings.yrs.1. Amos, in whose timeMoses went out ofEgypt2. Cheers - - 133. Amenophthis - 244. Mensis ( Mensis) 225. Misaphris (Mis-paris)- - 136. MisphragmathosisMisphragmutho-sis), in whose timehappened the delugeof Deucalion 267. Tuthmosis - -98. Amenophis, supposedto be Memnonof the musicalstone9.10.Isti Dynasty.According to Eusebius, of1 4 Diospolite Kings.yrs.1. Moses ( Amosis) - 25HorusCherries11. Ratios12. Cheered -13. Adheres14. Arises- 6- 515. Ramesses (Amusesor Armes)16. AmenophathAmenoph(262)Total(or- 19- 2632. Chebron - - 133. Amoris (Amends.-214. Miphris (empires,Metres) - 125. Misphragmuthosis(Myspharmu thesis,or Misphrag-muthos) - - 266. Tuthmosis - - 97. Amenophis ().It is hewho is supposed tobe Memnon of themusical stone - 318. Ores - 36, 27, or 379. AchencheresA chencherses, orAchencherres) 1 6 or 1 2[10. Authors, 39, (A-chorus)] - - 7[11. Chencherres.] Inhis time Moses ledthe Jews out ofEgypt - - 1810. [12.] Acherres - 811. [13.] Cherries - 1512. [14.] Armais, whowas also called Da-nous,reigned - 5After which he wasexpelled by hisbrother ^gyptus,and fled to Greece.He took Argos, ofwhich he becameKing.13. Ramesses (Am-moses)called also^gyptus. [15. recesses]- - 6814. Amenophis (or Memphis).[16. Me-copies]- - 40Observations.Mensis is omitted byEusebius, being aQueen.V. Thothmes 2d in mylist of Kings, agreeingwith the date ofthe deluge of DeusIn the Armenian textAchoris and Chen-cherriesare omitted,and the Exodus followsthe name ofAchencheres.The real name appearsto be Amunophth.Total348 Or 380, 369, 378, 384,or 337.THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. I.1 9th Dynasty.According to Africanus, oflDiospolite Beings.yrs.1 . Sethos - - 5 12. Replaces - - 613. Ammenepthes - 204. Rameses - •• 605. Animonemnes - 56. Thuoris, called byHomer Polybius,the husband of Ai-candia,in whosereign Troy wastakenTotal- 7- 209According to Eusebius, of 5Diospolite Kings.yrs.1. Sethos - - 552. Rameses (or Raises) 6G3. Amenephthis (orAmenophthis) - 84. Ammenemes - 265. Thuoris, the Polybiusof Homer - - 7TotalIn this 2d book of Manette are 96 Kings,who ruled 2121 years.THIRD BOOK OF MANETHO.2Qth Dynasty, of 12 Diospolite Kings, ivhoreigned 1 35 years, or according to Eusebius172 years. TJuiir names are omitted.2\st Dynasty, of 7According to Africanus.yrs.1. Mentes (Series,or Sedes) - 262. Psusenes (Psuneses,or Psusennes) - 463. Nephelcheres - 4Amenophthis (orAmencnophthis) -Osochor (Osoclion)Pinnacles (I'inachcs)Psusennes (Susen-ncs)- 14TotalTanite Kings,According to Eusebius.Smcndis (or amends)Psusennusyrs.Nephercherespherchenes)AmenophthisOsochorPinnaclesPsosennesTotal(Nes6- 9- 35Observations,V. Remeses 5, in mylist of Kings.Scaliger omits this Dynasty,and i n trod usesthe same Kings inthe 'Josh Dynasty.Syncelliis gives in the2()th Dynasty :Eclipses, 1 9 years.Psanimuthis, 13 years.4 years.Certes, 1 6 years.Uhanii)sis, 45 years.Menses, or Anunc-names, 26 years.Ocliyras, 14 years.And in one versionAmenophthis isl)lace(l l)erore Nespheirheres, in the21st Dynasty.CHAP. I.MANETHO S DYNASTIES.lid Dynasty.According to Africanus of 9Bubastite Alngs.yrs.1. Sesonchis (Seasons- - 212. Osorthon (Sooth) 153. rXliree names not4. < given, of kings }- 255. | who reigned6. Tacelothis (Tacello-this) - - 13g' J Name9. 1 •■^'ioroiiij 1,snot"!kings I 2,.d Jacello-- 1;les omitted, I .,,reigned. [Total - 1 20According to Eusebius of 3Bubastite Lungs.yrs.1. Sesonchusis (Seasons- - 2)2. Osorthos (Osorthon) 153. Tacellothis (Takello-this) - - liTotal - 4423c? Dynasty.According to Africanus, of 4Tanite Kings.yrs.1 . Petoubates ( PetitsIn his timethe Olympiad began- - 402. OsorchA(Osorch6n),whom the Egyptianscall Hercules - 83. Psalms - - 104. Set - (34 or) 31TotalAccording to Eusebius, of 3Tanite Aln"s.1. Petubastis2. Osorthon3. PsalmsyrsObservations.Pet-past?- 10Totid24^A Dynasty.Bocchoris, the Saite, in whose reign asheep spoke I - - -%Sth Dynasty of 3 Ethiopian Kings.1. Sabaco (Sabbacon),who took Bocchorisand burnt him alive,reigned - - 82. Sebichus (Sebichos,or Severus) his son 143. Marcus - - 18TotalVOL. I.- - 40According to Eusebius.6 ; Called the Wise.No mention ismade of his fatherTnephac-tus.Tracesyrs.- 12- 12- 20TotalTHE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. 1.26tk Dijnasty^ of 9 Saite Kings.1. Terminates - 7•2. Nechepsos (Nereus- - - G3. Nechao I. (Nachao) 84. Psammeticus(Psain-metichus, Psamme-typhus, or Psammi-ticus) --545. Nechao II. TookJerusalem, and carriedJoachaz theKing captive toEgypt - . 66. Psammuthis - - 67. Vapors, to whom theremainder of theJews fled when Jerusalemwas takenby the Assyrians - 198. Amosis9. PsammecheritesPsalm acheri tes )reigned - 6 monthsTotal - 150 yrs. 6 monthsyrs.Amperes the Ethiopian- - 18Stephinathis (Stem- - 7Nechepsos - - 6Nechao I. - - 6Psammetichus - 446. Nechao II.Psammuthes, calledalso Psammitichus - 17Vaphres - - 259. AmosisTotal-16721th Dynasty, of 8 Persian Kings.Name.1. Cambyses reigned over Persia 5 (9?)years, and over Egypt2. Darius, son of Hystaspes3. Xerxes the Great -4-. Artabanusus - - 7 months5. Artaxerxes - - - -6. Xerxes - - 2 months7. Socinus - - 7 months8. Darius the son of XerxesDuration of Reign.yrs.Total - 124' years 4 months28^/* Dynasty.VIS.Amyrteus of .Sais (Amyrtacus, Amyrteos) " 6Observations.Euseblusgives 12()years and fourinonlhs.CHAP. I.MANETHO S DYNASTIES.29th Dynasty, of 4 Mendesian Kings.yrs.1. Nepherites (Nicherites) - - 62. Achoris - - 133. Psammutliis - 1Nephritis (Nephritis,or Nephritis)- 4 monthsTotal - 20 yrs. 4 monthsI. Nepherites- 6Achoris - - 13Psammuthes - 1Mutes - - - 1Nepherites (or A nephritis)- 4 monthsTotal - 21 yrs. 4 monthsSot Dynasty, of 3 Sebennyte Kings.yrs.1. Nectanebes - - 182. Tees - - 23. Nectanebes (Nectanebes)- - 18Total -Totalyrs.10^\st Dynasty, of Persians.yrs.1. Ochus (ArtaxerxesIII.) ruled Persia20 years, and EgyptArisesDarius -Total1. Ochus, who in his20th year obtainedpossession of Egypt,and reigned2. Arises, son of Ochus3. Darius, conquered byAlexanderTotal -Observations.One version placesMutes afterNepherites II.(The whole number of years in the third bookof Manette is 1050.)*Such is the imperfect hist of Kings given by thecopyists of Manette ; but though many of theDynasties are questionable, yet from a comparisonwith the old Chronicle and the Canon of ThebanKings from Eratosthenes, some general conclusionsmay be obtained respecting their succession andthe different families who enjoyed the sovereignVide Vir. Carry's very useful collection of " Ancient Fragments."D 236 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. I.power. From Menes to the 18th, or at least tothe loth Dynasty, there is great obscurity ; andManette's work is unsatisfactory, both in the numberof monarchs who reigned and in the names ofthe Dynasties. Major FeUx conjectures, with greatprobability, that the loth and 17th Dynasties, accordingto our lists derived from the monuments,are the 12th, or the 12th and 13th of Manette. Thenames in the former are given, but those of the 13thare omitted. The 15th, which I suppose to havebut one king, will then be the 11th of Manette, inwhich too only one is introduced, and a Diospolitan,Ammenemes, a name not very unlike Menmoph ;though he states there were 15 others, whose namesare not mentioned. If so, the intermediate Dynastiesbetween the 13th and 18th have been interpolated,or were contemporary in Lower Egypt.In the Old Egyptian Chronicle, after the demigodsare enumerated 15 generations of the Cyniccycle, which occupied 443 years. Theyrs.16th Dynasty is of Tacitus, eight descents, during - 19017. Of Memphites, 11' in descent - - - - 10318. Of Memphites, 4< in descent - - --34819. Of Uiospolites, 5 in descent - - - 194<20. Of Diospolites, H in descent - - - - 22821. Of 'J unites, 6 in descent 12122. Of Tanites, 3 in descent - - - - 4823. Of Diosjwlites, 2 in descent - - - - 1924. Of Sa'itcs, 3 in descent 4425. Of l'ithioj)ians, 3 in descent - - . . 44,26. Of Memphites, 7 in descent - --17727. Of Persians, 5 in descent - - - 12428. - -29. Of Tanites, in descent - - - 3930. A Tanite, 1 in descent - - - - - 18Total, 30 Dynasties and 36,52.5 years, including 3984 ofthe reigns of ('ronus and the other 12 Deities.CHAP. I. TIIEBAN KINGS. 37The Kings of Thebes, according to Eratosthenes, are —1. Menes the Theban, which is by interpretation Dignus :he reigned - - - - 622. Athothes, the son of Menes, by interpretation Heroines- - - - - - 593. Athothes 11. - - - - - 324. Diaries, the son of Athothes, signifying Philetaerus - 195. Paphos (or Memphis), the son of Athothes, calledHeraclitus - - - - 186. Toegar-amachus Momchiri the Memphite, called a manredundant in his members (or Yoigaramos) - - 797. Stoechus his son, who is Ares the Senseless - - 68. Gosormies, called Etesipantos - - - 309. Mares his son, signifying Herodotus - - - 261 0. Anoyphis, which is " a common son " - - 201 1. Sirius, or " the Son of the Cheek," or " Ascanius "' - 1812. Chnubus Eurus, which is Phrases the son of Phrases 221.3. Rauosis, which is Arbitrator - - - 13J'l'. Biyris - - - - - - 10These three are probablythe Suphis I. and II. andMencheres of Manette ;the Cheops, Cephrenes,and Myeerinus of Herodotus.15. Saophis " Coasts," or accordingto some "Chrematastes."16. Saophis the 2d.17. Moscheres or " Herodotus''18. Musters - - - - - - 3319. Primus (Panes or Pains) Archons - - 3520. Apappus or " Maximus " (^a<pu(p "the giant), onehour less than - - - - - 1 0021.- Achescus Ocaras (Exeo-ko^ o v.afa.q) - - - 122. Nitocris or " Athena Nicephora " (Minerva Victrix,or potent ?), instead of her husband - - 623. Myrtles " Ammonodotus " ( Amuntaeus ? more probably)- - - - - - 2224. Thyosimares (Ouosimares) " the robust," who iscalled "the Sun" - - - .1225. Thrills (Thrills or Sethinilus), which signifies theaugmented of his country's strength - - 826. Semphucrates, which is Hercules Hippocrates - 1827. Luther Taurus (Chusthertaurus) the tyrant - 728. Meures Phosphorus (Meres philosophies ; more probablyMares or Maires), " the beloved of the Sun " 1229. Chomaephtha (Kahi-mai-phthah, or Tho-mai-phthah),Cosmos Phil-hephaestus " - - - 1 130. Soecuniosochus (Sykunius ochy-tyrannus, Scunios-ochus, or Annius ochy-tyrannus) the tyrant - 6031. Pente-athyres - - - - - 16D 33S THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAT. I,yrs.32. Sameness II. - - - - 2333. Sistosichermes, " Hercules the Strong " - - 5534. Maris (or Mares) - - - - 4335. Siphon (probably Se-phthas), " Hermes the son of Vulcan"-.- - - . . 536. - 1437. Perron or Nisus ((piapo, " the river ") - - - 538. Amuthantseus - - - - - 630)1 the Origin of the Shepherds or Pastor Kings.From the preceding extracts of Manette, as fromother passages in his work, it appears reasonable toconclude that Egypt was at one time invaded andoccupied by a powerful Asiatic people, who heldthe country in subjection ; and viceroys being appointedto govern it, these obtained the title ofPastor or Shepherd Kings. I have already shownthere is authority for believing this event to havetaken place in the early periods of Egyptian history,previous to the era of Osirtasen the First ;and the monuments satisfactorily prove that in thereiern of this monarch and of his second successorthe Egyptians had already extended their conquestsover some of the tribes of Asia, and wereconsequently free from any enemies within theirown valley. And this war was not only carried onwithout much interruption to the age of Ilemesesthe Third, but was afterwards continued at a laterperiod until the reign of Ncco. If wc inquirewhat nation lull sufficient power to obtain possessionof l'^gyi)t at so remote an era, history furnishesus with no authority for supposing any otherthan Assyria to have been capable of making soCHAP. I.SHEPHERD KINGS.difficult a conquest : and the Assyrians underSemiramis are even believed by some to have extendedtheir arms into that country. But theweakness of the successors of Ninyas preventedtheir keeping possession of a territory daily increasingin power : and the Egyptians were enabledto throw off the yoke, to extend in turn their conquestsinto the heart of Asia, and to obtain possessionof the provinces lying between Egypt andthe Euphrates, which had been previously annexedto the Assyrian empire, thus gratifying the ambitionnatural to a rising state, and retaliating theaffront offered by the invader. Their first attemptswere upon the neighbouring districts of Syria, andfinding their efforts attended with success, theyproceeded onward to the N. and E. till they hadnot only deprived the enemy of his conquests, butcarried the war into Assyria itself; and they continuedto enjoy the fruits of these victories untilthe arms of Babylon once more wrested the wholeof the vanquished territory from the decliningpower of Egypt, at the close of the reign of Neco.No. 2.Shooting at h TargetD 4THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. II.A'iCNETrE B.Cattle during the Inundation in the Delta.CHAP. II.History of Egypt.In the previous chapter, I have shown the difficultyof elucidating the early period of Egyptianhistory, owing to the want of monumental recordsand the deficiency of authentic historical information: a slight difference of opinion may alsoexist respecting the age of Osirtasen I., and eventhat of the glorious princes of the 18th Dynasty :it will, however, be proper to accompany my historicalnotice with a chronological table of kings,and the inquiring reader will not consider it uninterestingto compare the succession of thosewhose names occur on the monuments with theaccounts of ancient authors. Many of the firstmonarchs are omitted, from the persuasion thatconjecture unsupported by positive authority isunnecessary and presumptuous, and I am lessanxious to introduce them into the followingseries, as the lists of Manette and I^'atostlicneshave been already given.CHAP. II.CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE.Supposed Succession of Egyptian Kings.Name fromancient Authors.Name from theMonuments.AscendedtheThrone.1*^ Dynasty, of Tliehan.Menes.Mines of JosephusMenai.f First King of Egypt. cording to Josephus, Meines lived upwards of 1 ."^OOJ years before Solomon,(who was born in 1032,and ascended the thronein 1015,) and foundedMemphis. Antiq.viii.c.6.B. c.2320*Id to the 1 5th \ Dynasty, of Memphites ?Athothis, his sonHis successors uncertain.Sophist, or SaophisBuilds the palace at Memphis|, and transfers thecourt to it. This 2d Dynastywas perhaps in consequencecalled Memphite.Foundation of the kingdomof Assyria by Nimrod,2204, Eratosthenes gives569 years for the 1 9 kingswho preceded Apappus.r Foundation of the kingdomo Sicyon,2089. Hebuilt the great pyramid.These three kings shouldbe the Cheops, Cephren[his brother), and Myce-rings of Herodotus,whom he has strangelymisplaced, making themposterior to Sesostris, andMceris. Diodorus callsCheops Chemniis, orChamber.I extend the date of his ascending the throne from 2201 of myformer table to 2320, on the authority of Josephus.f The number of Manette's Dynasties from Athothis to Menmophis probably too great.X Manette, according to Africanus. Menes is said to have reigned60 years, ^lian, on the authority of Apion, mentions CEnis, a son ofMenes, as having been king of Egypt. Nat. Hist. lib. ii. 40.§ The name of this Pharaoh was probably Shofo, or Khof, the sk andkh being frequently used indifferently in Egyptian names. They areeasily converted into Suphis or Cheops by adding the Greek termination *THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. II.Name fromancient Authors.Name from theMonuments.Events.Ascendedthethrone.Supplies 2d, orel f" aSen Saophis, Ii. e. Saophis's (brother - JMoscheris, or "|IMeiicheris -jMusters?Primus Ar-"|chances? -JApappus, or T^Aphoph -JAchescus Ocaras?NitocrisMortals ?Thyosimares ?Thinilliis ?Semphucrates - \ Q15th Dynasty, of(Uncertain-IMenmoph*bD „ CO — ' o,'*^ !S -5tn ii ort o >ii ^ oC3 >•tf J"Era of the Chinese emperorYao, 2057.Built the second pyramid.Built the third pyramid.Abraham visits Egypt, 1920.{Aqueen,calledNicaule byJosephus. Antiq. viii. 6.r Kingdom of Argos founded, 1856.Deluge of Ogyges in Attica.Diospolite King ?-U(Uncertain.)Misartcscn j-I6th Dynasty, of Tanites ?Vide the list ofkingsinPlatel.of my Egyptand Thebes.Osirtasen I.Amun-iii-gori ?I.Amun-in-gori ?II.Arrival of Joseph, 1 706"I.(Uncertain. I)th Dynasty, of Mcmphites fOsirtasen II.N()fri-Ftep,or 1Osirtasen 1 1 1. JAmun-m- 1pori? III. j(Name un jknown) jJoseph died 1635B. c.In the list of the ancestors of Itcmcscs IT. at the Memnoniiim, nokin' intervenes between Menes and the IHth Dynasty Int Mcnniopli,which 1 suppose to i)e in consequence of his having been the onlyTheban monarch iteforc (he time of Ainsi vide' infra, note onAniosis).f The error in this name arose from the <,i leaving born mistaken for ),.X Viilr .yiiprn, p. 10.CHAP. II. REIGN OF OSIRTASEN I. 43The accession of the first Osirtasen I conceiveto date about the year I74O b. c, and the length ofhis reign must have exceeded 43 years. If thename of this monarch was not ennobled by militaryexploits equal to those of the Remeses, theencouragement given to the arts of peace, andthe flourishing state of Egypt during his rule,evince his wisdom ; and his pacific character satisfactorilyaccords with that of the Pharaoh * who sogenerously rewarded the talents and fidelity of aHebrew stranger.Some insight into Egyptian customs during hisreign is derived from the story of Joseph, withwhom I suppose him to have been coeval ; and theobjects taken thither by the Ishmaelites, consistingin spices, balm, and myrrh, which were intendedfor the purposes of luxury as well as of religion ;the subsequent mention of the officers of Pharaoh'shousehold ; the state allowed to Joseph t ; theportion of lands allotted to the priesthood, andother similar institutions and customs — tend toshow the advanced state of society at this earlyepoch.I have frequently lead occasion to notice the true reading and purportof this name : I shall, therefore, only observe, that it is written inHebrew Phrah, n3?"iD, and is taken from the Egyptian word Pire orPure (pronounced Para), signifying the sun, and represented in hieroglyphicsby the hawk and globe, or sun, over the royal banners. Itwas through the well-known system of analogies that the king obtainedthis title, being the chief of earthly as the sun was of heavenly bodies.But the word is not derived from or related to our, "king," asJoseph us supposes ( Antiq. viii. c. 6.). Phouro is like Pharaoh ; but thename is Phrah in Hebrew, and Pharaoh is an unwarranted corruption.Vide my Egypt and Thebes, p. 5. note.f Gen. xli. 42, 43.44 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. 11.From the sculptures of Beni Hassan *, we learnthat the Egyptians were acquainted with the manufactureof linen, glass, cabinet work, gold ornaments,and numerous objects indicative of art andrefinement ; and various gymnastic exercises, thegames of draughts t, ball, mora and other well-knownmodern amusements, were common at thesame period.bedGames of Draughts and Mora. Beni Hassan.The style of architecture was grand and chaste,and the fluted columns of Beni Hassan are of acharacter calling to mind the purity of the Doric,which indeed seems to have derived its origin fromEgypt.It was during the reign of Osirtasen that the templeof Heliopolis was either founded or receivedadditions, and one of the obelisks bearing his nameattests the skill to which they had attained in the(lifTicultart of sculpturing granite. Another of thesame materials indicates the existence of a temj)lcerected or embellished by this monarch in the• Grottoes on the chit hank o(" the Nile, nor the Spcos Artciiiidos.f 'J'licrc arc otlicr instances of tins f;anu' ; one of the; time of J{c-moses III., where the king liiniself is |)la3'in>j;; the other of Psania-ticus II.; both at Thebes.CHAP. II. EARLY WARS, 45province of Crocodilopolis, afterwards known bythe names of Arsinoi'te nome and el Fyoom ; andthe remains of a colonnade in the great temple ofKarnak prove, as well as the title " lord of theupper and lower country," accompanying his name,that he was sole monarch of the Thebaid and LowerEgypt.Of the Pharaohs in the two last Dynasties,Amun-m-gori II, and Osirtasen II. were the mostremarkable after Osirtasen I. Independent of theencouragement given by them to the agriculturalinterests of the country, they consulted the welfareof those who were employed in the inhospitabledesert ; and the erection of a temple, and a stationto command the wells and to serve for their abodein the Wadeee Jasoos *, proved that they weremindful of their spiritual as well as temporal protection.The breccia quarries of the Kossayrroad were already opened, and probably also theemerald mines of Gebel Sahara ; and the warswith the foreigners of Fount are recorded in atablet t at Wadeee Jasoos, bearing the date of the28th year of Amun-m-gori II. This last is a veryimportant fact, as it shows that the arms of Egyptalready extended into some of the very same countriesafterwards noticed among the conquests of thePharaohs, and satisfactorily establishes two facts —that the occupation of Egypt by the Shepherdscould not have happened during the 17th Dynasty,and that these prisoners are not the Jews.Or Gasoos : the g in Arabic being properly always soft. This isthe modem name of the valley.f It has now been brought to England by Mr. Burton-theANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. II.It is highly probable that the port of Philoctetes,or annum, on the Red Sea, was already founded,slice the station at Wadeee Jasoos appears to havebeen principally intended to protect the wells whichthen supplied, and still continue to supply, thatport* with water: and thus we have an additionalreason for concluding the commerce with Arabiato have commenced at a very early period ; andthat its gums and spices found a ready market inthe opulent Egypt, is sufficiently proved by theIshmaelites or Arabs of those days bringing themfor sale into the lower country.No monument now remains of Nofri-Ftept orOsirtasen III., though his name frequently occursin tablets sculptured on the rocks of Upper Egyptand Mount Sinai ; and we learn nothing of interestconcerning these monarchs, either from sacred orprofane records, till the accession of the 18th Dynasty.The modern town of Kossayr is a short distance to the south ofPhiloteras Parties, or old Kossayr, and consequently a little fartherfrom Wadeee Jasoos.■f- Vide my Egypt and Thebes, p. 500., note on Nofri-Ftep.An Atloiul.int holding the Cii.CHAP. II.THE 18th dynasty.Name fromancient Authors.Name from theMonuments.Events.AscendedtheThrone."Iste Dynasty of Theban or Diospolitan Kings.*Artois (Chebron)AnienophMesses, or Amenses, Iiis sisterMcphres, Memphis,or Mesphra-TuthmosesMisphra-Tummosisor TothmosisThummosis, orTothmosisAmenophisHorusAchenchres, (aqueen)RationisAchencheres,CheeredAchencheres,Acherres■ ( Chebron)AmesAmunoph I.1 Amende, hisJ sister ||y Thothmes I.ThothmesIIThothmes III.Amunoph II.Thothmes IV.}Maut-rh-Shoi(Regency) -Amunoph III.P" There arose a new (dynasty,or) king, who knewnot Joseph." Exod. i. 8.Moses born, 1571. Josephussays Pharaoh'sdaughters called Cecrops leads acolony from Sais§,andfounds the kingdom ofAthens, b. c. 1556.Included in the reign ofThothmes I.His 14th year found onthe monuments.The reign of Amun-neit-gore included in this.Exodus of the Israelites,1491, 430 years after thearrival of Abraham.Moses died 1451.f Included in the reign of\ her son, Amunoph III.the supposed Memnonof the vocal statue. Hisbrother "([ net admittedinto the list of kings.Amen-men. . .? -KRemesso,RemesesI.!B. {;.157.{• For a more detailed chronological table, vide my Egypt and Thebes,p. 310.t I have given my reasons for considering these two the same kingin my Hieroglyphical Extracts, pp. 10. 12.X Joseph. Antiq. ii. 9.§ Neath or Net, Minerva, was the deity of Sais, and her name seemsto have led to that of the Greek goddess, and of the new city. InEgyptian it was written from write to left, eHN, and the Greeks, byadding an A at either end, would make it A0HNA ; reading from left toright.II Vide my Materia Hieroglyphics, PI. I. of the Kings, Syncellusgives Menses.1 Amun-Toonh ? probably Danaus, who lived at this time, vide p. 58.THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. II.Name fromancient Authors.Name from theMonuments.Events.AscendedtheThrone.ArmaisRemeses MiamunAmenophisf Calculating 900years fromthe time of Herodotus,r^ ■ . T Moeris should have livedOsier 1. - < ^ . . • . t,, • •at this period. The similarityof Moeris (Mai-re)l^ and Armais is singular.r A^„^ ~,„; fThe supposed Sesostris ofI Amen-mai ^, „*^*^ , mu j . ^Remeses, Re '?^ ^'^:'^'- /^^ ^''^^ ^^mesesII.,ori '^'^ 44th and cid yearthe Great round onthemonuments.*- ■ l Manette allows him 66.f Pthahmen-l Thmeiof-[^ step ? his son - - -B. c.Amosis or Ames was the leader of the 18th Dynasty,and the period of his accession and thischange in the reigning family strongly confirm theopinion of his being the ** new king who knew notJoseph." And if we consider that he was from thedistant province of Thebes, it is reasonable toexpect that the Hebrews * would be strangers tohim, and that he was likely to look upon them withthe same distrust and contempt with which theEgyptians usually treated foreigners. They stigmatisedthem with the name of impure Gentiles ;and the ignoble occupation of shepherds was forthe Jews an additional cause of reproach. t Indeedit is possible that the Jews, who had comeinto Egypt on the occasion of a famine, findingJoseph was dciul, and all thisExod. i. G. lie had been deadOr the people of Joseph; fori)rctliren, and all that generation."about (JO years.-f- " Nations," an expression adopted i)y the Jews. The hieroglyphicalcharacter refers to a hilly country in contradistinction to the plainsof Egypt.t " livery she|)lier(l is an abomination unto the Egyptians."fleii. xlvi. :i\. — "Thy servants arc shepherds, loth we and also ourlathers." xlvii. -3.CHAP. II. THE JEWISH BONDAGE. 49the great superiority of the land of Egypt both forobtaining the necessaries of Hfe, and for feedingtheir flocks, may have asked and obtained a grantof land* from the Egyptian monarch, on conditionof certain services being performed by them andtheir descendants. As long as the MemphiteDynasty continued on the throne, this grant wasrespected, and the only service required of themwas that agreed upon in the original compact. Buton the accession of the Theban family the grantbeing rescinded, and the service still required,they were reduced to a state of bondage ; and asdespotism seldom respects the rights of those itinjures, additional labour was imposed upon thisunresisting people And Pharaoh's pretendedfear, lest in the event of war they might makecommon cause with the enemy, was a sufficientpretext with his own people for oppressing theJews, at the same time that it had the effect ofexciting their prejudices against them. Affectingtherefore some alarm at their numbers, he suggestedthat so numerous a body might avail themselves ofthe absence of the Egyptian troops, and endangerthe tranquillity and safety of the country t, andSome of them were tillers of land as well as shepherds; for besidestheir labour " in mortar and in brick," they were employed " inall manner of service in the field." (Exod. i. 14.) And in Deut. x. 1 1.we find this expression, " Egypt . . . where thou lowest thy seed, andwatered it."■f The Arabs, whenever they become settled in villages on the banksof the Nile, meet with much vexation from the Turkish authorities, andthe Turks are always anxious that they should fix themselves in villages,in order to get their within their power.J " Lest when there falleth out any war they join also unto ourenemies and fight against us, and ren get flick ons of the land.'^ Exod. i. 10.VOL, T. E50 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.that prudence dictated the necessity of obviatingthe possibility of such an occurrence. With thisview they where treated like the captives taken inwar, and were forced to undergo the gratuitouslabour of erecting public granaries and other buildingsfor the Egyptian monarch.* These wereprincipally constructed of crude brick, and thatsuch materials were commonly used in Egypt, wehave sufficient proof from the walls and otherbuildings of great size and solidity found in variousparts of the country, many of which are of a veryearly period : and the bricks themselves, both atThebes and in the vicinity of Memphis, frequentlybear the names of the monarchs who ruled Egyptduring and prior to the epoch to which I am nowalluding. The crude brick remains about Memphisare principally pyramids ; those at Thebes consist ofwalls enclosing sacred monuments and tombs, andsome are made with and others without straw.Many have chopped barley and wheat straw, othersbean halm and stubble; and in the tombs we findthe process of making them represented among thesculptures. But it is not to ])e supposed that anyof these bricks are the work of the Israelites, whowere never occupied at Thebes ; and though Josephusaffirms they were engaged in buildingpyramids, as well as in making canals and em-ticevidently did not fear their ol)t:vining possession of any part ofIsjrypt; l)iit of their eoiiiniittiiitf depredations, and then cKcapini^ out ofthe coMiitry.'' Tiny built "treasure cities, Pillion and Uaamscs." Exod. i. IJ.-j- Exod. V. 12, Sonic bricks were made "with stubble instead ofstraw."CHAP. ir. BIRTH OF MOSES. 51embankments, it is very improbable that the crudebrick pyramids of Memphis, or of the Arsinoitenome, were the work of the Hebrew captives.Towards the latter end of Amosis' reign happenedthe birth of Moses. His flight must havetaken place in the second year of Thothmes I., andhis return to Egypt after the death * of this andthe succeeding prince.Amosis, the leader of the 18th Dynasty of Dios-politics, appears to have derived his right to thethrone from his ancestor Menmoph, the last The-banprince who preceded him, and sole member ofthe 15th Dynasty, t Few monuments remain ofhis reign; but a tablet at the Trojan mountain t,behind el Maasara, shows that the stone of thosequarries was used by him for the erection of somebuilding at Memphis or in the vicinity. §Amosis was succeeded by Amunoph I., a princewhose name occurs in numerous parts of Thebes,and who seems to have been a great encouragerof the arts of peace. He married an EthiopianExod. iv. 19. " All the men are dead which sought thy life."f My conjecture seems strongly confirmed by the position of thenames in the chamber of Amosis' and Amunoph's family, where thename of Amosis follows that of Menmoph, as of the king from whomhe claimed his right to the throne, his Diospolite ancestor. Amunoph I.,the monarch in whose reign the sculptures were executed, occurs in theupper line as the then existing sovereign, but succeeding to the thronein uninterrupted order, therefore not deducing his claims from anydistant predecessor. Vide my Extracts, Plate V.:j: The Troici capitis Mons of Strabo and Ptolemy. It is about ninemiles to the south of Cairo. •§ Some may suppose it to have been for the pyramids, but his eradoes not agree with the time of their erection. It is, however, fromthese quarries that the stone used for the outer tier, or casing, was taken,which is alluded to by Strabo and other authors.E 252 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.princess, called Nofri-are, a name common to manyEgyptian queens.*Some buildings of the time of Thothmes I.t stillexist, but the second of that name has left little tomark the history of his reign. Between these twomonarchs appears to have intervened a queen,whom I have ventured to call Amun-neit-gori,and who has hitherto given rise to more doubtsand questions than any other sovereign of thisDynasty. But whether she was only regent duringthe minority of Thothmes II. and III., or succeededto the throne in right of Thothmes I., inwhose honour she erected several monuments, isstill uncertain, and some have doubted her beinga queen, t Her name has been generally erased,and those of the 2d and 3d Thothmes are placedover it ; but sufficient remains to prove that thesmall temple of Medecnet Haboo, the elegantedifice under the Qoorneh rocks, and the greatobelisks of Karnak, with many other handsomemonuments, were erected by her orders, and theattention paid to the military caste is testified bythe subjects of the scriptures. That the inventionof glass was known at this time, is satisfactorilyproved by the discovery of a large bead bearingI was led by the similarity of name into illic error of supposing' herthe daughter of Amosis. Materia Hieroglyphic, p. 78.f Tliotlimcs I., as I am assured by Lord I'nuiiioe, penetrated intoethiopia as far as the Isle of Argo, where iii' kit an inscription. The'^d Thothmes' name is found at Napata (Herkel), and the .'kl probablywent still iiirtiiei' south. Did they |)o^sl•ss this country by rightof the marriage of Anuuioph I. with an Ethiopian princess's';{; The constant use oi the female sij;n, and the title Hau^htei' of" theSun, seem to require it to be so, notwithstanding the dress, whichis that of a kin;. I'idc my Ejrypt and Thebes, p. f>2.CHAP. II. EARLY INVENTIONS. 53the name of this queen ; and I shall have occasionto show that we have evidence of the use of it inthe early time of the first Osirtasen. The modeof irrigation was by the shadows, or pole and bucketof the present day; and it is remarkable that themodern Egyptians have a tradition that it was derivedfrom their Pharaonic* predecessors. Themanufacture of linen cloth, the arch, and othernotable inventions are also represented in thesculptures of the same reign ; but as I shall noticethem in their proper place, it is unnecessary heretoenter into any detail concerning those interestingsubjects.The reign of Thothmes III. is one of the mostremarkable that occurs in the history of Egypt.He was a prince who aspired to the merit of benefitinghis country by an unbounded encouragementof the arts of peace and war. But whether hismilitary expeditions were conducted by himself inperson, or whether he confided the management ofthe war to expert generals, we have ample testimonyof the extent of his power by the tributeslaid at his feet by " the chiefs of foreign countries,"who present him with the riches of" Fount,"of " Kufa," of *' Rot-h-no, and of " the southerndistricts of western Ethiopia." tEbn Pharaoh, " son of a Pharaoh," is, however, a great term ofreproach with the modern Egyptians, and almost equivalent to " sonof a Frank." But the climax is " a Jew's dog."-|- From the monuments of Thebes; where deputies from thosenations bear the tribute to the monarch seated on his throne. Kufaand Rot-h-no are two northern people, of which the latter is the moredistant from Egypt. They were long at war with the Egyptians,54 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.It was in the 4th year * of his reign that I supposethe exodus of the Israelites to have takenplace, and the wars he undertook and the monumentshe erected must date subsequently to thatevent. Indeed there is no authority in the writingsof Moses for supposing that Pharaoh was drownedin the Red Seat; and from our finding that whereeverany fact is mentioned in the Bible history wedo not discover any thing on the monuments whichtends to contradict it, we may conclude that thesetwo authorities will not here be at variance witheach other. And in order to show that in thisinstance the same agreement exists between them,and to prevent a vulgar error, perpetuated byconstant repetition t, from being brought forwardto impugn the accuracy of the Jewish historian,it is a pleasing duty to examine the account givenin the book of Exodus. According to it, Pharaohled his army in pursuit of the fugitives, and overtookthe Israelites *' encamping by the sea, besidePi-Hahiroth, before Baal-zephon."§ The Israeliteshaving entered the channel of the sea, the army ofPharaoh, *' his chariots and horsemen 1|," pursuedthem, and all those who went in after them wereoverwhelmed by the returning waters. This, liow-Wc fiiul the (late of his 34tli year on the luoininu'iits.•f Vide my Materia Hieroglyphics, Keniarks, at the end of p. 4. TheArabs liavc a tradition that the exodny happened under Kini^ Anxious,a name very like vVmosis or Apotheosis (Ames or Thothnies), bothvvliirh have a similar import.1; Amon^^ many others are the two hnmps of a dromedary, and theinability of a crocodile to turn round (quickly, both in direct oppositionto truth.§ Exod. xiv. U. II Exod, xiv. 23.CHAP. II. THOTHMES III. AND THE EXODUS. 55ever, is confined to the ** chariots and the horsemenand all the host of Pharaoh, that came intothe sea after them * ," and neither here nor in theSong which Moses sang on the occasion of theirdeliverance, is any mention made of the king'sdeath t, an event of sufficient consequence at leastto have been noticed and one which would nothave been omitted. The authority of a Psalm canscarcely be opposed to that of Moses, even werethe death of Pharaoh positively asserted, but thiscannot even be argued from the expression, he*' overthrew Pharaoh and his host in the RedSeat," since the death of a monarch is not the necessaryconsequence of his defeat and overthrow.The departure of the Israelites enabled Thothmesto continue the war with the northern nations beforementioned with greater security and success,and it is not impossible that its less urgent prosecutionafter the time of Amun-m-gori II. wasowing partly to the sojourn of the Jews in Egypt. §At all events, we find evidence of its having beencarried on by this monarch with more than usualvigour ; and in consequence of the encouragementExod. xiv. 28,•j- Exod. XV. i. " Pharaoh's chariots and his host hath he cast intothe sea : his chosen captains also are drowned in the Red SeatPsahn xxxvi. 15.§ The failure of historical monuments of this period prevents ourdeciding the question. I had formerly supposed the Jews and Pastorsthe same people (Materia Hieroglyphic, p. Si), and that the expulsionof the latter happened under Thothmes III. This last must haveoccurred long before, and I believe the two events and the two peopleto have been confounded by historians, or by the copyists of Manette.The captives represented in the tombs of Thebes are not Jews, as Ihave observed in my Egypt and Thebes, but rather of those nationsbordering on Assyria. Vide also supra, pp. 21. and 38.E 456 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.given to the arts of peace, the records of his successes,sculptured on the monuments he erected,have been preserved to the present day. Hefounded numerous buildings in Upper and LowerEgypt, and in those parts of Ethiopia into which hisarms had penetrated ; he made extensive additionsto the temples of Thebes •, and Coptos, Memphis,Heliopolis, and other cities in different parts ofthe country, benefited by his zeal for architecturalimprovements. In many of the monuments * hefounded, the style is pure and elegant ; but in thereversed capitals and cornices of a columnar hallbehind the granite sanctuary at Karnak, he hasevinced a love of change consistent neither withelegance or utility, leaving a lasting memorial ofhis caprice, the more remarkable as he has elsewheregiven proofs of superior taste.After a reign of about thirty-nine years he wassucceeded t by his son Amunoph II., who besidessome additions to the great pile of Karnak,founded the small temple of Amanda in Nubia,which was completed by his son and successorThothmes IV. The great sphinx at the pyramidsalso bears the sculptures of the son of Amunoph ;but whether it was commenced by him or by theSeveral obelisks were cut by this order, as the two now at Alexandria,others at Rome, and one at (constantinople. More scarabaeusand hall objects liavu l)i'C'n frond l)tarinLj the name of this king, thanof any one who reigned before or after him, not excepting Remeses theGreat.+ According to Eratosthenes. Vide note*, p. !}l.1 The return of the Shepherds or Pastors (luring this reign, mentioned1)V Sancho, is very doubt lill. They are out of place here, and weknow that the Jews did not revisit ligyi)t.CHAP. II. AMUN-TOONH SUPPOSED Canals. 573d Thothmes, is a question which it would becurious to ascertain. At all events, the similarityof the names may have given rise to the error ofPliny, who considers it the sepulchre of Amass.Amunoph III. and his elder brother Amun-Tooth succeeded to the throne on the death of the4th Thothmes ; but as they were both young, theoffice of regent and tutor during their minoritywas confided to their mother, the queen Mat-nishow. She is perhaps the Achencheres or Acherresof Manette, who according to this list is introducedas a reigning queen. They appear to have ruledwith equal authority and in perfect harmony, tillsome event caused the secession of Amun-Toonh,who left to Amunoph the undivided possession ofthe throne, and retired from Egypt. And soanxious was the younger brother to obliterate everyrecollection of his having ruled conjointly with him,that he not only prevented the mention of his namein the lists of kings, but caused it to be erased fromall the monuments of Upper and Lower Egypt.That Amunoph III. was the younger brother, Iam inclined to believe, from the circumstance ofhis prenomen being alone admitted on the buildingserected during their combined reign, while both theprenomen and nomen of Amun-Toonh are alwaysintroduced. The departure of the elder brotherwas the signal for changing all the second phenomenaof Amunoph into a phonetic nomen, as maybeobserved on every monument sculptured duringthe early part of his reign, some of which are in theBritish Museum and other European collections.58 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.The reason of his secession it is now difficult todetermine ; however, the similarity of his namewith that of Danaus, and the time at which helived, are strong arguments in favour of his havingbeen the colonised of Argos * : and the followingis another remarkable coincidence. Amunoph hadbeen already engaged in several military expeditions,and the expulsion of Danaus is also reportedto have happened after the return of his brotherfrom war ; nor is it improbable that the influenceacquired by a warlike prince over the army duringthese campaigns should suggest to an ambitiousmind the facility as well as the desire of obtainingsole possession of the throne, and lead to the expulsionof his colleague ; and the only point of disagreementis the name of Danaus's brother, whichis not stated to have resembled Amunoph.During the early part of their reign, stations onthe road to the emerald mines were either builtor repaired ; and the care bestowed on their constructionis proved by our finding hewn stonescarved with hieroglyphics, and the name of Amun-Tooth, within their precincts.The palace-temple of Luqsor and that behindDanaus left Egypt and founded Argos, of which lie became king,and died ii. c. 14-^5. I have noticed tills change of the prenoinen ofAnuuiopli more fully in a paper on Lord I'rndlioe'.s lions now at theBritish Museum, which bear a convincing proof of what I lure advance.I'iilr also my Materia llierog. p. H7, HH. some say Inches orI'horoneus led the colony from Egypt to Argos, and it is remarkablethat in one of these names wi; trace the word vidi, which forms part ofthat of Annnioph's brother, and in the other that of Pharaoh. Theseaccounts make Danaus one of the successors to the throne of Argosby right of lo.CHAP. II. USE OF IRON. 59the vocal statue * were also founded by them atThebes, and the sculptures in a side chamber ofthe former seem to refer to the birth and earlyeducation of the young princes. Many otherbuildings were erected in different parts of thecountry! during this reign ; extensive additionswere made to the temple of Karnak, and the nameand monuments of Amunoph III. are found inEthiopia, and even at the distant city of NapatatThe conquests of the Egyptians in Ethiopia andAsia were also continued by this monarch, andsome of the enemies § with whom they foughtunder Thothmes III. again appear in the sculpturesof Amunoph.It was about the same period, b. c. 1406, thatsome suppose the use of iron || to have been first discoveredin Greece ; but whether it was alreadyknown in Egypt or no, is a question hitherto im-answered.We are surprised at the execution ofThe vocal statue of the supposed Memnon is of Amunoph III. 1have already noticed this error in my Egypt and Thebes, p. 33. ; Extracts,p. II.; and Materia Hero. p. 88. With the Romans everythingcurious or striking in Egypt was given to Memnon, as with theArabs every large grotto is the stable (stable of) Altar. English sailorsin like manner fix upon another remarkable person.■f- I do not here notice all the monuments erected by the Pharaohs.They will be found in the description of the different towns of ancientEgypt given in my Egypt and Thebes.J I suppose Gebel Berkel to mark the site of Napata. From thisplace were brought Lord Prudhoe's beautiful lions. They were sculpturedat the early part of his reign, and immediately before the secessionof his brother.§ Those of Pouont, who are among the number of northern nations.II Hesiod (in his Opera et Dies) makes the use of iron a much laterdiscover'. In Theseus' time, who ascended the throne of Athens in1235, iron is conjectured not to have been known, as he was foundburied with a brass sword and spear. Homer generally speaks of brassarms, though he mentions iron.60 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.hieroglyphics cut in hard granite and basalticstone, to the depth of two inches, and naturallyinquire what means were employed, what toolswere used ? If the art of tempering steel wasunknown to them, how much more must ourwonder increase ! and the difficulty of imaginingany mode of applying copper to this purpose addsto our perplexity.The era of Amunoph III. was noted for thegreat spirit and beauty of its sculptures, whichseem gradually to have improved from the reignof Osirtasen to that of Ilemeses the Great, thoughwithout any great change, the general characterbeing already established even at that early period,and only undergoing certain modifications of style.The features* of this monarch cannot flail to strikeevery one who examines the portraits of the Egyptiankings, having more in common with the negrothan those of any other Pharaoh ; but it is difficultto say whether it was accidental, or in consequenceof his mother having been of Ethiopian origin.It is singular that the sepulchres of the kingswho preceded him are not met with, and that he isthe first of the 18th Dynasty! whose tomb occursat Thebes. But it is not in the same valley asI was wrong in saying; in my Materia Ilicro;?. that " Egyptiansculpture (Docs not ofiur portraits." On a sul)sc(|ucnt visit to Tliciics,I took sonic pains to set this (|iuhtioa at rest, and Jive become convinced(as stated in my I\u:}pt and Thebes, p. 1 HI.) that the representationsof tile kings are intended as likenesses; and I am happy to havean opportunity of acknowledging the truth of M. ('hampollioii's observationand my own misconception on this point,-|- There is another toiiib in the same valley of an ancient king, whomay have preceded the iHtli Dynasty, as his name occurs on a blockused by Rameses II, in repairs of the temple of Kariiak.CHAP. ir. REVOLT OF THE SYRIANS, 61those of his successors ; and the next monarchwhose tomb has been discovered is Remeses I.,grandfather of the great conqueror of the samename. The tomb of Tail, the queen of Amunoph,is in company with many others in a valley behindthe temple of Medeenet Haboo at Thebes ; a circumstancewhich proves that they were not generallyburied in the same sepulchres with the kings,though some exceptions may occasionally have beenmade.*His successor has recorded his lineal descentfrom the 3d Thothmes on a block of stone usedin the wall of a temple at Thebes in the t followingmanner, — " the father of his father's father, Thoth-mesIII. ; " but the monuments of his reign are fewand inconsiderable, consisting chiefly of additionsto the previously existing buildings.Remeses I. has left little to elucidate the historyof the era in which he lived, nor does he appearto have been conspicuous for any successes abroad,or the encouragement of the arts at home. It isprobable that both he and his predecessor werepacific monarchs, and to this neglect of their foreignconquests we may ascribe the rebellion ofthe neighbouring provinces of Syria, which Osireiwas called upon to quell in person on his accessionto the throne. That the revolt of those countriesis alluded to in the sculptures of Osirei I feelpersuaded, from his being the only king who isAs in the tomb No, 10. of Biban-el-Mol6ok at Thebes, andperhaps in No. 14,f hdc Materia Ilierog. PI. I. name e. d.62 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.represented attacking any country in the immediatevicinity of Egypt, and from the remarkable factthat some of the people through whose territory hepasses are on friendly terms, and come forward topay the stipulated tribute*, or to bring presents tothe monarch. And the names of Cannot and Lebanon,added to the circumstance of its being atthe commencement § of his reign, tend strongly toconfirm this opinion.Osirei was the son and successor of Remeses I.,and father of the second of that name. He extendedhis conquests to a considerable distance inthe *' north and south countries ; " but the destructionof the upper part of the walls of Karnak hasunfortunately deprived us of great part of theinteresting historical bas reliefs which describethem. Among the people against whom thewar was principally directed, we distinguish thellot-fi-no, who from their colour and dress, asThe tributes levied on the countries conquered by the Egyptians,.arc not only mentioned in the sculptures of Thebes, but also i)y Tacitus: " Lcgebantur inflict gentiles tribute baud inns inagnifica quantnunc vi Parthorum, aut potentia Ionian jubentur." An. ii. GO.•j- The Pharaoh, whose daughter Solomon married, destroyed " the(Canaanites that dwelt in (iezer, and burnt it with fire ;" probably for thesame reason — neglect in paying the tribute they owed — which broughtthe vengeance of Osirei upon them on this occasion. 1 Kings, ix. IG.J The common custom of substituting m for l> in (coptic, and the representationof a mountainous and woody country in which trio chariotscould not ]pass, convince me of this being intended for Mount Lc'bauon.In tile compartnicut inunechately billow it is the " land of Canada."Vide Egypt and 'l'h(,l)es, p. !!»(). 1!)2. The modern (greeks write vis) forh, as Phamprika, tor I''al)rica, and the sound of ?» may be detected whena person having an itii|)ediment in his speech attempts to pronounce aword commencing with />. Another remarkable instance of the use ofm for h is met with in the name of Ninu'od, which is written Nebrod inthe list of (liialdec kings. Vide Lorry's Ancient Fragments, p. ()7.§ In his first year, according to the hieroglyphics.CHAP. II. MARCH OF OSIREI. 63well as the productions of their country, appearto have lived in a colder climate than Egypt, whichproduced elephants and bears.* The march of themonarch is described with great spirit on the wallsof Karnak, Leaving Egypt with a considerableforce, he advanced into the heart of the enemy'scountry ; attacked and routed them in the field ;and following up his successes, he laid siege totheir fortified cities, and obliged them to surrenderat discretion. And in order to indicate the personalcourage of the hero, he is represented alightingfrom his car, and, having laid aside his bow, engaging;hand to hand with the hostile chiefs. Having;established his dominion in the conquered countrieshe returned to Egypt, and dedicated the richbooty and numerous captives he had made to thedeity of Thebes.The subsequent part of his reign was employedin erecting the monuments which still serve tocommemorate his victories, and the glory he acquired; and the splendour of Egypt at this periodis sufficiently demonstrated by the magnificenceand grandiose scale of the buildings, and by thesculptures that adorn his splendid tomb, tOsirei was succeeded by his son, Remeses theGreat t, who bore the name of Amun-mai-Reme-From a tomb at Thebes. Vide Egypt and Thebes, p. 153.-f- Discovered and opened by Belong at Thebes,j M. Champollion and Sig. Rosellini are of opinion that there intervenedanother king between this and Osirei, to whom they give thename of Remeses II. Lord Prndhoe, Major Felix, and myself thinkthem to have been one and the same monarch, and that the variation inthe mode of writing the name was owing to his having altered it sometimeafter he ascended the throne. If they were two kings, they nesthave been brothers, and both sons of Osier, and the reign of the first64t THE ANCIENT EGYrTIANS. CHAP. rises,or Remeses-mi-amun*, and was reputed to bethefamous Sesostris of antiquity. The origin ofthe confusion regarding Sesostris may perhaps beexplained. He is mentioned by Manette in the12th Dynasty, and Herodotus learned that hepreceded the builders of the pyramids : I thereforesuppose that Sesostris was an ancient kingfamed for his exploits, and the hero of earlyEgyptian history ; but that after Remeses hadsurpassed them, and become the favourite of hiscountry, the renown and name of the formermonarch were transferred to the more conspicuoushero of a later age ; and it is remarkable that whenGermanicus went to Egypt, the Thebans did notmention Sesostris, but Raises, as the king whohad performed the glorious actions ascribed inolden times to their great conqueror. Nothing,however, can justify the supposition that Sesostris,or, as Diodorus calls him, Sesoosis, is the Shishakof Scripture.The reign of Remeses was conspicuous as theAugustine era of Egypt, when the arts attained adegree of perfection which no after age succeededin imitating t, and the arms of Egy})t were only I)e of very short duration. It is to be hoped that time analfuture discoveries will settle the (jtiestion.I have noticed the sviioiiyiiioiis use of tiicsc titles, Ainiiii-mai andMai-anmii (.Mi-ainmi), in the names oi' Remeses III. and others, whenwritten horizontally and vertically.t The head now in the British Mnseuin, and erroneously called ofthe Yonnj; Memoir, is of Keineses II. We smile at the name youngappUcd to a state Itecanse it was smaller than a colossians in the sametemple; a distinction formerly adopted at the Louise, where n statewas called /<■ Jcinic Apollon, Iwiaiisc it had not i/i/ matt. lined the size ofth Belvedere.CHAP. II. MARCH THROUGH SYRIA. 65tended by this prince considerably farther intothe heart of Asia than during the most successfulinvasions of his predecessors. He had no soonerascended the throne than he zealously devotedhimself to military affairs ; and we find that in hisfourth year he had already waged a successful waragainst several distant nations. * His march layalong the coast of Palestine, and the record of thatevent is still preserved on the rocks of the Lacusnear Beiroot, where his name and figure presentthe singular circumstance of a Pharaonic monumentwithout the confines of Egypt. But thatthis nation extended its arms and dominion farbeyond the valley of the Nile, is abundantlyproved by the monuments and by Scripturehistory, and some of their northern possessionswere retained by the Egyptians until Nebuchadnezzarking of Babylon took from Pharaoh Neco allthat belonged to him, "from the Euphrates to theriver of Egypt." t From Syria their march probablyextended towards the N. E.; but I do notpretend to decide the exact nations they invaded,or the names of the people over whom the victoriesof the great Remeses are recorded on thewalls of the Memnonium.1: M. Champollion supsVide tiny Egypt and Thebes, p. 193.f 2 Kings, xxiv. 7. This river of Egypt is not the Nile, but the"rivulet" or "torrent of Egypt;" and is mentioned by Joshua (xv. 4.)as the boundary line, a little to the south of the modern Gaza (Ghuz-zeh). bn: (nail) is a rivulet, and not a river, as some have supposed,which is in] (fahr), as in Arabic. Much less is nail related to theNile. Neco also " went up to fight against Carchemish by Euphrates."2 Chron. xxxv. 20. For the first copy of the name of Remeses on theLacus we are indebted to Mr. Wyse. Strabo (lib. xvii.) says, *' Therule of the Egyptians extended into Scythia, Bactria, India, and whatis now called Ionia."if I use this name for the palace-temple of Remeses II., because it isbetter known than any other.VOL. I. F66 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.poses them the Scythianss, and perhaps the hieroglyphicsmay admit of such a reading ; but let itsuffice for the present that they were a northernnation, skilful in the art of war, and possessingstrong towns and a country traversed by a largeriver. Indeed, from their general appearance andthe mode of fortifying their towns, we may concludethem to have been far above the level of abarbarous state ; and the double fosses that surroundedtheir walls, the bridges* over them, andthe mode of drawing up their phalanxes of infantry,suggest a considerable advancement in civilisation,and the art of war. Their offensive and defensivearms, consisting of spears and swords, helmets,shields!, and coats of mail, were light and effective jand two-horsed chariots, containing each three men,formed a well constituted and powerful body oftroops. Some fought on horses, which they guidedby a bridle, without saddles t; but the far greaterpart in cars ; and these instances of the use of thehorse seem to be introduced to show a peculiarityof Asiatic people.I do not find the Egyptians thus represented ;and though it is probable they had cavalry as wellas chariots, mention being made of it in ancientauthors §, the custom of employing large bodies of♦ As they arc seen from ;il)ov(', it is not possible to ascertain howthey were constricted.f III form hearing; a slight resenil)lancc to the Tiiel)an Creek buckler.j The Niiiiiidiaii cavalry had neither.§ We read of the l'i;y|)tian horsenieii in Isaiah, xxxvi. 9., " put thytrust in l'".,i,'ypt for chariots and horsemen;" and in Miriam's Song,the horse and his rider." l-^xod. xv. 21. Shishak had with him 1;:^()0chariots and (i(),0()() iiorscnicn. 2 Chiron. xii. 3. Vide uiy Egypt andTliebcs, p. l!)}-. note.CHAP. n. THE TESTUDO AND LADDER. 6jhorsemen does not appear to have been so usualin Egypt as in some Eastern countries.*The Egyptian cars contained but two persons t,the warrior and his charioteer ; and to the greatnumber of their chariots, and their skill in archery,may be attributed the brilliant successes ofthis people in a long suite of wars waged againstpopulous nations : and it is remarkable that theirmode of drawing the bow was similar to that ofour ancestors, who, for the glorious victories theyobtained over armies far exceeding them in numericalforce, were principally indebted to theirdexterity in the use of this arm.Great light is thrown on the mode of warfare atthis early period, by the sculptures of the Mem-nondum,where a very satisfactory representation isintroduced of the scaling ladder and testudo; andit is highly probable that the Egyptians, accustomedas they were to subterraneous excavations,adopted the latter as coverts while mining thebesieged towns, as well as for facilitating the approachof their men. Indeed, since they are notformed of shields, but of a covering of frameworksupported by poles, and are unaccompanied, inthis instance, by the battering-ram, we may concludethat the men posted beneath them wereHomer's heroes are also mounted in cars. He mentions onecavalier (Iliad, vi. causing two horses. The Greeks did not employmuch cavalry till after the Persian war.-|- The Indian chariots, according to Megasthenes, contained each twopersons, besides the charioteer. Vide in/id, on the Castes, in chap. iii.J It was already in use 400 years before this period, in the reign ofOsirtasen I., as well as a sort of battering ram. The Aries, or Ram, issaid by Vitruvius to have been invented by the Carthaginianss at thesiege of Gades. lib. x. 19,F 268 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IT.SO employed, especially as they appear, in no ostensiblemanner, to be connected with the fight.* Insome instances, however, they served as a coverto those who directed the rams against the walls,and were then very similar in use and principle tothe testudo arietaria of the Romans.The wars and successes of the great Remeses areagain recorded on the walls of Karnak, and in thetemples of Nubia ; and the number of nations hesubdued, and the extent of his arms in the northand south, are the subjects of many historical pictures.The Egyptians had already formed allianceswith some of the nations they subdued, and theauxiliary troops enrolled in their army assisted inextending the conquests of the Pharaohs. Theirprincipal allies, at this period, were the Shairetana,a maritime people, and the same who afterwardscontinued to assist the Egyptians in the time ofRemeses III. Other alliances were also formedby the last-mentioned monarch, many distant tribeswere subdued by him, and the reigns of Osireiand the second and third Remeses appear to havebeen the most remarkable for the extent of foreignconquest.According to Herodotus, Sesostris t, whom I as-ticwooden horse is, perhaps, the first hint of a mine in ancienthistory. Remeses II. lived ahont \.W years before the taking of Troy,■f Their ram was a loiij; pike armed with a metal point, by which theyloosened the stones of the wail : the terra of the Romans, and theTfxnrai'ov of the (Greeks.J Sesostris, or Sesoosis, according; to Diodorns, during his father'sreif;n, had led an expedition into Arabia, as well as Libya; and we may,perhaps, trace some indication of this fact in the sculptures of Karnak,where the son of Osirei ri'tnrns from the war with his father. Diod. i. 53.Can Ses-Osirei, or Se-()sirei, the "son of Osirei," bear any relation tothe name of Sesostris ?CHAP. II. CANAL OF THE RED SEA. 69some to be the same as Remeses II., fitted outlong vessels * on the Red Sea, and was the firstwho went beyond the straits ito the IndianOcean. Diodorus says they amounted to no less anumber than 400, and the historian supposes himto have been the first monarch who built shipsof war ; though merchant vessels, as I have beforeobserved, were probably used by the Egyptians ata much earlier period. And we may reasonablyconclude the fleet to have been connected withthe Indian trade, as well as the canal he cut fromthe Nile to what is now called the Gulf of Soo6z.tThis canal commenced about twelve miles tothe N. E. of the modern town of Belfast, calledby the Romans Bubastis Agra, and after followinga direction nearly E. for about thirty-three miles,it turned to the S. S. E., and continued aboutsixty-three more in that line to the extremity of theArabian Gulf. Several monarchs are reputed tohave been the authors of this grand and usefulundertaking ; some writers attributing it to Sesos-tris, others to Neco, and its completion to Dariusand Ptolemy Philadelphus. Pliny, indeed, supposesit never to have been finished, and states,that after it had reached the bitter springs (lakes),the canal was abandoned from fear of the greaterheight of the Red Sea : but it is evident that itOr ships of war.f Strabo, Pliny, and Aristotle attribute its commencement toSesostris.J Strabo says " it began at the village of Phaccusa, which is near tothat of Philo." (lib. xvii.)§ Plin. vi. c. 29. s. 33., and Aristotle. Meteorol. lib. i. c. 1-t. Diodorussays that Darius was prevented from completing it, owing to the greaterheight of the Red Sea ; but that the 2d Ptolemy obviated this objectionby means of sluices, (i. 33.) Vide Egypt and Thebes, pp. 320, 321.F 370 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.was completed, and there is reason to believe evenas early as the reign of the second Remeses ; noris it improbable that the captives he had taken inwar assisted in the construction * of this noblework. But the vicinity of the sands, amidst whichit was excavated, necessarily prevented it fromremaining in a proper condition without constantattention ; and we can easily conceive that, in thetime of Neco and of the Polemics, it was foundnecessary to re-open it, before it could be againapplied to the use for which it was intended.!Herodotus sayst, it was commenced by Neco,who lived about the year 6 10 before our era;that it was four days' journey in length, andbroad enough to admit two triremes abreast ;and that it began a little above Bubastis, andentered the sea near the town of Patmos(Pa or Pi-Thorn); and since Diodorus says itsmouth was close to the port of Arsinoe ||, thislast may have succeeded to the old town mentionedby Herodotus. Some have reckoned itslength at upwards of 1000 stadia ; its breadth at100 cubits, or, according to Pliny ^, 100 feet, andits depth forty ; and he reckons thirty-seven Romanmiles from its western entrance to the bitterlakes. Six-score thousand Egyptians were said tohave perished in the undertaking * * : but this is veryHerodotus (ii. lOH.) says that Scsostris ciiiplovcd his prisoners tocut the canals of Efiy[)t.■f It is evident that it entered the sea very near the modern town ofSoonestIlerodot. ii. 158.§ Diod. i. ."i.'i.II Strabo calls it " Arsinoe, or, as some style it, Cleopatra." lib. xvii.if Plin. vi. s. 33. ** Diodor. hoc. cit.CHAP. II. Re-opening OF THE CANAL. Jiincredible ; nor can we even believe that the livesof the captives taken in war, who were probablyemployed in the more arduous parts of this as ofother similar works, were so inhumanly and unnecessarilythrown away. At the mouth of the canalwere sluices, by which it was opened or closed accordingto circumstances ; and thus, at one periodof the year, the admission of the sea water into thecanal was regulated, as the Nile water was prevented,during the inundation, from discharging itself toorapidly from the canal into the sea. Though filledwith sand, its direction is still easily traced, as wellfrom the appearance of its channel, as from themounds and vestiges of ancient towns upon itsbanks, in one of which I found a monument bearingthe sculptures and name of Remeses II. — the moresatisfactory, as being a strong proof of its having existedat least as early as the reign of that monarch.After the time of the Polemics and Caesar, itwas again neglected, and suffered to go to decay ;but on the revival of trade with India, this line ofcommunication from the Red Sea to the Nile wasonce more proposed, the canal was re-opened bythe Caliphs, and it continued to be used and kept inrepair till the commerce of Alexandria was ruinedby the discovery of the passage round the Cape.Herodotus also tells us that Sesostris was theonly king who ruled in Ethiopia*, but his assertionis contradicted by the monuments which stillexist there.The family of Remeses II., by his two wives,This may refer to the original Sesostris, above mentioned. Thereis, perhaps, some analogy between this name and that of Osii'tasen.F 472 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.was numerous, consisting of twenty-three sons andthree daughters, whose names* and figures are introducedin the Memnonium.The duties of children were always more severein the East than among any European people, andto the present day a son is not expected to sit inthe presence of his father without express permission.Those of the Egyptian princes wereequally austere. One of their offices was " fan-beareron the left of the king," and they werealso obliged to carry the monarch in his palanquinor chair of state. As wanderers, they attendedhim while seated on his throne, or in processionsto the temples ; and in this capacity they followedhis chariot on foot as he celebrated his triumphantreturn from battle Nor did they lay aside theirinsignia of office in time of war ; and sometimes inthe heat of battle, whether mounted in cars orengaged on foot, they carried them in their handor shuig behind them ; and, as a distinguishingmark of princely rank, they wore a badge dependingfrom the side of the head, perhaps intendedto cover and enclose the lock of hair, which, amongthe Egyptians, was the sign of extreme youth, andthe usual emblem, of the god Hippocrates.The reign of liemeses the Great was long andprosperous ; nor does the period of sixty-six yearsappear too much, wlicn we consider the extent ofhis conquests, and the many graiul monumentshe erected in every ]part of Egypt, after hisThe names of the daughters are omitted. The families in the Eastare fre<|iicntly mentioned by ancient authors as being very numerous.Artaxerxes had 1.53 children ; Rehoboam begat 28 sons and 60 daughters.f Vtdc Plate 1.CHAP. II. MONUMENTS OF Rameses II. 73victorious return. Indeed, the number I havestated is derived from the authority of Manette ;and in the monuments, we have already metwith the date of his cid year. The extensiveadditions to the great temples of Karnak andLuqsor, where two beautiful obelisks of red granite,bearing his name, proclaim the wonderfulskill of the Egyptians in sculpturing * those hardmaterials : the elegant palace-temple of theMemnonium, and many other edifices at Thebesand Abydus : the temples hewn in the hard grit-stonerock of Aboosimbel : those erected at Day,Sabooa, angers Hassan in Nubia: the obelisksat Tanis, and vestiges of ruins there and in otherparts of the Delta, — bear ample testimony to thelength of time required for their execution : andfrom these we may infer a proportionate numberfounded or enlarged by him at Memphis t, andother of the principal cities, whose sites are nowunknown or concealed by mounds.Besides his military exploits, another very remarkableevent is said t to have distinguished hisreign ; the partition of the lands among the peasants§, who were required to pay a fixed tax to thegovernment, according to the extent of the propertythey obtained. But that this division could havebeen the origin of land surveying, as Herodotus sup-manyof the hieroglyphics are two inches deep. One of theobelisks has been removed to Paris ; the other is said to be ceded tothe city of Marseilles.t At Memphis, a Colossus, and fragments of several statues, bearinghis name, are still met with.J Vide infra, chap. iv. under " Different Lawgivers."§ Herodot. ii. 109.74 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.poses, is contrary to probability, and the evidence ofthe Bible as well as of the sculptures, both whichsoothe rights and limits of landed property to havebeen long since well defined ; and the necessity ofascertaining the quantity of land irrigated by theNile, or changed by the effect of the inundation,must have led a people already highly civilised beforethe accession of this prince, to the practice ofgeometry at least some centuries previous to hisera. The Bible informs us, that a Pharaoh, thecontemporary of Joseph, bought all leland (exceptthat of the priests) from the Egyptian landholders :the partition of land, mentioned by the historian,could not therefore have been the first instance ofsuch a system in the country ; and he may eitherallude to a new regulation made subsequently tothe time of Joseph, or to the very change thattook place by his advice. In this case, the taximposed refers to the fifth part * annually paid tothe government by the Egyptian peasant, whichcontinued to be the law of the country long afterthe time of Joseph ; and hence some may derivean argument in favour of the idea before suggested,that the original Sesostris (so often confoundedwith Remeses II.) was Osirtasen I.t, thePharaoh in whose reign Joseph arrived in Egypt. §Gen. xlvii. 21.t (it'll, xlvii. 20., "a law over the land ol" I'^^'ypt nii/n this dajj, thatPliaraoh should have the/i/'/A part, cxcej)t the land of the priests, whichbecame not Pharaoh's."\ Osirtasen's living; posterior to the protection ol" the pyramids is anobjection.^ I nuit, however, confess, that herodotus's statement does notagree exactly with that mentioned in (genesis; the people then sellingtheir lands for corn, and afterwards farming it li'om the king.CHAP. II. END OF THE 18tH DYNASTY. 75His thirteenth son, Pthahmen, succeeded him ;and, from the kingly oval accompanying his nameat the Memnonium, it is highly probable that thefirst prenomen he took on ascending the thronewas afterwards changed to that by which he isknown in the lists of the Egyptian monarchs. Buthis reign was not marked by any military event ofconsequence, nor by any particular encouragementgiven to the arts of peace. He may be the II. of Diodorus, and the Heron of Herodotus,— a title mistaken by the latter historian forthe name of the monarch, and evidently corruptedfrom Para or Pharaoh. * Two obelisks are reportedt to have been erected by him, at Heliopolis,in honour of the sun ; but they no longerremain ; and though his name appears on some ofthe monuments of his father and of his predecessors,those founded by him were comparatively few, atleast in Upper Egypt ; and the additions he madeto those buildings are neither numerous nor remarkablefor their magnificence.In Pthahmen terminated the eighteenth dynasty,and a second family of Diospolitan orTenant monarchs succeeded to the dominion ofUpper and Lower Egypt, and reigned eighty-nineyears.The Arabs now call Phrah, or Pharaoh, Pharaoh.-f- Pliny calls him Nuncoreus, and says that he dedicated two obelisksto the sun on the recovery of his sight. Herodotus states the same ofHeron. Plin. xvi. 16. Herodot. ii. ill.J Sethos, or Pthah-men-Se-pthah, appears to have been an exception,and was, perhaps, a Memphite, or from Lower Egypt, as his name isomitted in the lists of Thebes and Abydus. It also seems to indicatea Memphite origin.THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. II.19th Dynasty, of 1 Memphite ? and 6 Diospolite Kings.Name fromancient Authors.Name from theMonuments.AscendedtheThrone.Sethos - -\Rameses -<Amenophthis- \Ramesses - <AmmenemesThuoris -Pthah-men-Se-pthahOsirei II., oxOsiri-men-pthahO.sirita? remember?Amen-maiRemeses III.Mi-amen orAmen-mai -Remeses IV.Remeses V.Remeses VI.'Was probably either aINIemphite, or succeededto the throne by right ofmarriage with the PrincessTaosiriB. c.>1269]-troy taken 1 184 (Arundel"marbles), and in the reignof a Remeses, accordingto PlinyThus far I have stated my own opinions respectingthe accordance of the monuments with someof the historical data furnished by Manette ; particularlyabout the period of his eighteenth dynasty.I have placed the arrival of Joseph in the reign ofOsirtasen I. ; the birth of Moses in that of Amosis,the leader of this Theban succession, whom Isuppose to be the " new king who knew notJoseph ; " and the Exodus of the Israelites in thatof the third Thothmes. I have assigned the dateof 13.5.5 for the accession of the great Remeses,and have had the satisfaction of finding the periodthus fixed for his reign fully accords with, andis confirmed by, the astronomical ceiling of theMemnonium. But as another opinion, whichascribes to these events a higher antiquity, mayCHAP. II. QUESTION RESPECTING THE EXODUS. 77also be maintained by many forcible arguments, andmy object is to examine the question impartially,and to be guided by what appears most probable, Igladly avail myself of this opportunity of introducingLord Prudhoe's view of the subject, whichhe has done me the favour to embody in the followingremarks: — "It is extremely difficult todetermine the date of the Exodus in Egyptian history,from the want of sufficient data in the Bible,and from the incorrectness of names given by ancienthistorians ; but the event is so important,that even an attempt to ascertain that date mustbe interesting.The first text bearing on the subject is *,Pharaoh spake unto Joseph, saying, Thy fatherand thy brethren are come unto thee, the land ofEgypt is before thee, in the best of the land makethy father and brethren to dwell : in the land ofGoshen let them dwell. — And Joseph t gave them apossession in the land of Egypt, in the best of theland, in the land of Rameses, as Pharaoh had commanded.*In this quotation it does not appear thatthe land was called Rameses when Pharaoh gave itto Jacob : his words are, give them the best of theland : the remainder of the text is in the form ofa narration by Moses. But the land was calledRameses when Moses wrote, and consequently itwas so called before the Exodus. It probablyreceived its name from one of the Pharaohs ; wemay therefore conclude the Exodus did not takeplace until after the reign of a Remeses ; andGen. xlvii. 5, 6. f Gen. xlvii. 11.78 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.the earliest king of that name* is distinguishedamong students in hieroglyphics by the title ofRemeses I.' Now there arose up a new king over Egypt,which knew not Joseph.' t This text would agreewith Remeses I., who appears to have been thefirst king of a new dynasty, and might well beignorant of the benefits conferred on Egypt byJoseph. ' Therefore t they did set over them(the children of Israel) taskmasters to afflict themwith their burdens, and they built for Pharaohtreasure-cities, Pithom and Raises. The last wasthe name of the Pharaoh ; and it is remarkable,that the prefix used to designate Remeses II. wascompounded of Pi * the,' and Time ' Justice.*And though the figure of the goddess Time isintroduced into the names of his father and of otherPharaohs, he is the first Remeses in whose prefixit occurs, and we may therefore conclude it wasfor this monarch that the Hebrews built the tread** Another instance of the name so used, is confirmedby the testimony of Strabo and Aristotle,who attribute the making of the Suez canal toSesostris ; and Herodotus says, that it entered thesea near the town of Patmos. Sesostris is now generallyconsidered to be Remeses II., and the circumstanceof this name being found on buildingsnear the canal, gives another Pithom built by thisPrivate iiidiviiliiiils l)orc the name long before : but it is uncertainwhether there was any oliver king Remeses.f Exod. i.8, I Exod. i. IJ.CHAP. II. EXPULSION OF THE JEWS. 79*' Lysimachus mentions, ' that in the reign ofBoccoris, king of Egypt, the Jewish people, beinginfected with leprosy, scurvy, and sundry otherdiseases, took shelter in the temples, where theybegged for food; and that in consequence of thevast number of persons who were seized withthe complaint, there became a scarcity in Egypt.Upon this, Boccoris sent persons to inquire of theoracle of Ammon, respecting the scarcity : andthe God directed him to cleanse the temples of allpolluted and impious men, and to cast them outinto the desert, when the land would recover itsfertility.' This the king did with much cruelty.*' If Boccoris could be a mistake for the Copticname OCIPI, with the article 11 prefixed, it wasOsiris, the father of Remeses II., who thus oppressedthem. Again, the son of Remeses II. wascalled Pthamenoph. Josephus states, that * theking Amenophis was desirous of beholding theGods, as Ores, one of his predecessors in the kingdom,had done. And having communicated hisdesire to the priest Amenophis, the son of Papis,the priest returned for answer, that it was in hispower to behold the Gods, if he would cleanse thewhole country of the lepers and other uncleanpersons who abounded in it ; upon which the kinggathered them together, and sent them to work inthe quarries.' Josephus relates, in continuation,that a revolt was the consequence of this measure :and after some delays and difficulties, king Amesmarched with 500,000 Egyptians againstthe enemy, defeated them, and pursued them to80 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. If.the bounds of Syria, having previously placed hisson Sethos under the care of a faithful adherent.*' It is probable, that by Amenophis, Josephusmeant Pthamenoph ; and this opinion is twiceconfirmed: 1. by his son Sethos, the Se-ptha ofthe hieroglyphics, which is the only instance of aking: so called in the known series of the Pharaohs; and, 2. when he describes Horus as one ofhis predecessors : for the grandfather of Thamessucceeded to Horus, who was the onlyEgyptian monarch who bore that name.If these corrections of names be permitted,six Pharaohs, who succeeded each other in regularsuccession, are mentioned, either as a direct or acollateral evidence of the Exodus having takenplace at this era : 1. Horus, one of the predecessorsof Amenophis : 2. Remeses I., the new king,who knew not Joseph : 3. Osiris I., or Boccoris,who oppressed the Jews : 4. Remeses II., whobuilt Pithom and Raises : 5. Pthamenoph, thePharaoh of the Exodus : 6. Sethos, his son, whowas placed with an attendant.** From the many complaints of oppression in theBible, it appears that the bondage was both severeand of some duration ; these two reigns may thereforenot be too long : but what, may be inquired,would be the effect in Egypt of an oppression ofso numerous a population, and of their subsequentExodus ? for even if the lumber of ' ()00,U00 men,besides children,' lead not been mentioned, it isevident, from the previous account of their increasednumerical force, that the Jews were a veryCHAP. 11. 19th dynasty. 81large body. 1. To oppress and keep them inbondage required a powerful monarch, and a warrior; and such were in an eminent degree Osiris I.and Remeses II. '2. The labours of so great apopulation could not fail to be distinguished ; andno Pharaohs have left finer buildings, nor in greaternumbers, than these two kings. 3. A successfulrevolt could only take place under a feeble monarch,and such was Pthamenoph : and the loss ofso great a population would inflict a blow on theprosperity of Egypt, and cause a lasting debility.Such was the state of Egypt after the reign of RemesesII., when a sudden decline of the arts andpower of the country ensued ; and if at the accessionof Remeses III. they for a time re-appeared,and in great splendour, yet with this monarch theglory of ancient Egypt departed for ever."From the preceding statement, it is evident thatLord Prudhoe places the Exodus in the reign ofPthahmen, (or, as he writes it, Pthamenoph,) thelast king of the 18th Dynasty ; and that consequentlythe dates of those monarchs are allthrown back about 200 years. The decision ofthis interesting question I leave to the learnedreader ; and shall feel great satisfaction, when thesubject becomes so well understood as to enable apositive opinion to be pronounced upon it. I nowreturn to the 19th Dynasty.Pthahmen Septa appears to have been theSethos * of Manette and other authors, and theSo often mistaken for Sesostris. This rests on the authority ofJosephus's version of Manette: " 2f0w)^ tov Va^satjijv oivofiafT^isyov."VOL. I. G82 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.second part of his phonetic nomen may have beenthe origin of the name it so much resembles. Hisright to the sceptre and admission into this dynastywere probably derived from his wife Taosiri,while his Mephitic origin excluded him fromthe privilege of being inserted in the list of Dissolutemonarchs, unless this was owing to his expulsionfrom the throne.* Nothing of note occurredduring his reign ; and whatever buildings he mayhave founded at Memphis, and in Lower Egypt,few bear even his name at Thebes, or in any othercity of the Upper provinces. Those of his two successorsare equally obscure in the history of theircountry, and little else remains of the monumentsthey erected except the avenue of Sphinxes, and thesmall chambers in the front area of Karnak, whichthe first of them added to that splendid edifice.But the name of the third Ilemeses is conspicuousin the annals of his country, as a conqueror, and asazealous encourager of the arts. The war of Asiahad been neglected subsequently to, and perhapsin consequence of, the decisive successes of Ile-mosesthe Great, and the usual tribute from theconquered provinces was deemed a sufficient acknowledgmentof their submission. But eithersome remissness in its ]payment, or his own ambition,stimulated the new king to a renewal ofhostilities, and great preparations were made atThebes and other parts of Kgyi)t for a formidableexj)C(lili()n. Large bochcs of chariots, and ofIt would iiccomit fur this name hciiij^ crnspd in the tonic No. Ik atThebes, which M. (Ihampoilion supposed to he an instance of a kingrefused the right of burial for his bad conduct t.CHAP. II. MILITARY COLONIES. 83archers, spearmen, and other corps of infantrywere collected *, and the usual route was taken tothe intended seat of war.During their previous invasions t, the Egyptianshad over-run several provinces t, in what I supposeto be the vicinity of the Caspian Sea; and in orderto secure their possessions, and the fidelity of thosewho had entered their service as allies, they tookthe precaution to leave military colonies in theplaces where their presence was most essential, orwhich proved most suitable to the purpose ; andproper officers were appointed to urge and accompany§ the annual tribute paid to the Egyptianking. We may hence account for the readinessshown by the allies to join the Pharaohs wheninvading the hostile countries; and they are representedin the historical bas reliefs united with theEgyptians in the field of battle.Some of the people attacked by the third Remesesare frequently alluded to on various monuments,as the enemies || of Egypt ; but othersappear to be situated farther in the interior, and toRepresented at Medeenet Haboo.-j- I was wrong in saying (in my Materia Hiorog. p. 91.), "it doesnot appear to have been the object of the Egyptians to make any permanentsettlements in these countries:" I since find reason to herthat opinion ; and feel persuaded that they not only left colonies, as atColchis (according to Herodotus), but enrolled the troops of the vanquishedpeople in their own disciplined legions, allowing them to retaintheir own arms and dress. Vide Diodorus's Account (lib. i. 28.) of theEgyptian Colonies.J Diodorus (i. 71.) says, "many nations were conquered by them."Vide also Tacit. Ann. ii. 60.§ According to the pictures in the tombs at Thebes.II Some of the allies at Medeenet Haboo are also a new people.They may have been represented on earlier monuments, now destroyed.Medeenet Haboo has been better preserved even than the Memnoniura.G 284 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. !!•have been previously unknown to, or unassailed by,the Egyptians. This last would, indeed, argue thatambition or the love of spoil were the main objectsof the monarch who planned the expedition; and itwas, probably, owing to some injustice on his part,that two of the nations who fought under his bannersin the capacity of allies, were induced to quit theirallegiance, and unite against the aggressions of theinvader. These were the Shairetana and the Tokeand that the costume of the latter bears aremarkable analogy to those of the vicinity of Persia,may be seen by comparing it with the figuresbrought from Persepolis. t But whether the conquests,or any of the captives represented in thesculptures of the tombs and temples, can be referredto the rebellion and defeat of the Bavarians,is a question which I do not intend to discuss,since it would lead to arguments uninteresting tothe general reader.It is possible that this monarch extended hisconquests in one direction, even farther thanhis predecessor Remeses II. ; but the peoplerepresented at the Mcmnonium, and who havebeen supposed by M. Champollion to be the Scythian,do not a})j)ear to have been invaded to thesame extent by the third Remeses. tAfter subduing several nations, whose troops hehad defeated in the open field, in fortified towns,Tlic Tokkari rebelled first, and were tlicn joined by the Sliairetana,who had been allies of the Egyptians at least from the time of RemesesIF.f Vide infra, Chap. ill. Enemies of Egypt.■| for perhaps gave no cause for the renewal of war ; and theirnames may only be noticed at Medcenet Ilaboo, as among the nationstributary to Egypt.CHAP. II. GLORIES OF Rameses III. 85and by water, he returned with immense booty * tothe valley of the Nile, and distributed rewards tohis troops, whose courage and superior disciplinehad added so much to his glory, and to the powerof their native country. And the latter part of hisreign t was occupied, like those of his victoriousancestors, in erecting or embellishing many of thenoblest monuments of Egypt.The sculptures of this period were elegant, asthe architecture was magnificent ; but a peculiarinnovation, introduced into the style of the hieroglyphics,was the forerunner, though not the cause,of the decline and downfall of Egyptian art. Thehieroglyphics had ceased to be executed in relieffrom the accession of the second Remeses ; butthe change made in the reign of his fifth successor,was by carving the lower side of the characters to agreat depth, while the upper face inclined graduallyfrom the surface of the wall till it reached the innermostpart of the intaglio, so that the hieroglyphicscould be distinguished by a person standingimmediately beneath, and close to the wall on whichthey were sculptured. It was a style not generallyimitated by his successors ; and the presence ofhieroglyphics of this kind may serve to fix themonuments in which they occur to the era of thethird Remeses. some attempt was made by themonarchs of the Seth Dynasty to revive the beautyIf this king is the same as the Rhampsinitus of Herodotus, hissuccessful wars may have been one of the great sources of the immensewealth he is said to have possessed.■f- Among the Turks, it was long an established rule that no kioskcould be founded by a Sultan who had not defeated the infidels, theenemies of their religion, of which he was the chief.G 386 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.of ancient sculpture ; and so great was the carebestowed on the execution of the hieroglyphicsand small figures, that a person unacquainted withthe purity of the more ancient style feels inclined,at first sight, to consider them the most elegantproductions of this school. But on more carefulconsideration, and judging with a full understandingof true Egyptian design, they will befound to derive their effect from the minutenessof their detail, rather than from the boldness orsuperiority of their execution.At the close of his reign we bid adieu to themost glorious era of Egyptian history. But whatwas done by the labours of individuals zealousin the prosecution of the arts of peace, or whatadvances science and general knowledge underwentprevious and subsequently to his era, stillremains a secret; though it is probable, judgingfrom similar events in other countries, that theepoch of conquest and military renown was accompaniedby a proportionate development of intellectualpowers.That the Bible history makes no mention of theconquests of the Egyptian monarchs of the 18thDynasty is not surprising, when we consider thestate of the newly occupied land at the epoch inquestion ; and, as the history of the Jews only relatesto themselves, or to those people with whomthey were at war, we readily perceive the reasonof their silence. They had not, in fact, becomesettled in the promised territory; they were engagedin war with neighbouring tribes; and theCHAP. II. BIBLE HISTORY. 87passage of the Egyptian army along the sea-coastof Palestine could in no way disturb or alarm them.Nor could they have had any object in imprudentlyprovoking the hostilities of a nation far more powerfulthan those petty states, whose aggressions theyfound so much difficulty to resist : and we observethat, at a subsequent period, the insolent interferenceof Josiah on a similar occasion cost him hiskingdom and his life*, and had the additional effectof rendering his country tributary to Egypt.Whether the successors of Remeses III. preferredthe encouragement of the arts of peace andthe improvement of the internal administration ofthe country, or, contented with the annual paymentof that tribute which the arms of their warlikepredecessors had imposed on the vanquishedstates, ceased to thirst for further conquest, militaryexpeditions on the grand scale of those equippedby the two Remeses and Osirei were nowabandoned ; and the captives represented in theirsculptures may be referred to the tributary people,rather than to those brought from any newly acquiredterritory.The immediate successors of the third Remeseswere his sons. They all bore the name of theirfather, and completed the series of the 19th Dynasty.To them succeeded five other Remeses ;but the total of the 20th and 21st Dynasties isyet uncertain ; nor can the arrangement of theirnames be ascertained with any degree of precision,2 Kings, xxiii. 30. 3i. 2 Chron. xxxv. 20. ci seq., and xxxvi. 3.G 488 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.owing to their having erected few buildings, atleast in those cities whose monuments remain.Nor do the Dynasties of Manette assist in thehistory of this period ; and, indeed, the unsatisfactoryform in which they have been transmitted tous,precludes the possibility of our using them, inany instance, without some confirmation or assistancefrom the more trustworthy records of themonuments.Of the same epoch, little information is to beobtained either from Herodotus or Diodorus ;nor can we place much confidence in the accountsgiven by those authors of any portion of Egyptianhistory. Previous to the reign of Psamati-cus, the names of nearly all the sovereigns theymention are questionable, and great confusion iscaused by their misplacing Scsostris, or by theirascribing events of the later reign of a Remeses tothat conqueror. The cause of this error I havealready endeavoured to explain, by supposing Se-nostrilsto have been the original hero of Egypt,and the conquests of the second Remeses to havebeen attributed to the former monarch, whose exploitshe had eclipsed ; the two persons thusbecoming confounded together. Ilowev^r, asHerodotus and Diodorus mention some amusingdetails of the reigns of the early Pharaohs, I shallintroduce them as a collateral account of the historyof the Egyptian kings. *The History of I'-pypt, writtt'ii liy the iiiitlioi s of the ITiiivcrsalHistory, has been coinpiicd tliiifly from thirst; two historians; I liicrc-fore avail myself occasionally of some extracts from that work, addingniv own remarks on the events there ticlailcd.CHAP. II. COURSE OF THE NILE CHANGED. 89Menes, or Menas, as already stated, is allowedby universal consent to have been the first sovereignof the country ; and was the reputed founderof Thebes, as well as Memphis.Having diverted the course * of the Nile,which formerly washed the foot of the sandy mountainsof the Libyan chain, he obliged it to runin the centre of the valley, nearly at an equal distancebetween the two parallel ridges of mountainswhich border it on the east and west ; andbuilt the city of Memphis in the bed of the ancientchannel. This change was effected by constructinga dyke about a hundred stadia above the siteof the projected city, whose lofty mounds andstrong embankments turned the water to the eastward,and effectually confined the river to its newbed. The dyke was carefully kept in repair bysucceeding kings ; and even as late as the Persianinvasion, a guard was always maintained there, tooverlook the necessary repairs, and to watch overthe state of its embankments. For, adds Herodotus,if the river was to break through the dyke,the whole of Memphis would run a risk of beingoverwhelmed with water, especially at the periodof the inundation. Subsequently, however, whenthe increased deposit of the alluvial soil hadheightened the circumjacent plains, these precautionsbecame unnecessary ; and though wemay still trace the spot where the diversion ofthe Nile was made, owing to the great bend itIf this is true, it shows great scientific knowledge at that earlyperiod.90 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.takes, about fourteen miles* above the site of ancientMemphis, the lofty mounds once raised thereare no longer visible. The accumulated depositof the river has elevated the bank about Kafr-el-Iyat to a level with their summit ; and a largecanal runs, during the inundation, close to the villagesof Samara and Mit-ravenna, which occupypart of the old city, without endangering theirsecurity. Nor, judging from the great height ofseveral mounds still existing at Memphis, couldthat city have been overwhelmed t at any periodby the rising Nile, though much damage mighthave been done to some of the lower portions of it,which may have stood on less elevated ground.On the north and west of Memphis, Menesexcavated a lake, which stood without the town,and communicated with the Nile by a canal ; itdid not, however, extend to the east, because theriver itself was on that sides He also erected atMemphis a large and magnificent temple to Vulcan,who was called by the Egyptians Phthah, —the demiurgos, or creative power.Menes was the first who instructed the Egyptiansin religious matters, introduced domesticmagnificence and luxury, and instituted the pompoutcasts; and the change he made in the primitivesimplicity of the Egyptians was, in after times,so much regretted by Tncpliaclitluis, the father ofliocchoris surnamed *' the Wise," that he orderedI Have noticed this in my r>gy|)t and Tlicbcs, p. .34 1.-}- Herodotus says, *' Ktvfvi'ti Tratr^ MefKpi KaraKXvcrOiii'ai icfti.*' lib.ii, f)!).J But ;i|)|)aicntly at soin distance from it.CHAP. II. QUEEN NITOCRIS. 91a curse against the memory of Menes to be engraved,and set up in the temple of the ThebanJupiter.A great blank is left after the death of Menes,both in Herodotus and Diodorus. The former relates,that 330 sovereigns succeeded him ; amongwhom were eighteen Ethiopians, and one queen,a native of Egypt, whose name was Nitocris. Hefails to inform us if she preceded or followed theEthiopian princes ; and we are left in ignorance ofthe events which led to their obtaining possessionof the country — whether it was from conquest, or inconsequenceof intermarriages with the royal familyof Egypt. Nitocris was a woman of great beauty ;and, if we may believe Manette, she had a faircomplexion, and flaxen hair. Her immediate predecessorwas her brother, who was put to death byhis subjects ; but neither his name nor the causeof that event are mentioned by Herodotus. Resolvedon revenging herself upon the authors ofthis outrage, Nitocris had no sooner ascended thethrone, than she invited those she suspected ofhaving been privy to it to a festival. A large subterraneoushall was prepared for the occasion ;and though it had the appearance of being fittedup with a view to celebrate the proposed feast, itwas in reality designed for a very different purpose: for when the guests were assembled, thewater of the Nile was introduced by a secret canalinto the apartment ; and thus by their death shegratified her revenge, without giving them an opportunityof suspecting her designs. But she did92 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IT.not live long to enjoy the satisfaction she hadanticipated ; and fearing the indignation of the ■/2^fltj>-fcpeople, she put an end to herself by suffocation.No one monarch of the long suite abovementionedwas distinguished by any act of magnificenceor renown, except Moeris, who wasthe last of them. He built the northern of the temple of Vulcan at Memphis ;and excavated a lake called after him : a workof great splendour and utility, near * which heerected two pyramids, and the most wonderfulof all buildings t either in Egypt or in any partof the world. This was the famous labyrinth t;from whose model that of Crete was afterwardscopied by Daedalus § ; and in which, says Pliny ||,not a single piece of wood was used, being entirelyconstructed of stone. Herodotus attributes itsfoundation to the twelve kings, in the time ofPsamaticus ; but tradition seems to have ascribedit to Moeris ; though it is possible that the son ofNeco and his colleagues may have completed andenlarged it. Pliny says it was first built by kingPetesuccus**, or Tithes ; though others affirmIlcroJotiis (ii. 149.) says the pyramids stood in the lake, 200cubits above the surface of the water, and the same below it ; and oneach of them was a colossus of stone, seated on a tlu'one.+ Ilerodot. ii. 148.4; Pliny (xxxvii. 19.) mentions an emerald in tjiis building, of whicha statue of the god !Sarii])is was made, nine cubits in height. Anotherstone of the same quality was sent to Egypt by a king of Jial)yIon, fourpulpits long and three broad. These I suppose to have linen of thesmaragdite, or root of emerald, but even then their dimensions areextraordinary. His smaragdus is here evidently not the real ceram,§ Plin. xxxvi. Ii). l^ \\ Plin. v. II.1 Plin. xxxvi. 19.** Or PetescuccH. The connnencemciit of his name bears anEgyptian character.CHAP. II. THE LABYRINTH. 93it to have been the palace of Moth ems, or thesepulchre of Moeris ; and received opinion maintainsthat it was dedicated to the Sun. Diodorusmentions Mendes, or, as some call him, Baron orMarcus, as the founder ; and others have put forththe claims of Ismandes* and various other monarchs.The entrance and some of the courts t weremade of white stone resembling marble t; and thecolumns with which several of the corridors wereadorned, as well as many other parts of the building,were of red granite of Syene. § It was dividedinto sixteen parts, according to the number of thecuJ^^ nomes of, Egypt, and contained a temple to eachof the deities: and with such remarkable solidity ||was the whole constructed, that time, says Pliny,could not destroy it, though assisted by the ,from whose ill-will it sustained con-considerabledamage. ,i r,.Ac:^ /fe ^c-^Whether the lake Moeris was really commencedby, and owed its origin to, this monarch, it is difficultto determine ; but from the name still givenby the Egyptians to the canal which carries thewater of the Nile to the Fyoom 5[ and its lake,and from traditions concerning it, I am inclinedto attribute its commencement to Menes, fromProbably, as I have elsewhere suggested, the same as Mendes andOsymandyas, in which we trace the name of the god Mandoo, fromwhich that of the king was derived.f Herod, ii. 148.X Pliny says, "of Parian marble." The stones which I foundamidst the ruins on its site are, a hard white limestone, which takes apolish almost like marble, and red granite.§ Plin. hoc. cit. II Plin. hoc. cit. Strabo, 17.H The modern name of the Arsinoite, or Crocodilopolite, nome.94 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.whom the modern appellation El Menti appearsto have been borrowed. That the lake Moeris wasin reality a name applied to the canal, as wellas to the lake itself, we have the authority ofPliny, who asserts that "the lake Moeris* was alarge canal;" and the great difficulty which hasarisen on the subject is owing to the imperfectdescription of Herodotus, who has confoundedthe two : omitting to designate the canal as an artificialwork, and the lake as a natural formation.It has not only perplexed many of his readers,but has even misled the learned geographer Danville,who, in order to account for his statement,suggested the existence of the Bath en ; an hypothesisentirely disproved by an examination ofits supposed site : and of all authors who havewritten on this lake and canal, or the position ofthe labyrinth, none can be consulted with greatersatisfaction than Strabo, in whose valuable workwe only regret too much conciseness.During the period which elapsed from Menes toSesostris, no monarch of note reigned in Egypt, ifwe except those above mentioned, and the Mnevisand Sasyches of Diodorus, who held a conspicuousplace among the legislators of their country.But the exact period of their reigns is uncertain,and the historian has failed to inform us ifSasyches was the immediate successor of the forsMoeridus lacus, hoc est, fossa, grandis." Plin. xxxvi. 10.■j- Vide Strabo's account of the lake and its canal, as well as theposition of the labyrinth, il). xvii.:jl Diodor. i. 94. The name calls to mind fSnsachis, or Shishak ;though Diodorus places him before Sesostris (Sesoosis).CHAP. II. LAWGIVERS. ^5mer, and whether they both preceded or followedMorris. Mnevis is represented to have been thefirst to teach the people to obey and respect thelaws, and to have derived his sanction as a lawgiverfrom Mercury himself j a fable which, withthe name of the prince, argues strongly in supportof the opinion that Diodorus has confounded himwith Menes, the founder of the Egyptian monarchy.Sasyches, a man of great learning, madenumerous and important additions to the existingcode, and introduced many minute regulations respectingthe service of the Gods. He was alsothe reputed inventor of geometry ; and ordainedthat astronomy should be taught, as an importantbranch of education.With the exception of these few reigns, Egyptianhistory presents a blank from the foundationof the monarchy to the era of Sesostris : itis, however, probable that a portion of it maybefilled by an event, which, though not fixedto any precise time by historians, is universallyallowed to have occurred ; the occupation of thecountry by the Shepherds. If this and the sojournof the Israelites in Egypt have been confoundedby Josephus, perhaps intentionally, andby other writers accidentally, the exploits of Se-nostrilsand of Remeses the Great have experiencedthe same treatment from Herodotus and others ;as the following extracts from his writings cannotfail to prove, with which I continue my comparativeview of Egyptian history : —Sesostris was the first who, passing the Ara n^^<i- -96 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.bien Gulf in a fleet of long vessels, reducedunder his authority the inhabitants of the coastsbordering on the Mare ErythcBum* ; and proceedingstill farther, he came to a sea which,from the great number of its shoals, was not navigable.On his return to Egypt, according to theauthority of the priests, he levied a mighty army,and made an expedition by land, subduing all thenations he met with on his march. Whenever hewas opposed by a people who proved themselvesbrave, and who discovered an ardour for liberty,he erected tablets t (^stelcE) in their country, onwhich he inscribed his name, and that of his nation,and how he had conquered them by the force ofhis arms : but where he met with little or no opposition,upon similar tablets, which he erected,was added a symbol emblematic of their pusillanimity.Continuing his progress, he passed fromAsia to Europe, and subdued the countries ofScythia and Thrace; there, however, I believe hisarmy to have been stopped, since monuments of hisvictories only appear thus far, and none beyond thatcountry. On his return he came to the river Phases;but I am by no means certain whether he left adetachment of his force as a colony in that district,or whether some of his men, fatigued with their♦ The Mare Erythncuni, or Red Sea, was that part of the IndianOcean without the Straits of IJah-cl-Mandcl) ; and in later times wasapplied to the Arabian (inly, or Shines Aral)iiiis.■j- No don't, similar to tiiosc al)()ut I-VSonan and other places, manyof which are commemorative of victories of the Pharaohs. That onthe Lyciis, near Uproot, is pr()l):il)iy one of the stehe alluded to byHerodotus.I (Jon. Valer. Flac. Argon. 5. 418. . . . " ut prima Sesostris. inheritrex bella Gets."CHAP. ir. STEL^ OF SESOSTRIS. 97laborious service, remained there of their own accord.*The Colchians, indeed, appear to be ofEgyptian origin ; and a strong argument in supportof this conjecture, is derived from the fact oftheir being the only people, except the Egyptiansand Ethiopians, and, I may add, the Phoeniciansand Syrians of Palestine, who use circumcision ;and these two last acknowledge that they borrowedthe custom from Egypt. The Colchianshave also another point of resemblance to theEgyptians : the manufacture of linen is alike inboth countries, and peculiar to them ; and, moreover,their manners and language are similar.The greater part of the stelae erected by Sesos-tris in the places he conquered, are no longer tobe found. I have myself seen some in Palestine ofSyria, with the disgraceful emblem and inscriptionsabove mentioned ; and in Ionia are two figures ofthe same king hewn in the rock, one on the wayfrom Ephesus to Phocaea, the other between Sardisand Smyrna. They both represent a man, five palmsin height, holding in his right hand a javelin, andin his left a bow; the rest of his armour being partlyEgyptian and partly Ethiopian. Across his breast,from shoulder to shoulder, is this inscription, inthe sacred or hieroglyphic writing of Egypt — ' Iconquered this country by the force of my arms.' tWho or whence he is, are not specified; bothbeing mentioned elsewhere t; and though someRather as a garrison for one of the military posts he established, inorder to secure the conquered territory, and the exaction of tribute.f Or "shoulders:" conf. Claudia, Bell, Gild,, 114. "Terrahumeris pontumque subegi,"X Probably in the lines of hieroglyphics on the tablet accompanyingthe figure.VOL. I. H98 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.who have examined it, suppose it to be Memnon,I am persuaded they are mistaken in the name ofthe monarch."There is little doubt that one of the tablets orstelae alluded to by the historian still exists in Syria,bearing the name of Remeses II. It is at the sideof the road leading to Beiroot, close to the riverLacus, now Nahr-el-Kelb ; and though the hieroglyphicsare much erased, sufficient remains toshow by whose order it was sculptured. Near it isanother, accompanied by the figure of a Persianking, and inscribed with the arrow-headed character,copies of which have been lately made byMr. Bonomi ; and thus the memorials of the passageof the Egyptian army, marching triumphantover Asiatic nations, and that of the Persians victoriousover Syria and Egypt, are recorded in asimilar manner at the same spot.Diodorus mentions several princes who reignedin Egypt between Menes and Sesostris, some ofwhom preceded, and others followed, Moeris, or,as he calls him, Myris. Menes, according to thathistorian, was succeeded by two of his descendants,who in Manette are his son Athothes and hisgrandson Concedes, or, as Eratosthenes states,Athothes I. and II. Fifty-two kings, whosenames are omitted, succeeded them; then Busiris,who was followed by eight of his descendants, thelast of whom bore the same name as the first, andwas said to have been the founder of Thebes.This honour, we have seen above, has also beenclaimed for Menes ; but it is more probable, as Ihave elsewhere shown, that the city existed evenCHAP. II. EDUCATION OF SESOSTRIS. 99before his era, especially as he is said to havebeen a native of Thebes. Nor can we agree withDiodorus in ascribing the foundation of Memphisto Chorus II., who is said to have borne thesame name as his father, and was the eighth indescent from the monarch he supposes to have beenthe builder of Thebes. Chorus was followed bytwelve generations of kings, after whom came Myris,who excavated the lake above Memphis, and isthe Mceris of Herodotus. If we admit the authorityof Diodorus, seven generations intervened betweenMceris and Sesostris; but Herodotus seems-^'ut^cL i /a ito place the latter as his immediate successor.Sesostris, or, as Diodorus calls him, Sesoosis, wasreputed by some to have been the son of Amenophis ;and about the period of his birth, the god Vulcanappeared to his father in a dream, informing himthat his child should become lord of the wholeearth. Impressed with the truth of this vision, andanxious to profit by the admonition of the deity,he ordered all the male children throughout Egypt,who were born on the same day as his son*, to bebrought to him, and having appointed nurses andproper persons to take charge of them, he gave instructionsthat they should be educated and treatedin every respect as the young prince : being persuadedthat those who were his constant companionsin childhood and youth would prove hismost faithful adherents and affectionate fellow-solosabout the same age as his son, would have been more consistentwith probability. Voltaire ridicules this account very severely. Phil,del' Hist. p. 50.H 2100 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.tiers. They were abundantly furnished with everythingneedful: as they grew up, they were bydegrees inured to laborious and manly exercises,and were even forbidden to taste any food till theyhad performed a course of 180 stadia, or nearlytwenty-three Roman miles. By this severe trainingof the body, and by a suitable cultivation ofthe mind, they were equally fitted to execute andto command. And at length, resolving to givehim and his companions an opportunity of provingthemselves worthy of the pains bestowed upontheir education, the monarch sent them with anarmy into Arabia : and as soon as they had subduedthat unconquered country, they passed intoAfrica*, great part of which they over-ran.Sesostris having ascended the throne, turnedhis attention to the internal administration of thecountry, and having divided all Egypt into thirty-sixnomes, or provinces, he appointed a governorover each. He then prepared to put his militarydesigns into execution, and to extend the conquestsof Egypt into the most remote countries. Withthis view he collected an army of 600,000 foot,24,000 horse, and 27,000 chariots, and appointedthe companions of this youth, in number upwardsof 1700, to the chief command, t Leaving hisbrother Armais regent in his absence, he investedhim with supreme power, forbidding him only theLibya was always considered to Conn j);irt ol' tlu- tcM-ritorics ofEgypt, even to the lime of the Polemics. Titus J'toleniy, the son ofLiigns, was deputed hy Alexander to prtisidc over I'.gypt and Africa,us well ass part of Arabia, .Instil. xiii. 4,-|- Diod. i. rA,CHAP. ir. HIS CONQUESTS AND RETURN. 101use of the diadem, and commanding him to respectand defend the queen, the royal family, and thehousehold : and having marched into Ethiopia, andexacted from that country a tribute of gold, ebony,and ivory, he proceeded to the promontory ofDira, near the straits of the Arabian Gulf, wherehe erected a stella, with an inscription in thesacred character, to commemorate his successes ;and advancing to the country that produces cinnamon,he raised other monuments there, whichwere seen many ages after his time.The fleet of Sesostris consisted of 400 sail, andby having ships of war in the Mediterranean as wellas the Arabian Gulf, he commanded the coastof Phoenicia, and made himself master of manyof the Cyclades. Having vanquished numeroussouthern and eastern nations, he returned to Egypt;and on his arrival at Daphne of Pelusium, he was .^J-ouxLjl.met by his brother, who, with the plea of celebratingand welcoming this joyful event, invited him toa feast. Sesostris, little suspecting his designs,repaired to the house fitted up for his reception,accompanied by his principal friends and thedifferent members of his family. The house hadbeen previously filled with combustibles, which, bythe command of his brother, were ignited as soonas they all retired to rest. Sesostris, roused fromhis sleep, perceived the imminent danger to whichthey were exposed, and seeing no other meansof escape but by placing two of his childrenacross the parts which were burning, he came tothe resolution of making this sacrifice for the prey8102 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.servation of himself and the rest of his family.According to other accounts, his brother, havingseized the throne during his absence, openly rebelledagainst him, and even offered violence tothe queen ; and they ascribed his hurried return tothe anxiety he felt on receiving intelligence of hisperfidy.Sesostris was no sooner delivered from the sinisterattempts of his brother, than he returnedthanks to the gods for his escape, and raised sixcolossal marble statues before the temple ofPthah, or Vulcan, at Memphis ; two of himselfand the queen, which were thirty cubits inheight, and four of twenty cubits, each representingone of his children. Many splendid monumentswere also erected by him in different partsof Egypt, in token of his gratitude to the godsfor the great victories he had obtained ; and thecaptives he took in war were employed in transportingthe immense blocks of stone used in the constructionof the temple at Memphis, and in otherornamental and useful works. He also set uptwo splendid obelisks*, and dedicated a ship 280cubits in length to the god of Thebes ; and hisstatue, which was erected in the temple of Vulcan,together with those of his predecessors, in orderto show the esteem in which he was held by thiscountrymen, had the first and most conspicuous postassigned to it, nor did any succeeding monarch obtainpermission to place his own before that of Diuiluiiiy niiys 1:^0 tuliilK : 180 leet liit;!i ! i. 57,CHAP. ir. PUBLIC WORKS OF SESOSTRIS. 103nostrils. Darius, indeed, claimed this honour, uponthe plea that his conquests had equalled those of hisEgyptian precursor; but, after they had weighedhis claims, the priests of Memphis declared him tohave been eclipsed by Sesostris, inasmuch as he hadvanquished the Scythianss, who had never yieldedto the arms of Darius. This candid remonstranceof the priests was far from displeasing the Persianmonarch, who, in acknowledging the justice of hisprecedence, expressed a hope that, if he lived aslong as Sesostris, he should be enabled to equalhis exploits.In every building erected by his captives he putup an inscription, purporting that it was the workof those he had taken in war, and that no native *was employed in the laborious part of the undertaking; and in every city of Egypt he dedicateda monument to the presiding deity of the place.The same captives were also employed in digginglarge canals, and in raising dykes and embankments,for the purposes of irrigation, the protection of thetowns t and lands, and the distribution of the waterof thence during the inundation ; and though thesehad been previously established throughout thecountry by his predecessors, the superior scaleon which they were now constructed, the manywise regulations he introduced relative to landedproperty, and the accurate surveys he ordered tobe made, in order to ascertain the levels and extentDiod. i. 56.f Herodotus in another place (ii. 137.) says, the towns were elevatedin the reign of Sesostris when the canals were made.H 4104 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.of every person's estate, obtained for Sesostris thecredit of having been the first to intersect theplains of Egypt with canals, and of having introducedthe science of mensuration and land surveying.Herodotus supposes that Egypt, " previousto his reign, was conveniently adapted to thosewho travelled on horses or in carriages," and thatafterwards it became disagreeable to traverse thecountry on horseback, and utterly impossible inchariots ; but as many dykes were raised, as atpresent, to facilitate the communication from onetown to another, and as the journey along the edgeof the desert is not only more commodious, butshorter, for those who go by land from Lower toUpper Egypt, neither Sesostris nor his predecessorswere guilty of the great impediments complainedof by the historian. Nor is it probable that thismonarch was the first to suggest the expediencyof ascertaining the quantity of land irrigated bythe rising Nile, or the justice of proportioningthe taxes to the benefits derived from its fertilisinginfluence ; and however we may be inclinedto believe that geometry may have originated inEgypt, in consequence of the necessity of ascertainingthe changes which annually take place on thebanks of the Nile, we cannot suppose that no meanswere devised for this purpose previous to his reign.Sesostris is reported to have raised a wall onthe east side of ICgypt*, extending from PelusiumI* III my l\us|it ;iinl Tlidics (p. ."{(iH.) 1 luivc sliowii that Voltaire iswrong in the inCcrcncc he draws lion this fact.CHAP. II. THE WALL OF SESOSTRIS. 105along the edge of the desert by Heliopolis*, 1500stadia in length, or about I87 Roman miles; andthat such a wall was actually made by one of theEgyptian monarchs, we have positive proof from thevestiges which remain in different parts of thevalley. It was not confined to Lower Egypt, or tothe east of the Delta, from Pelusium to Heliopolis,but continued to the Ethiopian frontier at Syene ;and though the increase of the alluvial deposit hasalmost concealed it in the low lands overflowedduring the inundation by the waters of the Nile,it is traced in many of the higher parts, especiallywhen founded upon the rocky eminencesbordering the river. The modern Egyptians haveseveral idle legends respecting this wall, some ofwhich ascribe it to a king anxious to prevent anobnoxious stranger from intruding on the retirementof his beautiful daughter : and the name appliedto it is Gist el Agoos, or " the old man's dyke."It is of crude brick; the principal portion thatremains may be seen at Gebel e'Tayrf, a littlebelow Minyeh ; and I have even traced small fragmentsof the same kind of building on the westernside of the valley, particularly in the Fyoom.Of the humane character of the ancient Egyptians,we have several strong proofs ; but, if wemay trust the authority of Diodorus and Pliny §,Diod. (i. 57.) says to Heliopolis.f I have already noticed it in my Egypt and Thebes, p. 367.X Diod. i. 58.§ Plin. xxxiii. 15. " Sesostri Mgy^U rage, tam superb, ut pro-datumannie (juihusqnc sorte regis singles e snhjectis hunger ad cnrruinsolitude, atque ita triumphant."106 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.Sesostris tarnished his glory by an act of greatoppression, competing captive monarchs to drawhis chariot as he proceeded to celebrate histriumph. And the Theban artists have not beenashamed to introduce a similar instance of crueltyin the sculptures of the temple at Medeenet Misrepresentingthe triumphal return of RemesesIII.*,after his conquests in the Eastern war : wherethree captives are tied beneath the axle of his chariot,while others bound with ropes walk by hishorse's side, to be presented to the deity of theplace, tThe latter days of Sesostris were embittered bythe misfortune of losing his sight, which so affectedhim that he put a period to his existence : an actfar from being considered unworthy of a pious andgood man, but looked upon by his subjects, andeven by the priests themselves, as becoming a heroadmired by men and beloved by the gods, whosemerited gifts of eternal happiness he had hastenedto enjoy.He was succeeded by his son, the Heron ofHerodotus, the Sesoosis II. of Diodorus, and theNuncoreus of Pliny. Like his father, he wasaffected by a weakness of the eyes, which terminatedin total blindness : but though it continuedduring eleven years, he at length recovered, owingmore probably to some operation which the notedskill of the Egyptian surgeons had suggested, thanto the ridiculous cause assigned hy Herodotus.Diodorus and Pliny ]both agree with the historian• And of Osiici, at Kama. f I'lc/f l'\nto I.a;IA'^\^c^CHAP. II. Artisans THE ETHIOPIAN. 107of Halicarnassus, that he dedicated two obelisks tothe sun at Heliopolis, in token of gratitude for therecovery of his sight 5 and this 1 suppose to referto the son of Remeses II., as I have observed innoticing the reign of Pthahmen.Many ages after him, according to Diodorus,Amass ascended the throne. He is representedto have been a cruel and despotic prince j andhaving oppressed his people for some time, he wasdeposed by Actisanes, an Ethiopian, who madewar upon him, probably in consequence of therepresentations of his subjects, and who succeededto the throne of Egypt. Actisanes proved himselfworthy of the confidence reposed in him and ofthe choice made by the Egyptians. He behavedwith great moderation and impartiality, and introducedsome beneficial laws. Instead of punishingtheft with death, he caused all robbers tobe banished and confined in the most remotepart of Egypt, on the edge of the desert borderingSyria ; their noses having been previouslycut off, as an eternal stigma, and as a meansof recognising them in the event of theirescape. And the town of Rhinocolura *, wherethey lived, was said to have received its namefrom this mutilation of the inhabitants. The spotwas dreary and unproductive. On one side wasthe sea, on the E., W., and S. all was desert,and the torrent or dry *' river of Egypt," theboundary line of the Syrian frontier, afforded nowater but during the partial rains which some-did.i. GO.108 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.times fell in winter. The wells were salt orbrackish ; nothing could be cultivated withoutexcessive labour, and so destitute were they ofthe necessaries of life, that they gladly availedthemselves of any opportunity of providing themselveswith food. At one season numerous quailsvisited the district, which they caught in long netsmade with split reeds * ; but this temporary reliefonly acted as a contrast to their wants during theremainder of the year, when they depended principallyon the fish of the neighbouring sea.Actisanes was succeeded by Mendes, or marries,the sceptre now returning to the Egyptianline. This Mendes, according to Diodorus, builtthe labyrinth in the Crocodilopolite nome, ascribedby Herodotus to Moeris : whence it is evidentthat he considers Mendes a different person fromMoeris, who excavated the lake, and is called byhim Myris.t Mendes, indeed, may have continuedthe building, as the twelve kings are supposed tohave done, at a later period, and thereby haveobtained the title of its founder : nor is it improbablethat Mendes is the Ismandes of Strabo, whowas also reputed to be the builder of the labyrinth,and the same as the Manhood or Mandoof-step of the hieroglyphics. And the circumstanceof there being two towns in the vicinity stillbearing the name Isment is very remarkable.Diodorus does not fix the exact epoch at whichOsymandyas, whose tomb he describes at Thebes,• The frame-work of some nets, in the Egyptian paintings, seems tobe made of reeds.f The oi and u of tit (greeks lead the sound of our cc.CHAP. II. TOMB OF OSYJVIANDYAS. 109reigned in Egypt ; but, if we may be allowed toinfer the identity of Ismandes and Mendes*, weareenabled to assign him a position in the seriesgiven by the historian, Ismandes being unquestionablythe same as Osymandyas.Osymandyas signalised himself both for thevictories he obtained in the East, and for themonuments with which he adorned the cities ofEgypt. In his reign the Bactriansns, who had beensubdued by Sesostris, rebelled, and threw off theirallegiance to the Egyptians. Resolving to punishtheir defection, and recover the conquered country,he levied a formidable army and marchedagainst them. He was victorious ; he again reducedthem under the dominion of Egypt, andreturning triumphant to Thebes, he erected amagnificent monument, supposed by Hecataeus tohave been afterwards used as his tomb, on whichhe commemorated his victory, and his gratitude tothe god Amun, and the co-templar deities. It isthus described by Diodorus, on the authority ofthat ancient author : *' Ten stadia from the firstsepulchres in the Theban Necropolis, where thefallacies of Jove are buried, stood the tomb ofOsymandyas. Its entrance was by a propylon ofvariously coloured stone t two plethra in length §,Strabo says, " If, as some suppose, Memnon is calfcd by theEgyptians Ismandes, the labyrinth must be Memnonian, the work ofthe same person who erected the buildings at Abydus and Thebes,which are there styled Memnoneia." lib, xvii.-j- Diodor. i. 47. et scq.1 This appears to allude to the painted sculptures usual on Egyptianbuildings, or to granite.§ The plethrum, according to some, was 100 feet, others reckon itabout 92 feet, English.110 THE. ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IF.and forty-five cubits in height. * Behind was asquare area, surrounded internally by an avenueof columns t, each side measuring four plethra,and having a (partial) roof supported by figures ofanimals of solid stone, sixteen cubits high, sculpturedin the antique fashion. The ceiling, whichwas of compact masonry § (covering the space betweenthe outer walls and the columns), was upwardsof two orgies (twelve feet) in breadth, andwas ornamented with stars studded on an azureground. II At the upper end of this, you cameto a doorway leading to a second area, with apropylon, similar in all respects to the former, butsculptured with a greater variety of subjects ; andclose to the entrance was a colossal group of threefigures (the workmanship) of Memnon ofSyene.^One of them was in a sitting posture, and was reputedto be the largest statue in Egypt, whose footexceeded seven cubits in length. The other two,very inferior in size, reached only to its knees (andwere attached in an upright position to the front ofthe throne), one on the right, the other on the leftside, and represented the daughter and mother of theOr 07.^ feet, which can only apply to the pyramidal towers.literally " after you [passeth through this, was a square peristyleof stone."J He evidently alludes to the Osiride figures, not of animals, but ofmen, in the areas of I'^j^'vptian temples.§ Moj'oXiOoi' signifies here, as in Strabo's description of the labyrinth,of solid masonry," not of a single stone. The Osiride pillars, saidalso to have been monolithic, were no doniit built, as usual, ofseveral blocks.II These ceilings are very connnonly met with in ancient Egyptianedifices.If In this may have originated the iilca of its bi-king the statue ofMenon, as well as the name Memnonium attained to the buildinghere described.CHAP. II. REBELLION OF THE Bactria. Illking. It was a monument remarkable as well for theexcellence of its workmanship as for the dimensionsand nature of the stone, in which no crack or evenflaw could be found ; and upon it was this inscription:* I am Osymandyas, king of kings; if any onewishes to know what I am and where I lie, lethim surpass me in some of my exploits.' Nearit was a statue of his mother, twenty cubits inheight, and of a single stone, bearing three crownsupon her head, which purported that she was thedaughter, wife, and mother of a king.* Behindthe propylon was another peripheral area, adornedwith a variety of sculpture. On it was representeda war waged by the monarch in the country of theBactriansns, who had revolted from him, and againstwhom he led an army of 400,000 foot and 20,000horse, in four divisions, each commanded by one ofhis sons. On the first wall the king was seen besieginga fortress, surrounded by a river, and contendingin the foremost ranks with the enemy,accompanied by a lion, which appeared to aid himin the fight. Some indeed affirm that the sculptorintended to represent a real lion, which theking had brought up, and was accustomed to takewith him to battle, to intimidate his foes : butothers are of opinion that it merely alludes to thecourage of the monarch, of which it was deemedan appropriate emblem. On the second wall, captiveswere conducted without hands, or the signsHieroglyphics bearing the same import are found to precede thenames of queens who were similarly circumstanced, as Neitacri, the wifeof Psamaticus III., and others.112 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.of virility, purporting them to be men destitute ofcourage and the power of resistance: and the thirdwall presented various subjects and appropriatesculptures, indicating the sacrifices and triumph ofthe king. In the centre of the open court was analtar of very beautiful stone, admirable for its sizeas well as for its workmanship ; and close to theend wall were two sitting statues, of a single blockeach, measuring twenty-seven cubits * in height.Three entrances led from the area to a hall supportedthroughout by columns, and built in themanner of an odeum y which measured on eachside two plethra. Here were several wooden statues,representing persons engaged in lawsuits,and judges listening to the causes. These lastwere thirty in number, with the chief justice in thecentre, who had many books lying near him, andwore an image of Truth, with her eyes closed,suspended from his neck : an emblematic figure,purporting that the duty of a judge was to receivenothing t, and that the chief justice shouldhave his mind intent on truth alone. After thiswas a corridor filled with numerous chambers,where all kinds of food most agreeable to the40 feet G iiiclics. He evidently ;illiules to the two smell colossiof the Mcinnoniiiii), vvliicli stood on eiuii side of the steps heading; fromthe second court of tliiit hiiildinfj;. Tiic heiid of one is in the jiritisliMnsenm, and was formerly called of the young; Menon. From thiscourt, three entrances lead to the hall of assembly, agreeing well withthe description of Diodorns in his account of the tom.■f Diodorns has omitted to mention their being " without hands ;"which, however, wc learn from I'hitarch : "The states of judges atThebes without hands, with tiicir chief or president at their head, withhis eyes tinned downwards, signify that justice ought neither to be accessibleto bribes, nor guided by favour and affection." be Isid. s. 10.CHAP. II. LIBRARY AND PLANISPHERE. 113palate were introduced. The king also appearedin the sculptures, painted in elegant colours, dedicatingto the deity the gold and silver he annuallyreceived from the mines throughout Egypt, whichin silver alone amounted to 3200 myriads of mine.*To these chambers succeeded the sacred library,over which was inscribed * The balsam of thesoul;' and contiguous to it were figures of all thegods of Egypt, to each of whom the Monarch presenteda suitable offering; in order that Osiris, andthe deities who attended beneath him, might know,that through life he had acted with piety towardsthe gods and benevolence towards men. Adjacent tto the library was a chamber elegantly fitted upwith twenty couches, where the statues of Jupiter,Juno, and the king were placed ; and hereit was supposed that the body of the princereposed. Around were several rooms, havingbeautiful paintings of all the sacred animals of thecountry, and from them an ascent t to the wholetomb ; beyond which, and immediately overthe sepulchre, was a golden planisphere, carriedaway in later times by Cambyses when thePersians invaded Egypt. It measured 365 cubits §in circumference, and one in thickness, and wasdivided and marked at every cubit with the daysof the year, the rising and setting of the starsaccording to their natural revolutions, and theThe Egyptian mina was 1 lb. coz. 6dwts. English.IO/iioroiyor, having a common wall with the library.From the position of the Memnonium on a rising rock, viii ascendtowards the upper end of the building.§ 547^ feet, or about 182 feet in diameter.VOL. I. 1114- THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.signs ascertained from them by Egyptian astrologers."*In re-examining this description of Diodorus, Iam still more inclined to the opinion I before statedof his having in view the Memnonium, or palace-templeof Ilemeses II. 1. The distance from thefirst tombs, where the fallacies of Jove were buried,agrees very satisfactorily with that from thetombs of the queens t to the Memnonium. 2. Itshaving the largest statue in Egypt, which is the sittingcolossus of Remeses, in that building. 3. Theplan of the tomb, its three entrances from the secondarea, and the succeeding hall of columns,agree perfectly with those of the Memnonium ;and if the dimensions of the areas exceed thetruth, or appear inconsistent, the objection is onewhich equally applies to any other Egyptian edifice.I had supposed the word ivxj'Karjct. to referto an entrance court or propylacum ; but I perceivethat he alludes to the ]pyramidal towers ofthe pro})ylon, to which he gives the length of twoplethra. The area behind them was four plethrasquare, and we must therefore conclude the towersto be each two plethra, without including the intermediategateway, which will accord very wellwith the proportions of an Egyptian tcm})le. However,his measurements may be exaggerated, andAnother astronomical {■cilinj^ is met with at the Mcninoniiiin, inthe central chanil)cr, iinnu-diatcly behind the {jrand Iiall, in wliicli allthe Egyptian niontiis, and various stars, are introduced, with fi^Miresand hieroglyphic lefjcnds.t The Egyptian princesses and (queens held that ofTiee in the serviceof Amun or Jove. Vide my Egypt and Thebes, p. HO.CHAP. ir. THIS TO.AIB J HE IVIEMNONIUIM. 11.5I consider it better to leave his plethriim of indeterminatelength. And in order that the readermay perceive the relative dimensions and usual arrangementof these courts, and compare Diodorus'description with the Memnonium, I insert a planof that building, and leave him to form his ownopinion. *That two Theban buildings, the palace of RemesesIII. at Medeenet Haboo and the Memnonare united in this description of the historianappears not altogether improbable, from a comparisonof the plans and sculptures of those edifices.And the revolt of an Eastern people, thelion accompanying Remeses III., and the mutilationof the bodies of the enemy slain in the fight,which occur at Medeenet Haboo in the sculpturesof the inner and outer walls, as well as the fortifiedtown surrounded by a river at the Memnonium,and the presence of his sons in the battle, show astriking resemblance to the circumstances detailedby Diodorus.After Mendes, or Osymandyas, ensued an interregnum,which lasted five generations, until Cetesor Aetna, a Memphite, " who in the Greek languagewas called Proteus," ascended the throne.The shrine of this monarch was still visible atMemphis in the time of Herodotus. It stood onthe south of the temple of Vulcan, and was magnificentlyornamented. The Phoenicians of Tyre,who had settled in Egypt, lived in its vicinity,See wood-cut in next page.I 'iTHE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. If.o • • e e cTo o• • ee • oe oo ••o„9« oo• • •„• •,• o oo •,,• S •'o o o^^^^^^^^^B j^ffl^^^^M^JPlan of the Memnonium, showing its great rcscnil)lance to the descriptionthe Tomb of Osymandyas, given Ijy Diodorus : —A, A, Towers of the Propylon, " irvAciua . to /xev /xrj/coj SinXfOpov, ro8' v\pos 'TfrrapaKoina cat irfVTe irrjxcov." u, the entrance, " Trj;/ ticrubou."c, c, the area, " SieAflurrt 5€ avruv eivai \i9ivov irtpiarvKov Tfrpaywvov,tKacrrr-irKfvpas ovtrri^ TtTrapaiv ■K\fQp(jiv." ." avTi twv kioivwv, tw^ta . .fiofoKida," as at ii, ii, in the next court ; the area was open in the centre, andcovered at the sides, " ttji/ opocfiriv . . first-rrKaros Butif opyvia>t>." ." «^r)s StTov irtpiarvKov tovtov iraXiv txfpav (inoSov Kai irvXoova " . . " papa 8« ttjc(tffo^ov (e) avSpiauras reis fi (voi f^tOtw . . . tovtcdv tva fxfv KaO-nfitvov {o )imapx^^v (xfyMTov iravT(»v twv Ear 'Aiyvnlov." n, is the large sitting Colossusof Remiss the Great, close to the second entrance e. " fitra 5« rov vvXwfa(f, i) irtpunvKov rov vportpov alioKoyairfpov (o, o) (v (p y\v(pas . . . STjAoutrajTOV TToKfuov." The battle scenes occur on these walls, and at 1 are traces ofsculptures relating to the war; but that part, as well as j, is now in ruins.At K, ilwfirxt wall on the right entering, the king is !besieging a city sur-chap.ir. THE STORY OF HELEN. 117when the historian visited the country, and thewhole of the environs thence obtained the nameof the Tyrian camp. There was also in the samespot a small temple dedicated to Venus the stranger*; and this goddess, Herodotus, with the vanityof a Greek, conjectures to be the Grecian *' Helent, who was said to have lived some time at thecourt of Proteus." *' On inquiring," he continues,Probably alluded to by Horace :Oh quae beaten, Diva, tones Cyprus, etMemphis carpenter Bithynia give." — Od. lib. iii. 26. 10.Strabo also mentions it. Lib. xvii.f Strabo says some consider this Venus to be a Greek goddess, andothers suppose the temple to be dedicated to the moon.rounded by a river, " Kara rov Trpoojov toil toikwv (k) rov jSacrjAeo . .iroXiopKowra reixos veto vorafiov •n pippv rov." On the second wall were the y^f^/fcaptives led by the king, " ra re aiSoia Kai ras x^'P"'^ "•"' extras," as atMedeenet Haboo; and in the centre of the area was an altar in the openair " vTraiOpiov," showing this court was also hypaethral in the centre. "KarrtSe TOP TeXevratov toixov virapxf^v avBptavTas KaBrifievovs Suo," l and m, — thehead of the latter of which is now in the British Museum; " trap' ois eicro-does Tpeis (n, o, p) en tov irfptarvXav, KaQ' as olkou virapxeiv xrnocTTvXov (q)uthiiov Tpo-nov KaTeffKevaffiievov, eKaffrrjf irKevpav exAJ'Ta 5i.TrXe0pov." R and sare pedestals, perhaps belonging to some of the statues he mentions. " ej^js8" VTrapxfiv ■Kepnrarov oiKcav iravToSaTruiv TrArjpTj," perhaps referring to thewhole space containing the chambers u, v, y, z. " 6|r)$ S'vTrdpxfii' rrjy lepavPi6\io6r]KT)v " (u or v) " (Tvvexets Se ravrri ruv ^eaiv airavrccv etKoyas, tov$aaiXiOi>s, ofioieas ^upotpopowros a iTpoar]Kov tjv fKOffrots," which is referredto in the sculptures of w and x. Whether his description of the partsbeyond this are correct we cannot decide, as the chambers are entirely destroyed,and the general plan is scarcely to be traced ; and, as it is probableHecataeus, who is his authority, was not admitted beyond the great Hall q,the information obtained of this part must have rested solely on report.Indeed, in this portion, he appears to have united or confounded two buildings,the temple of Remeses the Great, and that of Remeses III. at MedeenetHaboo ; though with the exception of the measurement of the areas (fourplethra square), his description of the first part of the Tomb of Osymandyasagrees very closely with the edifice before us ; but we may be allowed toquestion its having been a tomb, or having been erected by that monarch.I, Battle scene, where the testudo occurs,I 3-tVlis THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. 11.*• concerning her, the ]priests gave me the followinginformation: — Paris (or Alexander) havingcarried off Helen from Sparta, was returning home,when, meeting with contrary winds in the ^gean,he was driven into the Egyptian sea ; and as theycontinued unfavourable, he proceeded to Egypt,and putting into the Canopic mouth of the Nile,landed at the Tarichasa*, near a temple of Hercules,which still exists there. If on any occasion a slavefled for refuge to this shrine, and, in testimony ofhis consecrating himself to the service of the god,submitted to be marked with certain characters,no one was permitted to molest him ; and the samecustom has been strictly observed, from its first institutionto the present period. The servants ofParis, aware of the privileges of the temple, fledthither from their master, and with a view of injuringhim became suppliants to the deity. Theyrevealed the whole affair concerning Helen, andthe wrong he had done to Menelaus; and they notonly related it to the priests, but also to Thongs,who was governor of that mouth of the river.*' Thongs instantly despatched a courier to Memphis,with this message to the king: — ' A certainTrojan is arrived here, who has perpetrated anatrocious crime in Greece. He has seduced thewife of his host, and has carried her away, with aquantity of treasure. Adverse winds have forcedhim hither : shall I suffer liii to depart withoutmolestation, or shall I seize his person and ]prosthe Salt-pans.CHAP. II. HELEN AND PARIS IN EGYPT. 119party?' Upon this, Proteus gave an order thatwhoever the man was, who had thus violated therights of hospitality, he should be arrested andbrought before him. Thongs therefore sent Paris,with Helen and all his wealth, to Memphis, anddetained his ships. As soon as he was admittedinto the presence of the king, Proteus inquiredwho he was and whence he came. Paris faithfullyrelated the name of his family and country, andfrom what place he had set sail. But when he wasquestioned concerning Helen, and how he hadobtained possession of her person, he hesitated inhis answers, and endeavoured to conceal the truth,till the slaves who had deserted him explained allthe circumstances of his guilt. Proteus thereuponpronounced this sentence, ' If I did not considerit a very heinous crime to put any stranger todeath, who may have been driven on my coast bycontrary winds, I would assuredly, thou worst ofmen, avenge the Greek whose hospitality thouhast betrayed in a most treacherous manner :thou hast seduced his wife ; and not contentedwith this, thou hast carried her off' by stealth, andstill detained her ; and, as if this crime was notsufficient, thou has robbed his house. However,as I think it right not to put a stranger to death,I suffer thee to depart ; but this woman and thewealth thou hast brought I forbid thee to take:these shall remain with me till the Greek himselfshall come and demand them. In three daysleave my coast with thy companions, or expect tobe treated as enemies.'I 4120 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.'* Helen was therefore detained by Proteus till thearrival of Menelaus, who, finding at the capture ofTroy, that his wife was not in the possession ofParis, but had been left by him in Egypt, repairedto the court of the Egyptian king. On hisarrival, he related the object of his journey. Hewas received with great hospitality, and Helen,who had been treated with respect, was restoredto him with all his treasure. He then returned tothe coast, intending to set sail immediately : but thewinds were contrary ; and Menelaus, forgettingthe gratitude he owed to his benefactors, clandestinelyseized two children of the country, and offeredthem as a sacrifice.* This was no soonermade known to the Egyptians than they resolvedon punishing the perpetrator of so great an outrage; but as he fled by sea to Africa, they wereunable to overtake him, and Menelaus escapedtheir indignation, and the punishment his perfidydeserved'*The fable related by the Greeks of the wonderfulpowers of Proteus, in assuming a multiplicityof shapes, is thought by Diodorus to beexplained from a custom common to the Egyptiankings of adorning their heads with various figuresand emblematic devices, intended to strike the beholderswith awe ; but this is neither satisfactorynor probable. The head-dresses of the kings representedill the sculptures, when offering to theConf. Virgg. /Kn. ii. I l(j.S;m^iiiiic placastis vcDlos, et virginia c'a?sa."■j J>io(lor. i. G2.CHAP. ir. ROBBERY OF THE TREASURY. 121gods, are numerous and varied (especially in thelater times of the Polemics and Caesar) ; yet suchslight changes could never account for a similarfable among the Egyptians, who were fully acquaintedwith the intention of every vesture andcrown of ceremony.Memphis, or Rhampsinitus, succeeded Proteus.He does not appear to have been distinguished forthe extent of his conquests abroad, but he surpassedall his predecessors in the immense wealthhe possessed, and in his fondness for riches. Diodorusconsiders him of so avaricious a characterthat he was unwilling to employ any of the treasurehe had amassed either for the service of thegods or the benefit of his subjects ; but the monumentshe erected at Memphis disprove this statement,and claim for him a place among the patronsof religion, and the encouragers of art. *' Thewestern vestibule of the temple of Vulcan," saysHerodotus, *' was added by his order, as weretwo colossal statues, twenty-five cubits in height,which stand in front of it. The northern statue(or that on the left entering) is called by theEgyptians summer, the other to the south, winter;and though they treat the latter with no mannerof respect, they reverence the former, and evenworship it."Herodotus concurs in representing Rhampsini-tus as the most opulent of all the Egyptian kingswho reigned before or after him 5 and if he doesnot state the amount of his wealth, which theformer historian calculates at no less than 400,00012^2 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.talents, he relates the great care he took in itspreservation. *' For this purpose he constructed astone edifice, one side of which was attached tothe wall of his palace. But the architect he employed,with a dishonest view, so disposed one ofthe stones of the outer wall that two or even oneman might easily remove it. The building beingcompleted, the king there deposited his treasuresin supposed security. Some time afterwards, thearchitect finding his end approaching, sent for histwo sons, and told them how their future prosperitywas provided for by an artifice he had adopted inbuilding the king's treasury. He then explainedall the secret of the stone; its dimensions and position;the mode of removing it; and, if they usedproper caution, the certainty of participating inthe royal wealth. After the death of their father,they were not long before they availed themselvesof the advice lie had given them ; and repairingby night to the palace, they found the stone as described,and having easily removed it, they carriedaway a large sum of money. When the king enteredthe apartment he observed a sensible diminutionof the gold in the vases ; but as he had nosuspicions of any person, and the lock and its sealswere intact, he was greatly perplexed. At length,finding the same diminution continue, the thievesconstantly repeating their visits, he resolved onplacing traps round the vases wliicli contained themoney. They returned as usual, and one of themon going to the spot was caught in the trap, lieinstantly called to his brother; and explaining hisCHAP. II. ARTIFICE OF THE THIEF. 1Q3situation, he requested him without loss of time tocut off his head, as the only means of preventingdetection and preserving his own life. The adviceappeared good ; and having overcome his scruples,he complied, replaced the stone, and ran home,carrying with him the head of his brother.*' As soon as it was light, the king entered theapartment; and seeing the body of a person withouta head secured in the trap, the walls entire, andshowing no place of exit or ingress, he was moreastonished than ever. Still he hoped to unravel themystery; and ordering the body to be exposedfrom the wall, he stationed guards on the spot,and directed them to seize and bring before himwhoever should discover any symptoms of sorrowor compassion at the sight. The mother, exasperatedat this treatment of her son's body, threatenedthe surviving brother if he did not contrivesome means of removing and bringing it away,she would go herself to the king and accuse himas an accomplice in the robbery. In vain did heendeavour to excuse himself; at length, findingher determined, he had recourse to the followingartifice: — He loaded some asses with skins ofwine, and drove them to the place where theguards were stationed to watch the body of hisbrother. As soon as he approached them, hesecretly drew the pegs from the mouths of two orthree of the skins, and when the wine gushed out,he began to beat his head and to cry vehemently,running to and fro with pretended confusion, as ifuncertain to which of the asses he should go first.124 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.The soldiers perceiving the accident, ran withvessels; but instead of assisting him, all the winethey could save they considered themselves entitledto as their own. At first he abused them in apparentanger; then, feigning to be pacified by theirendeavours to console him, he led his asses asideout of the road, put the skins in order, and beganto enter into conversation with them. Affectingto be pleased with the drollery of one of them,he gave him a skin of wine; and having acceptedtheir invitation to stay and drink with them, hesat down, and, to reward their civility, he addedanother. It was not long before the wine had itseffect : the soldiers became intoxicated and fellasleep, and as soon as night came on, he took downthe body of his brother ; and having shaved the rightcheek * of the guards, in derision, he put the bodyinto a sack on one of his asses and drove home.When Rhampsinitus heard what had happenedhe was enraged beyond measure ; but being resolvedon discovering the robber, he is said tohave had recourse to this stratagem, which to meappears very improbable. He commanded hisdaughter to receive every man indiscriminately,on condition he would tell her the most artfulas well as the most wicked thing he had everdone ; and if any one confessed the crime ofwhich this robber had been guiRy, she was to seizeThis, like the rest of the .story, is very (niestion;vl)le. The F,f,'y|)-tian soldiers had no beards, and Herodotus himself allows that theEgyptians shaved, and only allowed " the hair of their head and beardto grow in horning." ii. 'Mi. That this last is true, is proved by thescuiptiiiVb representing soldiers and otiicr individuals.CHAP. II. PARDONED BY THE KING. 1^25him and prevent his escape. The daughter obeyedthe orders of her father ; and the thief guessingwhat was intended, prepared to thwart the artfulscheme of the king. He cut off the arm of abody recently dead, which he concealed under hiscloak during his visit to the princess ; and whenasked the same question as the rest, he repliedthat the most wicked thing he had ever done wasto cut off the head of his brother who had beencaught in a trap in the king's treasury, — the mostartful thing, his making the guards drunk andremoving the body.* She immediately endeavouredto apprehend him ; but as it was dark, heheld out the dead arm, and on her seizing iteffected his escape. This being reported to theking, he was still more astonished at the art andaudacity of the man, and issued a proclamation thatif the offender would declare himself he shouldnot only be pardoned, but rewarded handsomely.Trusting to his word, the thief presented himselfbefore him, and Rhampsinitus, being much pleasedwith his address, gave him his daughter in marriage ;for knowing the Egyptians to be superior in ingenuityto all other people, and finding he had surpassedeven the Egyptians, he looked upon him asinfinitely more clever than any other human being."Such is the story told by Herodotus ; but wemust do him the justice to say he expresses his disbeliefof it, as well as of the same king's visit to thelower regions, where Rhampsinitus was reportedto have played at dice with the goddess Ceres,alternately winning and losing, and to have been126 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. 11.presented on leaving lier with a napkin embroideredwith gold. The period of his supposed returnwas celebrated by the Egyptians as a solemnfestival, and continued even to the time of Herodotus: but what the real origin or import of theceremony may have been, the historian is unableto inform us. " The ministers," he adds, " whoofficiate on that occasion, wear a vest woven withinthe space of a day ; and this is put on by one ofthem, whose eyes are blinded, and who is conductedto a path leading to the tensile of Ceres, wherehe is left, and whence two wolves are said to takehim to the temple, distant twenty stadia from thecity, bringing him back to the same spot when theceremony is concluded. But I leave every readerto judge for himself regarding the credibility ofwhat I here relate."*' Till the reign of Rhampsinitus, Egypt was fortunate,as well in the tranquillity and justice itenjoyed, as in the blessings of abundance. ButCheops*, his successor, abandoned himself to everykind of depravity. He closed all the temples, forbadethe Egyptians to offer sacrifices, and orderedtheir labours to be confined to his own ]purposes.Having the project of building a pyramid, he compelledsome to hew stones in the quarries of theArabian mountains t, and to drag them to the bankof the Nile ; others were appointed to receive them• The Chemist, Chenibcs, or (nicniiiis of Diodorus. This anachronism,of placing Cheops af'tiM- tiic Trojan \v;ir, must l)c obvious toevery one.+ Conf. Plin. xxxvi. 17. " I'vrainis amplissiiiia ex Aral)ici.s lapisconstat;" and Strabo, lib. xvii., 'I'iov Xi^wr, t^ lov at \\iif)((^if(<;yiyovaaiv tv Tis Apiifiif Tpwiicov r« KctXiiTcn TrtrpwOtt . . . ofiot;.CHAP. II. THE PYRAMID OF CHEOPS. 127from the boats and transport them to the mountainof Libya; and for this service 100,000 men* wereemployed, who were relieved every three months.In the operation of forming the road, by whichthe stones were carried, ten years were consumed ;and this arduous undertaking appears scarcely inferiorto the pyramid itself, which, independent ofthe time employed in preparing the hill where itstands, occupied twenty years." The historianthen proceeds to describe the pyramids : but as Ihave given an account of them in a previouswork, I think it unnecessary to repeat it here,and resume my history of the successors of thismonarch.After a reign of fifty years, Cheops, who, as Ihave already stated, appears to have been theSuphis of Manette, and the Chambre of Diodorus,was succeeded by Cephren his brother. Hereigned fifty-six years, and erected a pyramidsimilar to that of his brother, but of rather less dimensions.Mycerinus, the son of Cheops, was his successor.He was a good and religious prince ; and hismemory was revered by the Egyptians beyond thatof all his predecessors, not only because of theequity of his decisions, but because his love ofjustice was so great that if complaint was made ofhis conduct he always showed a willingness toredress the injury. He had an only daughter,Plin. " Recent LX. liominuin millia annie XX. ani procureur. Tres vero facta annie LXXVIII. et mensisIV."t Egypt and Thebes, p. 323.128 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.who died some time after he ascended the throne,which was the first misfortune he experienced ;and being much afflicted by her death, and wishingto honour her funeral with more than ordinarysplendour, he enclosed her body in a heifer madeof wood, richly ornamented with gold. It was notburied, but remained even to the time of Herodotusin the palace at Says, in a magnificent chamber,where exquisite ]perfumes burnt before it everyday,and brilliant illuminations continued throughoutthe night.*Mycerinus afterwards met with a second calamity.The oracle of But sent to inform him heshould live six years and die the seventh ; andthough he represented his piety and upright conduct,the same answer was returned, with this addition,that his early death was in consequence ofhis virtues.During this period of his reign t he occupied himselfin constructing a pyramid ; and if we may believeDiodorus, he died before its completion. Itstands near those of his father and his uncle ; andthough much smaller, was considered, when entire,far more elegant than the other two, being casedwith red granite On the northern face he inscribed• It is very (|uc'sti()iial)lc if this lucifer rcf'crrcil to the daiif^Iitcr of"Mycerinus; and jiulf,'iiif5 from what the historian adds of the Egyptiansfhii^ellatinf; themselves in iiononr of a certain god (Osiris), it wouldrather seem to belong to Isis, or to Atlior.f Herodotus mentions a ridiculous story of his passing the night inrevelry, and endeavouring to convict the oracle of falsehood, by turningnight into day, and thus doubling the number of years.X Pliny says, " Tertian minor praedicti, sed nndto spectator ethiopiansla[)i(lil)us." xxxvi. 17'. Herodotus says, it was of ethiopianstone, as far as the middle of its height.CHAP. II. TNEPHACHTHUS' CURSE OF MENES. 129his name ; and the entrance, though still closedand undiscovered, may be looked for on this side,like those of the other two pyramids. The Greekserroneously attributed its erection to the courtesanRhodope ; but, as Herodotus observes, it is improbablethat a monument, which cost severalthousand talents, should have been erected by her,and even impossible, since she did not live at thesame epoch, but during the reign of Amass.The immediate successor of Mycerinus is uncertain.According to Herodotus, it was Asychis,who appears to have been a Memphite. Diodorus,however, here introduces the names of Tne-phachthus, and his son Bocchoris, both omittedby Herodotus, as Asychis and Anysis are in hiscatalogue of kings.Tnephachthus, or, as Plutarch calls him,Technatis,is only known as being the father of Bocchoris, andas having led an expedition into Arabia, where heendured great privations and hardships, owing tothe loss of his baggage in so inhospitable a country.And being obliged to put up with the poor andslender diet he there met with, and finding his sleepin consequence much more sound and refreshing,he felt persuaded of the ill effects resulting from aluxurious mode of living, and was resolved on hisreturn to Thebes to record his abhorrence of theconduct of Menes, who had induced the Egyptiansto abandon their frugal and simple habits : he,therefore, erected a stella, with an inscription tothat purpose, in the temple of Amun at Thebes,VOL. I. K130 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.where his son also made considerable additions tothe sacred buildings dedicated to the deity.While examining the ruins of Carnal, I metwith one tablet, which appeared at first sight toresemble a monument of this kind ; but on furtherexamination I altered my opinion, and was obligedto relinquish all hope of finding it there, or, indeed,in any other building at Thebes.Bocchoris, his son, a Saite by birth, succeededhim. He is represented to have been despicablein his person, but the qualities of his mind fullycompensated for any imperfections of the body ;and so far did he surpass all his predecessors inwisdom and prudence, that he obtained the distinctivesurname of " the Wise." He is reputedto have been one of the Egyptian lawgivers, andin this capacity to have introduced many usefulregulations in the ancient code respecting debt *,and fiscal matters ; though some have supposedhis care of the revenue to proceed from a feelingof avarice, rather than from a desire to benefit thestate, t He was said to have been taken prisonerby Sabaco the Ethiopian, and to have been burntalive ; but this assertion is destitute of probability,and there is great doubt whether Sabaco was hisimmediate successor, or whether, as I have alreadyobserved, several kings intervened between Boc-chorusand that monarch. t To enable us to solvethese questions, we require more positive authority,either from the monuments, or from history, andDiodor. i. 79. J'idc hij'ru on the T^aw.s of Egypt, f Ibid. i. 94.I This is also the opinion of Diodorus, i, G5.CHAP. II. BRICK PYRAMIDS. 131it is equally useless to inquire if Asychis was thesame as Bocchoris. I therefore proceed to noticethe reigns of Asychis and Anysis, as given byHerodotus.The former was not only an encourager of art,but a benefactor to his country by the introductionof some salutary laws respecting debt. " Findingthat commercial interests suffered from an extremewant of money, he passed an ordinance that anyonemight borrow money, giving the body of hisdeceased father as a pledge : by which law thesepulchre of the debtor fell into the power of thecreditor ; for if the debt was not discharged, hecould neither be buried with his family in that or inany other tomb, nor was he suffered to inter any ofhis children."Among the monuments erected by Asychis wasa pyramid of brick, with this inscription engravedon a marble slab, " Compare me not with the stonepyramids, for I am as superior to them as Jove is tothe other gods. Thus was I made : men probingwith poles the bottom of a lake drew forth the mudwhich adhered to them, and formed it into bricks."Four pyramids built of these materials still remainin Lower Egypt, independent of several.smaller ones at Thebes, and it is probable thatone of them is that alluded to by Herodotus ashaving been erected by Asychis. Two are close toMemphis and the modern town of Dishonor ; theothers stand at the entrance of the Fyoom. Nearthe former are two pyramids of stone ; and thiscircumstance, and their vicinity to Memphis, ink2132 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.duce me to believe one of them to be the crudebrick monument in question ; for it is reasonableto suppose it would be erected near the city wherethe prince resided, and in the vicinity of stonepyramids, to which it forbade the spectator tocompare it. In what its superiority consisted, weareunable to decide. Dr. Richardson ingeniouslyascribes it to the vaulted roofs of its chambers,whose construction was the result of the novelinvention of the arch. But though chambers didexist in the brick pyramids, vestiges of which Ihave myself seen in one of those at Dishonor, andtheir roofs, as he justly concludes, were vaulted,other pyramids of similar materials had long beforebeen erected at Thebes, with roofs of the sameconstruction, and the arch was invented and usedin Upper Egypt many centuries before the accessionof this monarch.According to Herodotus, Asychis was succeededby Anysis, a native of a town of the same name,who was blind. In his reign, Sabaco, the Ethiopian,invaded and conquered Egypt, of which he continuedin possession fifty years ; and during thewhole of that period Anysis remained concealed inthe lowlands of the Delta, at a place called theIsle of VAho, which lie is said to have formed forhimself of ashes and earth, neither daring nor havingthe power to dispute the authority of the invader.*• Sabaco, while he ruled Egypt, refrained frompunishing any crime with death ; but, according tothe magnitude of their offence, he condensed allcriminals to raise the ground around the place toCHAP. II. SECESSION OF SABACO. 133which they belonged : in order to elevate the differenttowns throughout the country, and to placethem above the reach of the inundation. This hadbeen previously done during the reign of Sesostris,when the canals were made ; but the mounds nowadded by order of the Ethiopian were much moreextensive : so that every city was raised at thisperiod, and particularly Bubastis." Manette differsfrom the historian of Halicarnassus in his characterof Sabaco, and in the name of the prince whosethrone he usurped, since he affirms that he tookBocchoris captive and burnt him alive ; nor isHerodotus's own account consistent, when he mentionshis having put to death " Necks, the fatherof Psammitichus." * Again, Manette limits hisreign to eight or eighteen years, while Herodotusallows him fifty ; and states, that he relinquishedthe throne of Egypt and returned to Ethiopia inconsequenceof a dream, in which *' a person appearedadvising him to assemble all the priests ofEgypt, and to inflict upon them the cruel death ofcutting them asunder . . . but, rather than perpetratesuch a deed, he resolved to retire from the throne,especially as the duration of his reign over Egypt,according to the oracles, was now fulfilled ; forSabaco, while in Ethiopia, having consulted them,was informed he should reign fifty years in Egypt ;and this period being accomplished, the vision soalarmed him that he voluntarily withdrew."On the secession of Sabaco, Anysis was recalledfrom his place of concealment, and assumedThis I shall presently show to have been impossible. Herod, ii. 132.K 3134 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.the reins of government ; but for what length oftime Herodotus fails to inform us. He was succeededby Sethos, a priest of Vulcan, who, as Ishall presently have occasion to observe, was contemporaryof Tirhakah, and who, in consequenceof the contempt with which he treated the militaryclass, endangered the safety of the whole ofLower Egypt, when Sennacherib king of Assyria,threatened to invade it. This, and the eventswhich occurred in the reigns of Sabaco, Psamati-cus, and succeeding monarchs, will also be noticedin my account of the 25th and 26th Dynasties ;and having, as I proposed, introduced a comparativeview of the history of the early Egyptianprinces, from Menes to Sethos, from the works ofHerodotus and Diodorus, I resume my chronologicalinquiry, which I had carried down to theend of the 19th Dynasty*, and consequently nowreturn to the kings who succeeded the sons of thethird Remeses, and who composed the 20th, 21st,and the following Dynasties : —The IQth and 'inst Dynasties, on the Authority of the Monuments,were composed ofName from theAscendedMonuments.the Throne.Remeses VII.n. c.- 1170Remeses VIII.- 1155Remeses IX.-- 1140liemeses X.-- 1125Jteineses XI.-- 1110Ainun-mui-Pouee ?-- 1095Amun-meses ?-- 1080reigned till about 1068Vide p. 87.CHAP. II. 22d and 23d dynasties.The succession is doubtful for a period of about90 years, when a more interesting period opens toview, in the 2^d Dynasty, where we recognise agreat similarity between the names * of Manette'slist and those on the monuments.The 22d Dynasty of Diospolitans.Name fromAncient Authors.SesonchisOsorthonTacellothisName from theMonuments.Sheshonk I.Osorkon I.TakelotheEvents.Shishak of S. S., who plunderedthe temple of Jemsalem, b. c. 971cotemporary of Zerah,the Ethiopian King,who fought with Asa,Bec. 941-]AscendedtheThrone.B. C.23</ Dynasty.Name fromName from theEvents.AscendedtheThrone.Ancient Authors.Monuments.(Uncertain)Osorkon II.Homer flourished about 907.B. c.-Sheshonk II.-(Then, probably,to aboutone or more860,kings, occupy-thenaing a space ofblank tillabout 50 years. )the reignTnephachthus, theof Boc-fatherof Boc-chorus,chorus, accordingwho astonDiodorus, thecendedtheTechnatis of Phi-throneintare, ought to be812,one of this Dynasty?Manette begins with Sesonchosis or Sesonchis, and Osorthon, butplaces three other uncertain kings between this last and Tacellothis, andwith three others completes the 22d Dynasty. In the 23d, Manettebegins with Petubastes (Pet-past), a name not yet met with, thenOsorthon or Osorchon, and two other kings. Vide his catalogue,in p. 33.K 4136 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.Sheshonk* was supposed by the learned Sir I.Marshal, and other distinguished chronologists, tobe the same as Sesostris ; but this untenable hypothesishas long since been abandoned, and Sesostrishas resumed his place among the monarchs of anearlier dynasty. He was the Shishak of Scripture,who, in the fifth year of rehoboam (b. c. 971),marched against Judea with 1200 chariots and60,000 horse, and a numerous body of infantry,composed of Syrians, Sukkiimst, and Ethiopians;took all the walled towns of Judah ; and pillagedthe temple of Jerusalem t ; and though no veryextensive buildings remain erected by him, thesculptures he added on the walls of Karnak, sufficeto show that this campaign is recorded with thenames of the captured places. The king, as usual,presents his prisoners to the deity of the temple,and to each figure is attached an oval, indicatingthe town or district he represents: one of whichM. Champollion concludes to be the Yooda Melchiorkingdom of Judah ; a name whose componentletters agree with the hieroglyphics, though theIt was to this king that Jeroboam (led in !)&(). Solomon hadmarried the daughter of Pharaoh, i)rol)al)ly hiss immediate predecessor,about the year 101+. Josephus ,says that Egypt and Ethiopia wereat that tinge under the same monarch ; lent he con)niits a great error insupposing that " no egyptian king bore the title of Pharaoh after thefather-in-law of Solomon," the reverse being proved by the Jewishbooks which he pretends to (quote. Witness Pharaoh-echo andHoplira. Joseph. Antics. lib. viii. (i.f Some have supposed the Sukkiims to be the fabulous Troglodytes,and have [placed tiuin lear the Led Sea. Others bring themfrom (central Egypt. Some wiio have seen or heard of the sepulchralgrottoes hewn in the rocks at 'Thebes, have innocently fixed onthese as the habitations of the live Troglodytes, previous to theirappropriation for the dead Thebans.X 2 Chron. xii. 9.CHAP. II. SHESHONK OR SHISHAK. 137place it holds is not sufficiently marked to satisfythe scruples of a rigid sceptic.The era of Sheshonk is the first fixed point forthe establishment of chronological data ; and wehave been enabled, by reckoning backwards to theExodus, and from inscriptions on the monuments,to fix the probable duration and date of each reign.From the accession of Thothmes III., about 1495B. c, to the year 1068, twenty-three kings succeededto the throne of Egypt, which gives abouteighteen years to each reign ; and the ninety yearsintervening at the end of the 21st Dynasty, mayreadily be accounted for by assigning them tosovereigns whose names are lost.A very favourable argument in support of thedates I have given, is derived from the astronomicalsubject on the ceiling of the Memnonium atThebes, erected by Remeses the Great : wherethe heliacal rising of Solis is found to coincidewith the beginning of Thoth, which could onlyhave happened in the year 1322 b. c. j and thisfalls, according to my table, in the middle of hisreign. But whatever I offer on such intricatequestions is given with much deference, and Ishall willingly yield to the sounder judgment ofthe scientific reader.The aggressions of the Egyptian monarch inJudaea do not appear to have been repeated ; andthe Jewish Chronicles show that previous to thebattle with Zerah, king of Ethiopia *, the land ofThis indefinite name, Ethiopia, the country of burnt or blackfaces, always perplexes. Zerah could not have come from Ethiopia toTHE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. II.Judah was free from foreign invasion, " and had nowar * in those years," which gave Asa an opportunityof repairing and building fortified towns, forthe protection of his country. Nor do we find thesuccessors of Sheshonk undertaking any importantmilitary expedition ; and little remains on themonuments, relating to the other kings of the 22dand 23d Dynasties, except some tablets and religioussubjects in the temple of Karnak.24^/* Dynasty of 1 Spite.Name from Ancient Authors.Name from the Monuments.Ascendedthe Throne.Bocchoris (the Wise) "Ison of TnephachthusJPehor, Bakhor, or Amun-se-PehorB. c.The 9,5th Dynasty consisted of an Ethiopian Family.Name from AncientAuthors.Name from theMonuments.Events.Ascendedthe'Throne.Sabaco, So of SS. -Sebechon, SuvechusTraces, Tcarclius, TScarron of Strabo, lTirhakahof SS. JSabakophSherbetTelirakRome founded 75.3 b. r.Captivity of the ten tribes, 721Sennacherib attacks Judah <B. c.toBocchoris and his father Tnephachthus havebeen already mentioned ; and if we are unable todecide whether this last should be introduced intothe 23d or 21'th Dynasties, the same difficultyexists in the position of Asychis and Anysis.the .south of tht! (cataracts wliilc Sheshonk or O.sorkon ruled Egypt.Ill the Arabic version lie i.s styled King of India, and his name in theSc-|)tiiagint is written Are. In 2 Chron. xvi. H. mention is made ofthe I'"thio|)ians with the Lnhims (Syrians). The oval, supposed byMr. Salt of Zerah, is of a mich more amici king.2 Chiron. xiv. I. 6, 7.CHAP. II. SABACO THE SO OF SCRIPTURE. 139The reign of Sabaco has also been noticed ; andHerodotus, as we have seen, supposes Anysis tohave been restored to the throne after the secessionof the invader, and to have been succeededby Sethos (Se-ptliah), a priest of Pthah or Vulcan,who was cotemporary with Sennacherib and Tirha-kah. Manette, on the contrary, states that Sabacousurped the throne of Bocchoris, and Diodorusintroduces other monarchs between this last andthe Ethiopian. That he was not the Sabaco whoput Neco to death is evident, from a comparisonof the eras of Psamaticus and the Ethiopian monarch; nor could the flight of Psamaticus havetaken place during his reign ; and, unless we supposethe son of Neco to have lived to the age ofmore than 120 years, he could not have fled evenfrom the second of that name, or Shebek, the predecessorof Tirhakah.Sabaco is generally supposed to be the So* ofScripture, who made a treaty with Hosea king ofIsraeli; an event which led to the taking ofSamaria, and to the captivity of the ten tribes byShalmaneser king of Assyria ; and this I believe tohave happened a few years before the close of hisreign. Of Shebek, or Sabaco II., the name occursonly on the monuments of Thebes, and in the catalogueof I^Ianetho. By some he has been consideredthe Sethos of Herodotus ; but this name,which is properly Se-pthah (or the " Son of Pthah "),bears so strong a stamp of Mephitic origin thatSo, Soa, or Sua; the 2//yojp of the Septuagint.-j- 2 Kings, xvii. 4.140 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.we cannot feel disposed to assign it to the Ethiopianmonarch.With Tirhakah we are acquainted, both fromsacred and profane records ; and his successfulopposition to the power of Assyria is noticed inthe Bible*, may be traced in Herodotus t, andis recorded on the walls of a Theban temple, t Itis possible that in the early part of his reignSethos shared the kingdom with him, and ruledin Lower Egypt, while the Ethiopian monarchpossessed the dominion of the upper country ;and this would account for the absence of thename of Sethos on the monuments of Thebes.Whether Tirhakah and Sabaco's claims to thethrone of Egypt were derived from any rightacquired by intermarriage with the royal family ofthat country, and whether their dominion was atfirst confined to the Thebaid, it is difficult todetermine ; but the respect paid by their Egyptiansuccessors to the monuments § they erected arguesthe probability of their having succeeded to thethrone by right, rather than by usurpation, or theforce of arms.During the reign of Tirhakah, Sennacherib, kingof Assyria, threatened an incursion into LowerEgypt; and owing to the disaffection of the troops of2 Kiiif^H, xix. 0. " And wluii he (Scniuulu'rih) lizard say ofTirliakali king of Ktliiojjia, behold he is conic out to fight againstthee." Isaiah, xxxvii. '.). I'll Ik-rkel (fornuriy Napata) was his l'>thio-[)iaii capital, wiiero iiis name and Monnnicnts arc found.•f Ilcrod.ii. 111.J At Mcdccnet Ilabo;) arc the fijiurc and name of this king, and thecaptives he tf)()k.§ Sabaco's name is I'uund at Abydos.CHAP. II. DEFEAT OF SENNACHERIB. 141Sethos, Memphis and all that part of the countrywas in danger of falling a prey to the invader.Sethos, who had been a priest of Pthah, was moresolicitous, even after his elevation to the throne,for the observance of religious ceremonies than thewelfare of the state ; and induced by fanaticismto consider the services of the soldier unnecessaryfor the security of a country entrusted to the protectionof the gods, " he treated that class withextreme contempt, and, among other indignities,deprived them of their arurcp, or fields, which, bywayof reward, his predecessors had allowed to eachsoldier. They therefore refused to march againstthe Assyrians ; and in this dilemma the priest-kingretired to the shrine of the god, before which helamented his danger and misfortunes. He there sunkinto a profound sleep; and the deity, appearing tohim in a dream, promised that if he marched to meetthe enemy he should experience no injury, for thathe would furnish him with assistance. Inspired withconfidence from this vision, he put himself at thehead of his adherents, and advanced to Pelusium,the entrance of Egypt, unaccompanied by a singlesoldier, his army being entirely composed of tradesmenand artisans"* Nor was it long before thisassistance arrived. Tirhakah, having heard of theapproach of Sennacherib, marched with a numerousarmy from the Thebaid, and entering Palestine, defeatedthe Assyrians ; thus delivering Lower Egyptas well as Judaea from the arms of this powerfulHerodot. ii. 141. It might be supposed that the sections 164 —168. of the same book were intended to have been introduced here.142 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. U.invader. But the ingratitude, perhaps the jealousyof the Memphites, disguised the truth fromthe Greek historian, and the miraculous interpositionof Ptliah was affirmed to have been the causeof Sennacherib's defeat. Concealing the assistancereceived from the army of Tirhakah, the priestsassured Herodotus, that when the Assyrians orArabians and the feeble party commanded by Sethoswere encamped opposite each other, a prodigiousnumber of rats infested the enemy's camp by night,and gnawed in pieces their quivers and bows, as wellas the handles of their shields ; so that in the morning,finding themselves without arms, they fled inconfusion, and lost great numbers of their men.And in order to commemorate the event, a marblestatue of Sethos was erected in the temple ofPthali at Memphis, representing the king holdinga rat in his hand, with this inscription — '* Whoeverthou art, learn from my fortune to reverencethe gods."'* From Menes to this prince," adds the historian,*' was a period of .341 generations, in which therehad been as many high-priests, and the same numberof kings. And as three generations are equalto 100 years, the total of these may be estimatedat 11,310 years." Such arc the extravagant datesgiven by ancient writers.That Tirhakali ruled at Napata and in the Thebaidat the same period, is sufficiently proved bythe actions lie made to the temples of Thebes,and by the monunieiits he built in I*Hlii()j)ia ; Sordidthe Egyptians office this records, or forget theCHAP. ir. THE TWELVE KINGS. 143gratitude they owed to the defender of their country.The name of Nectanebo has indeed usurped theplace of Tirhakah's ovals in one or two instancesamong the sculptures at Thebes ; but such substitutionsare not uncommon, and the name of the Ethiopianhas not been erased from any ill-will, so oftenevinced when an obnoxious monarch had ceasedto reign. That he was a very potent prince, isevident from his defeat of the numerous army ofSennacherib* as well as from the monuments hehas left both in Egypt and Ethiopia, and his maintenanceof the Egyptian possessions in Asia; andhowever Strabo may have exaggerated his powerwhen he affirms that he extended his conquests,like Sesostris, into Europe, even as far as thePillars of Hercules, yet his authority is of use, asit leads to the conclusion that Tirhakah, or, ashecalls him, Tearcont, ruled Lower as well asUpper Egypt, to which he, perhaps, succeeded onthe death of the priest-king Sethos.According to Herodotus, twelve kings, or rathermonarchs, succeeded to the dominion of all Egypt;but it is probable they did not assume the title ofPharaoh, being only governors of the twelveprovinces or nomes into which the country wasdivided. On this occasion the historian sarcasticallyobserves, that " as the Egyptians werenot capable of existing a single instant withouta king, they elected twelve," each enjoying equalIn the Syriac and Arabic versions he is called Sanhedrin.■f Strabo, lib. xv.j Herodotus, ii. 147.144- THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. If.rank and authority. " They connected themselvesby intermarriages, solemnly promising topromote their common interests, and never toengage in any acts of separate policy : theirprincipal motive in this union being to guardagainst the declaration of an oracle, which hadpredicted that whoever among them should offera libation in the temple of Vulcan from a brazenvessel, should be sole sovereign of Egypt." Formany years they continued the management ofaffairs in perfect amity and mutual confidence, andno administration was more eminent for justice andimpartiality. An accident at length occurred tointerrupt their friendship. " On a certain occasionthey were called upon to offer sacrifice in thetemple of Vulcan j and when the last day of thefestival came, they prepared to make the accustomedlibation. For this purpose the chief priest presentedthe golden cups used on those solemnities;but having mistaken the number, he brought onlyeleven. Psammiticlnis *, who was the last, not havinga cup, took off his helmet, which was of brass, andpoured from it the libation. The other princeshad similar helmets, and wore them on the presentoccasion ; so that the circumstance of this oneking using his was accidental and unpremeditated; but when they observed what Psammiti-chus had done, and remembered the predictionof the oracle, they examined him, suspecting hehad acted designedly. Finding, however, thatThis is Ilcrodotu.s's mode of writing the name of P.sainatik, orP»aii)aticus.CHAP. ir. FULFILMENT OF THE ORACLE. 145it was purely accidental, they did not think himworthy of death, but were satisfied with deprivinghim of his regal power ; and, confining him to thelow lands of Egypt, they forbade him to leave thatdistrict, or to hold any communication with the restof the country."Things continued in this state for some time ;the eleven kings having taken the whole directionof affairs, and the dethroned prince still remainingin exile. Psamaticus, however, could not passivelysubmit to this uncalled-for treatment ; andfeeling the strongest resentment for the injury, hedetermined to be revenged upon his oppressors.With this view he sent to consult the oracle ofLatona at Butts, which had among the Egyptiansthe highest character for veracity, and receivedfor answer that the sea should avenge his causeby producing brazen men. He was little inclinedto believe that such an event could ever occur ;but some time afterwards a body of lonians andCarians, who had been engaged in a voyage ofplunder, were compelled by stress of weather totouch at Egypt and landed there, clad in brazenarmour. Some Egyptians, alarmed at their appearance,hastened to carry the news to Psamaticus ; andas they had never before seen persons so armed, theydescribed them as brazen men*, who had arisenfrom the sea, and were plundering the country.He instantly conceived this to be the accomplish-thesurprise of the Egyptians on seeing men clad in bronze orbrass armour would seem to imply that they used iron for the samepurpose. But can we trust this statement of Herodotus ? Psamaticus'shelmet was also of bronze, according to the same author.VOL. 1. L146 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II,ment of the oracular prediction ; and having enteredinto an alliance with the strangers, and engagedthem by splendid promises to unite with his Egyptianadherents, he vanquished the eleven kings, andmade himself master of the whole country.Previous to this event, the twelve kings are saidby Herodotus to have erected the famous labyrinthin the nome of Crocodilopolis, afterwards calledArsinoe ; but since the prior claims of Mceris *, asthe builder of that monument, appear to be fullyestablished, we can only suppose that Psamaticusand his coadjutors completed a work commencedmany ages previously by one of their early predecessors.In acknowledgment," continues the historian,•* of the assistance he had received from the Ionianand Marian strangers, Psammitichus conferred uponthem certain lands termed the camp, which weresituated opposite each other, on either bank of theriver ; and having fulfilled all his engagements withthem, he entrusted to their care some Egyptianchildren, to be instructed in the Greek language;and from those the present interpreters of Egypt aresaid to be descended. The district they inhabitedwas near the sea coast, a short distance belowBubastis, on the Persian branch of the Nile, andthe same Greek settlers continued in possessionof it for a considerable period ; till Amass, wishingto avail himself of their services against the Egyptians,removed them to Memphis. They were theride p. 92.CHAP. II. DIODORUS'S ACCOUNT. 14?first foreigners whom the Egyptians received amongthem;" and Herodotus* affirms, that even in histime, *' the places they formerly occupied, the docksof their ships, and the vestiges of their houses,might still be seen." Such is his account of thetemporary reign of the twelve kings, and of theaccession of Psamaticus to the throne.According to Diodorus, the anarchy which prevailedin Egypt, during two whole years, after therule of the Ethiopian princes, and the commotionsexcited by popular phrensy, suggested to the chiefmen of the country the expediency of assumingthe reins of government, and restoring order tothe state. With this view, twelve of the most influentialpersons were chosen to preside with regalpower. Each had a peculiar province allotted tohim, in which his authority was paramount ; andthough independent of one another, they boundthemselves by oaths of mutual concord and fidelity.During fifteen years their relations were maintainedwith the greatest harmony ; but as Psama-ticus, whose sway extended to the Mediterranean,had availed himself of the opportunities offered bythe seaports within his province of establishingcommercial intercourse with the Phoenicians andGreeks, and had amassed considerable wealth bythese means, his colleagues, jealous of his increasingpower, and fearing lest he should eventuallyemploy it against them, resolved to prevent his supposeddesigns, and to dispossess him of his province.Herodot. ii. 154-. f Diod. i. 66.L 2148 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.They therefore prepared to attack him, and by thisstep obliged Psamaticus to adopt measures whichhis ambition might not have contemplated. Apprisedof their resolutions, and finding himselfthreatened by the formidable army of all the upperprovinces, he sent to Arabia, Caria, and Ionia, and,having succeeded in raising a considerable body ofmercenaries, he was soon in a fit state to opposethem ; and, putting himself at the head of these andhis native troops, he gave them battle at Memphis,routed their combined forces, and obligingthose of the princes who had escaped the slaughterto fly to Libya, became possessed of an undividedthrone. This account is more consistent with reasonthan that of Herodotus, which Diodorus afterwardsnotices, and which he had the good judgmentnot to adopt. The fortuitous arrival of any greatnumber of Greeks is in itself improbable ; butthe necessity of believing that a party of pirates,driven upon the coast by adverse winds, paralysed acountry so powerful and well garrisoned as Egyptthen was, and uniting with the few adherents of theexiled Psamaticus, overcame the combined forces ofthe eleven kings, is alarming even to the credulous.No mention is made of the accession and dethronementof the twelve kings in the catalogue ofManctiio : and some might feel inclined to doubtthe veracity of the two historians, did not sometraces of these events appear in the sculptures.The titles " Pharaoh," " Soften," "king of men'*and " lord of the upper and lower country," wereapplied to those sovereigns who had the sole directir. TITLE OF Meek. 149tion of affairs while Egypt was an independentstate : the term " Melek" denoted an inferior gradeof " king," or was reserved for those who governedas tributaries or viceroys of a more powerfulprince, of which Egypt afforded some examplesafter the Persian conquest. To the twelve kings,each possessing a limited share in the sovereignty ofEgypt, the honours conferred on the sole monarchsof the country was necessarily refused, and Melekwas deemed a title of sufficient consequence toprecede their names : and while this accounts forPsamaticus being designated in some instances** Melek," and in others *' king of the upper andlower country," we have the satisfaction of findinghistory confirmed by the sculptures. Psamaticusthen, and his eleven coadjutors, had, during theperiod of their joint reign, the title o? Melek ; andall monuments on which his name, with this prefix,is met with, may be ascribed to that epoch.Psamaticus was son of that Neco who is said byHerodotus to have been put to death by Sabaco *,and perhaps the same who occurs as the third kingin the 26th Dynasty of Manette : but there is noreason to suppose him one of the twelve kings ;and if he really enjoyed the sovereign power, andruled the whole of Upper and Lower Egypt, it isprobable that his reign preceded the accession ofthose princes.side supra.L 3THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. II.^6th Dynasty of Sprite Kings.Name fromAncient Authors.;}StephinatbisNechepsusNechao I.Psammitichus -PsamaticusNechao II.Psammitichus "|Psammutis, or \Psammis - JVaphres, or A priesAmass, or AmosisPsaminicherites,or Psammeni-tusName from theSculptures.Psamatik I.NecoPsamatik 1 1.Psamatik III.Ames-Neit-seObservations.The Twelve Kings.Josiah defeated and slain,610 B. c.Neco's defeat by Nebuchadnezzar,606. A stellain the museum of Florencegives 71 years fromthe 3d of Neco to the35th of Amass.Captivity of Jehoiakim,599 B. c,Pliaraoh Ilophra of S. S. ;probably not the same asPsamatik III.Babylon taken by Cyrus,538. Date of his 44thyear, on the monuments.AscendedtheThrone.Psamaticus had no sooner become sole master ofEgypt than he turned his attention to the internaladministration of the country, and the suppressionof party feeling consequent upon the late events.With this view he endeavoured to ingratiate himselfwith the priesthood and the people, by erectingmany splendid monuments, and beautifying thesacred edifices in the principal cities of Upper andLower Egypt. At Thebes he made considerableadditions to the great temple of Amun, now calledKarnak ; and at Memphis the southern vestibuleof tile temple ol" Pthah was erected by him, andopposite to it a magnificent edifice tor Apis, whereCHAP. II. THE HOUSE OF APIS. 151he was kept when publicly exhibited. The wallswere richly decorated with sculpture, and its roofwas supported by colossal figures twelve cubits inheight, which served the purpose of columns, andrepresented the king himself in the character ofOsiris, whose emblems he bore in either hand ;and in order to give the reader some idea of thisbuilding, I have introduced a view of the interior,restored according to the style and proportions ofsimilar courts in the temples of Thebes.In the meantime, a strong feeling of jealousywas excited among the troops, in consequence ofthe marked favour shown by the king to the foreignauxiliaries ; and though they submitted patientlyfor many years, at length their secret discontent wasopenly manifested. That Psamaticus should havebeen indebted for the possession of his crown tothe aid and interposition of strangers, who, viewedthrough the unfavourable medium of strong prejudice,appeared an inferior and impure race, wasin the highest degree humiliating to the Egyptianarmy, however disposed they might have been toacknowledge his claims and the injustice of his previousexile ; and more tact was required to soothethe ruffled feelings of the soldier than of the peopleor the priests. The precautions necessary underthese circumstances were altogether neglected bythe king, who either failed to observe their growingdisaffection, or totally disregarded it, *' discoveringon all occasions a preference of the foreigners tothe disparagement of his native troops * : " and heDiodorus, lib. i. Lxvii.L 4152 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.was not only guilty of injustice towards many ofthem, by prolonging their usual time of garrisonduty *, in the frontier towns of Mare, Daphneof Pelusium, and Elephantine, where they continuedthree years without being relieved, but heeven deprived them of the post of honour in theSyrian war, and assigned the right wing to theGreek troops, and the left to the Egyptians, tUpon this, their indignation knew no bounds ;and, quitting the camp, they, joined by other regimentswhich had remained in Egypt, abandonedthe service of Psamaticus, and, to the numberof 240,000, retired into Ethiopia. As soon as theking received intelligence of it, he endeavouredto dissuade them from their project ; and havingfollowed them himself as far as Elephantine t, hesent forward the Greek auxiliaries, and some ofhis most faithful Egyptian adherents, with instructions,if possible, to prevail on them to return.It was not till after they had passed Aboccis § inEthiopia, that these emissaries of the Egyptianmonarch overtook them ; and using every kind ofremonstrance and entreaty, they solemnly conjuredthem not to desert the gods of their country,their wives and families: but all without effect;and one of them tauntingly observed, that, whereii. :}(). i Dioil. i. ()7.J Diodorus siiys lir first scil to tliciu, mid then followed by waterto the confines oi' I'',ij;\ |)t. 'Julie inscription at Ahoosinihel, written leythe (Greeks wiio accompanied him, coniirnis this, stating positively thatKing; Psamaticus went as far as I^lcpliantine :" — " HAi:iAi;()i; HAOON-'Foi: Ki: KAK'I'AN'IINAN M'AMATIXO."^ Aboccis I snjiposc to have stood near Ahoosiinbel. They musthave gone beyond this place before they overtook them.CHAP. II. DESERTION OF THE TROOPS. 153ever they went, provided they had their arms, andproved themselves to be men, they could alwaysobtain both wives and children.Continuing their march into Upper Ethiopia,they entered the service of the monarch of thatcountry, and in return received a considerable extentof territory upon the confines, from which theEthiopian prince ordered them to expel a tribe ofpeople at that time in rebellion against him : andthis migration of the Egyptian troops introducingthe arts and manners of a refined nation, had a verysensible effect in civilising the Ethiopians." *The exact position of the country they occupiedis unknown. Herodotus places it on the Nile, atabout the same distance beyond Meroe as this lastis from Elephantine, or fifty days' journey t ; andadds that these Automoli (deserters) " are knownby the name of Asmach, which being translatedsignifies ' standing on the left hand ' of the king."Strabo states that 'they settled near Meroe,which was afterwards governed by their queen ; "and calls them " Sebritffi, a name implying strangers:but Pliny §, on the authority of Aristocracy,reckons " seventeen days from Meroe to Esar, acity II of the Egyptians who fled from Psamaticus,and who are reported to have lived there 300years."A singular connection may be observed betweenthe names given by different writers to this peopleHerodot. ii. 30. -f This distance is unreasonable.J Strabo, 16. § Plin. vi. 30.II Strabo calls their country Tones's.154> THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.and their country. " Esar," says Pliny, " is calledby Sion Sapen, and is supposed to mean strangers;" and the neighbouring Symbari, Demerits,Sambre, and Sembolitis, cannot fail to recall theSeries of Strabo, or the great similarity of thewords shemmo, " a stranger," and ber, '* new," inthe ancient Egyptian language. It is not less remarkablethat Esar is the pure Arabic word signifying" the left hand," synonymous with shemal ;and this last is plainly pointed out in the ao-fxa^ ofHerodotus, where the letter ^ h^s been accidentallychanged for the letter x it so much resembles.It is highly improbable that 240,000 men couldhave had any duty *' on the left hand of the king;"a post, moreover, reserved for the sons of the monarch,or the chief persons of the country; and wemay rather conclude this name to have beenassumed in commemoration of the affront offeredthem by Psamaticus, and the cause of their desertion; or to have been given these strangers* inconsequenceof their coming from the left, or north,which was considered the left t of the world, andis still so called (Sheindl) by the Arabs of thepresent day.The reign of Psamaticus continued fifty-fouryears, twenty-nine of which he employed in thesiege and capture of a large town of Syria calledAzotust; and since Diodorus tells us that theTlicy lead, pcrh;i|)s, the two luuncs — "strangers," and "peoplefrom the left."■f Tiic cast was the front, the west the hark, of the world. Pliifarchsupposes the north to i)e the rij^lit side of the world. Dc Isid. s. 'A'^.J Now Ezdod, or Eshdood. Azotiis (Ashton) was on the coastbetween Gaza and Joppa.CHAP. II. EXPERIMENT ON LANGUAGE, 155defection of his troops happened during the Syrianwar, it is probable that the taking of Azotus precededthat event.It was in his reign, and by his order, that an idleexperiment, since repeated in later times, was madeto discover the language of nature, or at least toascertain the oldest nation, and the oldest tongue.The account is thus given by Herodotus. * " Beforethe reign of Psammitichus, the Egyptians consideredthemselves the most ancient of men ; butthis prince having taken considerable pains toinvestigate the truth of the matter, the result was,that they reckoned the Phrygian more ancientthan themselves, and themselves than the rest ofmankind. Psammitichus himself suggested thefollowing method of solving the question. A shepherdwas ordered to take two children just born,of humble parentage, and to pay particular attentionto their early habits, and the mode of bringingthem up. He was strictly enjoined never to speakin their presence, to place them in a sequesteredhut, and at proper intervals to allow them to suckthe milk of goats, whilst he was attending to otheremployments. By this means the king expectedto ascertain what word they would of their ownaccord first articulate. The experiment succeededto his wish : the shepherd complied with everyparticular of his instructions ; and at the end of twoyears, on paying his usual morning visit, and openingthe door of their apartment, both the children■* * Herod, ii. 2.156 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.extended their arms towards him, in an attitude ofsupplication, and pronounced the word * becos.' *It did not at first excite his attention ; but, on theirrepeating the same expression whenever he appeared,he thought it right to mention the circumstanceto his master, who ordered the childrento be brought before him. When Psammitichusheard them repeat the same word, he sought to discoveramong what people it was used, and found itwas the Phrygian name for bread ; and on thisaccount the Egyptians, after they had seriouslyconsidered the matter, were led to the conclusionthat the Phrygian were of greater antiquity thanthemselves. That this experiment was really made,I myself heard at Memphis from the priests ofVulcan ; but the Greeks, in order to embellish thestory, relate that Psammitichus caused the childrento be nursed by women whose tongues had beenpreviously cut out."During the whole of his reign, Psamaticus maintaineda direct intercourse with the Greeks, andestablished commercial relations with them as wellas the Phoenicians t ; and so much encouragementwas given to foreigners that many settled in LowerEgypt; and by means of the constant communicationbetween Euroj)c and Egypt, the Greeks becameacquainted with a country whose history andinternal administration had been previously unknownto them. And the liberal policy of thisOr Bcc; the i>.t hnwj, a (Jrcck fciiiiiniitioii. M. L:irc!icr ingeniouslysupposes it to Have l)ceii in iiiiilatioii of the cry oltlie i.<>atij.f niodor. i. .!)6.CHAP. II, INCURSIONS OF Tie Scythian. 157monarch continued to be followed at a subsequentperiod, particularly by Amass, who reigned before,and by Nectanebo who lived after, the Persianinvasion.In the reign of Psamaticus, the Scythianss*having subjugated the whole of Asia, advancedtowards Egypt with the intention of invading thatcountry. They had expelled the Cimmerian fromEurope ; and led by their valiant king Madras,they over-ran the provinces to the left of MountCaucasus on their way from the Palus Mantis, anddefeated Cyaxares, the Median monarch, who wasbesieging Ninus (Nineveh), the capital of Assyria.They then penetrated into Syria ; and Psamaticus,alarmed at their approach, went forward to meetthem, and partly by presents, and partly by entreaty,prevailed upon them to desist from their project jthus saving Egypt from the aggressions of a dangerousfoe.Psamaticus was succeeded by his son Neco II.,whose wars and successes in Syria are recorded bysacred as well as profane writers. Studious ofmilitary renown and the promotion of commerce,he had no sooner ascended the throne than he appliedhimself to the re-organisation of the army andthe equipment of a powerful fleet ; and, recollectingthe imprudent conduct of his father, he avoidedall innovations which might tend to alienate thegood will of his people, or sow the seeds of discordamong his troops ; and while he courted the friendshipof the Greeks, and appreciated the importantHerodot. i. 104, 103.158 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.services he received from auxiliaries of that nation,he laid aside every appearance of partiality, treatingthem with proper consideration, and giving them apost next to the Egyptian troops, as his wise predecessorshad done to their allies in the wars of Asia.In the Mediterranean * he fitted out a fleet oftriremes, and another in the Red Sea ; and havingengaged some expert Phoenician pilots and mariners,he sent them on a voyage of discoveryalong the coast of Africa. *' They were orderedto start from the Arabian Gulf, and come roundthrough the Pillars of Hercules (now the Straits ofGibraltar) into the North Sea, and so return toEgypt. Sailing, therefore, down the Gulf, theypassed into the Southern Ocean ; and when autumnarrived they laid up their ships, and sowed theland. Here they remained till harvest time ; and,having reaped the count, they continued theirvoyage. In this manner they occupied two years ;and the third having brought them by the Pillars ofHercules to Egypt, they related (what to me appearsincredible, however others may be disposed to believeit), that they had the sun on their right hand ;and by these means was the form of Africa firstknown." The historian t then relates, on the authorityof the Carthaginianss, a second attempt tocircumnavigate that continent, under Sataspes, theHerodotus calls it thu; North Sea. Tlic Arabs now style it theWhite Sea.-j- It may a|)|)car siiii,Miiar that they siioiiUI carry grain for this purpose;but the same was done by Tiniur in his march to China, whoiia.'i with his army wafrf^ons laden with seed corn.I Herod, iv. +2, 43.CHAP. II. VOYAGES ROUND AFRICA. 159son of Teases, a Persian, who, being alarmed at thelength of the voyage and the dreary solitude of thoseregions, returned without accomplishing his task.He had been condemned to the cross by Xerxes foroffering violence to the daughter of Zephyrus, the sonof Megabyzus ; but his mother the sister of Darius,obtained his pardon on condition of his going roundAfrica. He therefore repaired to Egypt ; andhaving there engaged a ship and crew, he sailedto the Pillars of Hercules, entered the ocean, andpassed the promontory of Soles on the coast ofAfrica. * He thence continued southwards ; but,after spending several months at sea, he returned toEgypt, and endeavoured to exculpate himself tothe king, saying he found it impossible to proceed.Xerxes, however, rejected this excuse, and inflictedupon him the punishment to which he had beenpreviously condemned.That similar expeditions round Africa were performedby other people is testified by ancient authors;and that of the Carthaginianss under Annowas described in Punic by the commander himself,and afterwards translated into Greek. Pliny states tthat " Anno, a Carthaginian, circumnavigatedthe continent of Africa, from Gades to the extremityof the Arabian Gulf, and wrote all thedetails of his voyage, which was undertaken at theperiod when Carthage was most flourishing;" andThe promontory of Soles, or Soloentia, called also the Libyanheadland ; and supposed by some to be the Cape Canton of modernAfrica, at the western extremity of Mount Atlas.f Plin. lib. ii. 67., and lib. v. 1.; and Arran's Rerum India, ad fin.160 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.*' founded several towns on the coast," none ofwhich remained in the reign of Vespasian. Healso mentions a certain Eudoxus, a cotemporary ofCornelius Nepos and of Ptolemy Lathyrus *, whowent round Africa from the Arabian Gulf toGades : and others before him were reported tohave performed the same journey for the purposesof commerce. tThe voyage of Anno happened some time afterthat undertaken by order of Neco ; the honour,therefore, of being the first to equip an expeditionfor the purpose of making this discovery belongs tothe Egyptian monarch, who thereby ascertainedthe peninsular form of Africa, about twenty-onecenturies before the Cape of Good Hope was seenby Diazt, or doubled by Vasco de Gama.In mentioning the expedition sent by Neco,Herodotus makes one remark which is singular,from its confirming the truth of the statementsdetailed to him by the Egyptians ; for it is evidentthey could not have passed the Cape of GoodHope without observing the phenomenon he mentions; and the assertion that the sun (when rising)was on their right hand, though so improbableto Herodotus, is highly satisfactory to his modernPliny sa3.s he fled Iroiii that kinj,', "cum Latliiirtiin rcgcin fiigcrct;"but (ortil)ly sent hy liii is more probable. Plin. ii. 07.-(- I'lin. lor. cit. lib. ii.'^ liartliokiiiew Dia discovered it in list, in the reign of John II.,King of" Portugal, but did not land. He named it Capo Torments,froui the storms he experienced there ; but the king afterwardschanged its name to Cape of (Food Hope ; and Emanuel, his successor,sent Vasco de (Fama, in ll!>7, vvitii orders to double it andproceed to India.CHAP. ir. CANAL TO THE RED SEA. l6lreaders, who are indebted to him for thus expressinghis doubts, and the proofs of a fact which mightotherwise have been called in question.Previous to projecting this voyage of discovery,Neco had commenced re-opening the canal fromthe Nile to the Red Sea, which had been cutmany years before by Sesostris, or Remeses theGreat. The work, however, if we may believeHerodotus, was abandoned; an oracle warning theEgyptian monarch that he was labouring for thebarbarian. * This may be true ; but we cannotattach any credit to the statement that 120,000Egyptians perished before he desisted from theundertaking ; or, that he was the first who commencedthe canal t ; and not only do Pliny t,Strabo, and Aristotle attribute it to Sesostris, butthe monuments which remain in the towns uponits banks afford a satisfactory testimony of the accuracyof those writers II, and of the erroneousinformation of Herodotus and Diodorus.Neco also turned his attention to the Egyptianconquests in Asia ; and fearing lest the growingpower of the Babylonians should endanger theterritories acquired by the arms of his victoriouspredecessors, he determined to check their pro-thesame may be applied to the projected communication by theEuphrates.■j- Vide supra, p. 70. Herodotus and Diodorus mention Neco as theprojector of the canal.% Plin. vi. 33. " Navigable alveum per ducere in Nilum . . . primusomnium Sesostris . . . cogitavit, mox Darius . . . delude Ptolcm^ussequens."§ Strabo (17.) says," The canal was commenced by Sesostris, beforethe Trojan war. Some suppose by Psammitichus, the son, whoonly began the work, and died. It was afterwards finished by Darius."II Assuming him to be Remeses II.VOL. I. M16'2 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.dress, and to attack the enemy on his own frontier.With this view he collected a powerful army, andentering Palestine, followed the route along thesea-coast of Judea, previously taken by the Egyptiansunder various kings, who had penetratedinto Asia, intending to besiege the town of Carchemish* on the Euphrates, t But Josiah, king ofJudah, offended at the passage of the Egyptian armythrough his territories, resolved to impede, if hewas unable to prevent, their march. Necot, learningof the approach of the Jewish monarch, and apprisedof his intentions, sent messengers to engagehim to desist from his uncalled-for interference, assuringhim that he had no hostile intentions againstJudaea, but against an enemy with whom he was atwar; that his expedition was undertaken by thesanction, and at the express command of God ; andwarning Josiah lest his imprudence should be fatalto him. § This conciliatory message was of no avail ;and Josiah having posted himself in the valley ofMegiddo, prepared to oppose the Egyptians.Megiddo was a city in the tribe of Manasseh,between forty and fifty miles to the north of Jerusalem,and within three hours of the coast, and iscalled by Herodotus Magdolus. In this valley theCalled Manbcg ■^■^^-•0 in the Arabic, and Magog in the Syriacversions.f 2 Chiron. xxxv. 20. " Ncciio, king of Egypt, came np to fightagainst-'archeinish, by Euphrates."\ In the Targnni, or (Mialdfe Parable., and the Syriac and Arabicversions, Neco is calk-d " the lame Pliaraoh."§ 2 (Chron. xxx.^l. " J>nt he (Neiho) sent ambassadors to him,saying, What have I to do vvitii thee, timon king of Judah ? 1 come notagainst thee this day, but against the house wherewith I have war: forGod commanded me to make haste. Forbear then from nied<llingwit!) (hod, who is with me, that he destroy thee not."CHAP. II. DEFEAT OF JOSIAH. 1 63feeble forces of the Jewish king attacked the Egyptians;but they were routed with great slaughter,and Josiah being wounded in the neck with anarrow*, ordered his attendants to take him from thefield. Escaping from the heavy showers of arrowswith which their broken ranks were overwhelmed,they removed him from the chariot in which he hadbeen wounded, and placing him in "a second onethat he had," they conveyed him to Jerusalem,where he died, tIntent upon his original project, Neco did notstop to revenge himself upon the Jews for theaffront they had offered him ; but continued hismarch to the Euphrates. Three months had scarcelyelapsed, when, returning victorious from the captureof Carchemish and the defeat of the Babylonians,he learned that, though Josiah had leftan elder son, Jehoahaz had caused himself to beproclaimed king on the death of his father, withoutintimating his intention, or soliciting him to sanctionhis election ; and, considering this neglect asatoken of hostile feeling, he was highly incensed,and resolved on punishing his insolence. With thisview he ordered Jehoahaz to meet him '* at RiblahtOn the authority of the Arabic version ; which also says he waskilled at Megiddo, being wounded by Pharaoh with two arrows.■j- 2 Chron. xxxv. 22. et seq. " Josiah would not turn his face fromhim, but disguised himself, that he might fight with him, and hearkenednot unto the words of Echo from the mouth of God, and came tofight in the valley of Megiddo. And the archers shot at king Josiah :and the king said to his servants. Have me away, for I am sorewounded. His servants therefore took him out of that chariot, andput him in the second chariot that he had : and they brought him toJerusalem, and he died."X The Syriac and Arabic versions have Death. The Hebrew dand r are easily mistaken.M 2l64f THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.in the land of Hamath*;" and having deposedhim, and condemned the land to pay a tribute of100 talents of silver t, and a talent of gold t, hecarried him a prisoner to Jerusalem. On arrivingthere, Neco made Eliakim, the eldest son of Josiah,king in the room of his father, and changed hisname to Jehoiakim ; and, taking the silver and goldwhich had been levied upon the Jewish people,returned to Egypt, with the captive Jehoahaz,w^lio there terminated his short and unfortunatecareer.The victories and triumphant return of Osirei,the Remeses, and many Egyptian monarchs, arerepresented on the walls of the Theban temples,or in other parts of Egypt and Nubia ; and theconquerors are seen to present their prisoners tothe deity, to whose special savoir' they supposedthemselves indebted for the success of their arms.We might, therefore, reasonably expect to find someindication of the victory, gained over the Babyloniansand Jews, especially as the name of Necooccurs among the hieroglyphics in the groat hallof Karnak : but this is the sole record of him atThebes, and merely tends to show that he ruledboth the upper and lower country. And thoughhis ovals occur on vases, and some small objects ofart, no sculptures record his victories, or the gloriesof his reign j and a subject of such great interest as2 Kings, xxiii. .3.S. Now Ilainali.f Reckoning the IIel)re\v silver talent at 35li/. lis. 10^^/., this sumis 35,359/. 7.V. Gd.t 50751. \5s. 7ir/. The total being 40,435/. 3*. \id.CHAP. ir. JERUSALEM OR Capitis. 1 65the defeat of the Jewish king is in vain looked foron the monuments of Egypt.The success of Neco, in his conflict with Josiahat Megiddo, and the taking of Jerusalem, arenoticed by profane as well as by sacred writers.Herodotus* who includes the Jews under thegeneral name of Syrians, says, that he routed themat Magdolus, and afterwards took Cadets, a largecity of Syria, in Palestine, which, he adds, in hisopinion, " is very little less than Sardis."t Andthat by Cadets he means Jerusalem is evident,from the ancient Jewish as well as the modernHebrew and Arabic name of that city ; Kadushat,** the holy," being an epithet applied by the Hebrewsto Jerusalem, as el Gods or Cots is the nameby which it is known to the Arabs at the presentday. This title it received after the building ofthe temple by Solomon.Pleased with his successes, the Egyptian monarchdedicated the dress he wore in the campaign tothe deity who was supposed to have given himthe victory, whom Herodotus, with the prejudicesnatural to a Greek, believed to be the Apollo ofMiletus. § But Neco did not long enjoy the advantageshe had obtained ; and in the fourth yearHerod, ii. 159. t Herod, iii. 5.J The sh is easily converted into th, even in Eastern dialects, andstill more readily is t substituted for sh by the Greeks, who had not thesound of the Hebrew and Arabic sh. El Gods also signifies " theholy."§ " The vest he consecrated to Apollo, and sent to the MilesianBranchial," ii. 159. Nothing can be more improbable, consideringthe contempt in which the Greeks and their religious notions wereheld by the Egyptians, than that Neco should have preferred a Greekdeity to the whole Pantheon of his own gods.M 3166 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.after that expedition, alarmed at the increasingpower of the Babylonians, and desirous to checktheir incursions into those provinces which hadlong been tributary to Egypt, and had cost hispredecessors much trouble to subdue, he againmarched into Syria, and advanced to the Euphrates.The Babylonians were prepared for his approach :Nebuchadnezzar opposed him with a powerful army,completely routed the Egyptians, recovered thetown of Carchemish, and, pushing his conqueststhrough Palestine, took from the Egyptian monarchall the territory belonging to the Pharaohs, fromthe Euphrates to the southern extremity of Syria.*Nor was it in the power of Neco to recover theprovinces thus wrested from him ; and he wasobliged patiently to submit to these losses, andto content himself with the defence of his ownfrontier, tJerusalem now became subject to the victoriousBabylonian ; and some time after, being displeasedwith the Jewish king, Nebuchadnezzar carried awaythe sacred vessels from the tcm})ks and led manynoble youths, with Jehoiakim himself, prisoners toBabylon . The calamities of the Jews did not terminatehere. 'J'he ensuing year Nebuchadnezzar2 Kings, xxiv. 7. "And the king of Egypt caiiic not again anymoreout olliis land, for the king of IJalnlon had taken from the riverof Egypt unto the river euphrates all that pertained to the king ofl':gypt."-{• This defeat of Net " happened in the forth year of Jehoiakim,"when " Nebuchadnezzar, king of J5a!)y!on, smote hin) by the riverI'jiphratcs in Carcheniish." Jereni. xlvi. 2.I Or Nai)nciiodonosor II., the son of Nabopolazzar, who had associatedhim in the kingdom. The Arabs call him liokhtonusr. Thecommencement of the name is the title '^ Lord," which is found in theCHAP. II. MESSAGE FROM THE Leans. lG7sent for Jehoiachin, the son of the deposed monarch,who, though only eight years of age*, had beenchosen to succeed him, and appointed Zedekiah,*' his father's brother," king in his stead. Tenthousand captives, among whom were the principalpeople of Jerusalem, 7000 fighting men, and 1000smiths and artificers, with the treasures of thetemple and the palace, were carried to Babylon ;and Zedekiah became a vassal of the Chaldeanmonarch.A short time previous to the captivity of Jeho-hakim Neco died, and was succeeded by Psama-ticus II., whom Herodotus calls Psammis. Littleworthy of remark took place during his reign, exceptan expedition into Ethiopia, and the arrivalof an embassy from the Eleans.t *' These peopleboasted that the regulations of the Olympic gameswere the most just and unobjectionable that had everbeen instituted; and that even the Egyptians, whowere considered the wisest of men, could not inventany of a more perfect kind. On their arrival inEgypt they explained the object of their mission ;the king, therefore, convoked an assembly of menreputed for their wisdom and experience, beforewhom the Leans stated the rules of their games, inquiringat the same time of they could suggest anyimprovements. After some consultation, the Egyptiansasked whether any of their fellow-citizensancient Egyptian Neb, the Indian Need, Nawab, and the Arab Nail.Nus implies " victory."2 Chron. xxxvi. 9., differing from the account in 2 Kings, xxiv. 8.f Herod, ii. 160. Diodorus (i. 05.) says they sent to Anabasis.M 4-THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.were permitted to contend at the games ; and uponbeing informed that every one, either of their ownor any other Greek state, was at liberty to enterthe lists, they decided that such regulations weredirectly at variance with every notion of justice ;since it was impossible for them not to favour theirfellow citizens, to the prejudice of a candidate fromanother place.And they concluded by saying, * If you arereally anxious for impartiality, and have come toEgypt to learn our opinion, we recommend youto exclude the Leans, and to confine the games toforeign competitors.' "Psamaticus II. was succeeded by the third ofthat name; but whether he was the same as Apriesremains uncertain. Of Apries, or Vaphres, we havesome account in Herodotus and Diodorus, and he isstyled in the Bible history Pharaoh llophra.* Hiscontemporary in JudiL'a was Zedekiah, who had beenmade king by Nebuchadnezzar, and who, thinkingthat a favourable opportunity now presented itselffor throwing off the Babylonian yoke, made a treatywith the king of Egypt. But the war in whichApries was engaged with the Syrians, and afterwardswith the Cyreneans, prevented his affordingany great assistance to his ally ; and though his•* army," by entering Judaea, obliged " the Chaldeans" to raise the siege of Jerusalem t, andretire from their ]positions, the king of Babylon,having again advanced to that (capital, succeededIMirfih llophra, »iDn nunc. In the ('hiildcc l*iir;i|)li. N-i':n.•j- Jtreininh, xxxvii. 8. I 1.CHAP. II. PROPHECIES. REIGN OF Aries. 169in taking it in the eleventh year of Zedekiah, rasedit to the ground, and carried away the remainderof the people captives. And this momentary aid,and the inutility of placing reliance on the protectionof A pries, led Ezekiel to compare the Egyptiansto a broken reed *, which was to pierce thehand of him who leaned upon it.Many other prophecies respecting the calamitiesconsequent upon this treaty with Egypt, and therebellion of the Jews against the Babylonians, aremet with in the Bible; and Egypt itself was threatenedby the arms of the victorious Nebuchadnezzar.But it is difficult to determine in what time and inwhat manner the last prophecy was accomplished,or to discover the extent of the calamities whichhappened to Egypt from the conquests of the Babylonians,though the scriptural account appearsto fix those events to the time of Nebuchadnezzar.They may, however, refer to the reverses of Apries,and to the subsequent confusion which prevailed inEgypt after the rebellion of Amass.The commencement of the reign of Apries wasprosperous, and he was considered " the mostfortunate monarch who had hitherto ruled inEgypt, next to his grandfather Psammitichus."He sent an expedition against the island of Cyprus;besieged and took Gaza and the city of Sidon ;engaged and vanquished the king of Tyre bysea ; and, being uniformly successful, he madeEzek. xxix. 6, 7. f Herod, ii. IGl.J This is foretold by Jeremiah, xlvii. 1., "Before that Pharaoh tookGaza," or Azah; properly Ghazi, or Ghuzzeh, which is the modernname.170 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.himself master of Phoenicia and Palestine, recoveringmuch of the territory, and that influence inSyria which had been taken from Egypt by thevictories of Nebuchadnezzar. He next sent anarmy against the Cyreneans of Libya ; but herefortune deserted him : his troops were defeated,and, mortified by this severe and unexpected check,they attributed their disgrace to Apries himself,imagining that so disastrous a project could onlyhave been devised by one who was desirous of theirdestruction. They felt persuaded that his viewswere to weaken the power of the military class,and thus to remove the only barrier to that ambitionwhich aimed at nothing less than absolutedominion, and the subversion of the liberty of hissubjects: and excited by these feelings, and meditatingrevenge for the sufferings and disgrace theyhad already endured, the recurrence of which couldonly be prevented by a timely declaration of theirsentiments, they refused to acknowledge his authority; and being joined by the friends of those whohad been slain, they openly raised the standard ofrevolt. The news of this event greatly surprisedand exasperated the king ; but deeming it moreprudent to adopt mild and conciliatory measures,he sent Amass, one of his abk\st generals, withorders to use every endeavour to appease thetumult, and to persuade the mutineers to return totheir (city.Amass, having arrived at the cam), addressedthe soldiers in an a])pr()j)riate speech ; begging themto desist from their purpose, and to jay respect toCHAP. II. AMASIS REBELS AGAINST HIM. Iithe royal authority, as they had previously done,and as was due to one who had their interest atheart. While he was speaking, an Egyptian, whostood behind him, placed a helmet on his head,proclaiming him king, and affirming, in the nameof his comrades, that they were willing to acknowledgehim as their master, and the ruler of Egypt.Though far from expecting such a proceeding,Amass required little persuasion to accept thehonour conferred upon him by so powerful abody •, and being sensible that further attempts torecall their allegiance to Apries would be fruitless,and to sacrifice his own advantage would not benefithis sovereign, he acquiesced in the resolutionsof those who had elected him as their chief, andput himself" at their head.Apries, on receiving intelligence of what hadhappened, despatched Patarbemis, one of the mosteminent men of his court, with directions to bring;Amass alive to his presence. Having arrived atthe camp, he told Amass the purport of his mission,and the order of the king to appear before him.Amass, who was seated on horseback, treatedPatarbemis with indignity, and sent an insultingmessage to his master; adding, that he intendedto go of his own accord, and hoped Apries wouldnot take any trouble in looking for him, as heshould soon present himself to his majesty withseveral companions. Patarbemis, fully comprehendinghis intention, from his manner of speaking,and seeing the preparations he was making, returnedwithout loss of time to acquaint his sove-172 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.reign with the state of affairs. No sooner had hearrived than Apries, finding he had failed to bringAmass, without either inquiring the reason orlistening to his statement, commanded his noseand ears to be cut off: an order which was immediatelycarried into execution. This barbarousand uncalled-for outrage, committed upon one somuch esteemed by all classes, exasperated eventhose who had hitherto sided with Apries, and thegreater part without hesitation deserted him, andwent over to Amass. Finding himself thus abandonedby the Egyptians, he collected the auxiliarytroops who were about him, consisting of 30,000lonians and Carians, and prepared to oppose theenemy. The hostile armies met at Memphis,Apries leading his small band of Greeks and thefew Egyptians who had remained faithful to him,and Amass at the head of the native troops. Theforeigners fought bravely, but, greatly inferior innumbers, they were obliged at length to give way;and Apries, falling alive into the hands of theEgyptians, was carried prisoner to Sais, where hewas confined in the palace he had previously inhabitedas king, which now belonged to his rival.Amass did not show himself unworthy of thesuccess he had obtained, and the singular favour offortune. He treated his royal prisoner with greatkindness, and used all his influence to preserve hislife, in oj)))()sition to the representations and wishesof the Egyptians ; nor did he yield to their urgentrequest, till they accused him of treatingthem with injustice, by showing favour to one whoCHAP. II. DEATH OF Aries FORETOLD IN S. S. 173was their enemy. Unable, therefore, to opposedemands put forth under colour of a right, Amassconsented, with reluctance, to deliver up his captiveto their resentment: and " having strangledthe unfortunate Apries, they buried him in thetomb of his ancestors, which was in the sacredinclosure of Minerva's temple, very near the principaledifice, on the left, entering. In this buildingall the princes of the Saite house were interred,and among the number Amass also ; but his sepulchreis more remote from the principal buildingthan those of Apries and his predecessors."Such, according to Herodotus, was the tragicalend of Apries ; a monarch who, in the zenith ofhis glory, felt persuaded it was not in the powerof a deity to dispossess him of the kingdom, orto shake the stability of his sway.* And this accountof his arrogance satisfactorily accords withthe Bible, where Ezekiel speaks of the "king ofEgypt" as " the great dragon that lieth in the midstof the rivers, which hath said, My river is mine own,and I have made it for myself;" and his overthrowand subsequent captivity and death are foretold byJeremiah, with remarkable precision, in the followingwords t: — " I will give Pharaoh Hophra, kingof Egypt, into the hands of his enemies, and intothe hands of them that seek his life."The slight acquaintance we are able to obtain ofthe state of Egypt prevents our discovering theprecise mode in which the fulfilment of the otherHerod, ii. 169. f Ezek. xxix. 3.J Jeremy. xliv. 30.174 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.predictions took place. Amain-No*, or Thebes,and Egypt, with their gods and kings, were to bepunished, and Pharaoh, and all that trusted in him,to be delivered into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar,and of his servants ; Egypt was to be given intothe hands of the people of the north t, and afterwardsto be inhabited as in the days of old.Still more severely is it denounced in the propheciesof Ezekiel. tThe Deity threatens to make the land of Egyptutterly waste and desolate, from the tower ofSyene § even unto the border of Ethiopia. || Nofoot of man shall pass through it, nor foot of beastshall pass through it, neither shall it be inhabitedforty years. And I will make the land of Egyptdesolate in the midst of the countries that are desolate,and her cities among the cities that are laidwaste shall be desolate forty years; and I will scatterthe Egyptians among the nations, and will dispersethem through the countries. Yet at the endof forty years will I gather the Egyptians from thepeople whither they were scattered ; and .1 willJcreni. xlvi. 25. In the Hebrew version it is " Amun of No," orNa ; in the Syriac, "Amun of the waters;" in the Targum, or ChaldeeParaph., " Alexandria," which was not yet fonndeci.+ Jercm. xlvi. 24, 2.5, 2G. J Ezck. xxix. 10. el scq.§ In the Sc|i!na{;int and Arabic versions it is " from Migdol andSyene (l-VSooan) into the borders of l^tliiopia." Tiic Hebrew andSyriac, as well as the Targum, have " from the lower of yycne," or,'* from Migdol to Syene (nro) and to the confines of Ethiopia" (Cush).Syene being on the borders of l',thi()|)ia, the sense seems to require"from the towers of Syene," or " from Migdol to Syene," (which is)on the confines of I\thioi)ia.II Syene, l'>lepliantine, and I'hilrc continued to be the frontier townsof E|.,ypt, even in the time of the Romans, though their dominionsin the Pharaonic times extended beyond. " Ilcgni claustra Philae."Lucan, x. lille. ; vide also Strabo and Procopius.CHAP. II. PROPHECIES Against EGYPT. I75bring again the captivity of Egypt, and will causethem to return into the land of Pathos, into theland of their habitation, and they shall be there abase kingdom. It shall be the basest of kingdoms;neither shall it exalt itself any more above thenations : for I will diminish them, that they shallno more rule over the nations, and it shall nomore be the confidence of the house of Israel's'. . .And the sword shall come upon EgyptEthiopia, Libya, and Lydia*, and all the mingledpeople t, and Chubb, and the men of the landthat is in league shall fall with them, by the swordI will also make the multitude of Egypt tocease by the hand of Nebuchadnezzar king ofBabylon they shall draw their swords againstEgypt, and fill the land with slain. § I willalso destroy their idols, and cause their images tocease out of Noah II, and there shall be no more aprince of the land of Egypt, and I will makePathos desolate, and will set fire in Zoan*, andIn Hebrew, Cush, Phut, and Lud.■f In Hebrew aii% ai-ab. The same word is used for the " mixedmultitude" which went out with Moses at the exodus.J Hebrew, Cub. Probably the Cubit of Ptolemy, a people wholived in Parentis.§ Ezek. XXX. 4. et seq.II Noah was Memphis ; called by the Egyptians Memfi, Mei, Menti,or Mente, and Men-nofri, or Ma-nofri, " the place of good," as well asPthah-ei, "the abode of Pthah." In Hosea (ix. 6.) it is styled Moth.The Arabs call it Ma-nous, or Venous. In hieroglyphics it is writtenMen-nofri, followed by a pyramid.1 Pathos or Pastures, in the Septuagint (S^aQiopi^g, is Pa-athyris,"belonging to Author," or Aphrodite. It might be supposed to referto Aphroditopolis, or Afhribis, or Atarbechis ; but there is more reasonto believe it to be Patris, or the district of western Thebes, whichwas afterwards made into a separate nome of that name, and so calledfrom the same goddess.** Tanis.176 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.will exercise my judgments in No.* And I willpour out my fury upon Sin t, the strength ofEgypt ; and I will cut off the multitude of NoThe young men of Aven t and of Pibeseth § shallfall by the sword, and these cities shall go intocaptivity. At Tehaphnehes || also the day shallbe darkened, when I shall break there the yokes ofEgypt ; and the pomp of her strength shall ceasein her . . . and her daughters shall go into captivity ;. . and I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations,and disperse them among the countries." %I shall now endeavour to show how these predictionswere accomplished, and to explain theprobable reason of Herodotus's silence upon thesubject of Nebuchadnezzar's invasion.The defeat and death of Apries, before mentioned,are given on the authority of Herodotus ;who represents Amass as a rebel chief, taking advantageof the disaffection of the army to dethronehis sovereign. This information he received fromthe Egyptian priests ; but no mention was made ofthe signal defeat their army experienced, or of thatloss of territory in Syria which resulted from theNo, or No-Aniiin, Tlicl)c.s, Diospolis Proper, on the cast bank. Itis also written Na-Aniiin [or Arniui-na]; the l\!iyptian, Anni-ci, theabode of Ainun. r/V/cNahiini, iii. H. The Septuagint gives tv AiomroXn.+ The Septuagint lias " iloif ;" the Latin translation of the Hebrew,Pehisiiini ;" the Arabic, "San;" fire I Iel)revv version and Tyranny,Sin." Perishing, wliicii was the newark of J'>fj;}'[)t on the N. E.frontier, is to be preferred. It is now called Tine.J Aon ]Mi, heliopolis, or On, as in (Jen. xli. ■!■.'>.$\ Bnbastis, Pi-Tasiit.II In the Scptnai;int iv Tafran^ ; or, as IIero(h)tns calls it, Aa^vr/irtr//<Ti I/fXoii(T(?/rT(. herod. ii. 107. and .'<(). I)a|)hne was a little distancefrom Pehisiuni,and higher up that branch of the Nile.*i Ezek. XXX. 13. cl scq.CHAP. II. NEBUCHADNEZZAR. 177successes of the victorious Nebuchadnezzar. Itis therefore reasonable to conclude they disguisedthe truth from the Greek historian ; and, withoutmentioning the disgrace which had befallen theircountry, and the interposition of a foreign power,attributed the change in the succession, and theelevation of Amass to the throne, solely to hisambition and the choice of the Egyptian soldiery.Mesrasthenes and Serous affirm that Nebuchadnezzarconquered a great part of Africa, and, havinginvaded Egypt, took many captives, who were committedto the charge of persons appointed to conductthem after him to Babylon. But as this issaid to have happened at the period of his father'sdeath, and consequently in the reign of Neco, itcannot refer to the point in question. Josephus,however, expressly states, that the Assyrian monarch*' led an army into Coeli-Syria, of which heobtained possession, and then waged war on theAmmonites and Moabites. These being subdued,he invaded and conquered Egypt ; and, havingput the king of that country to death, he appointedanother in his stead." * If Josephus be correct inthis statement, there is reason to suppose he alludesto Apries being deposed and succeeded by Amass;and we can readily imagine that the Assyrians,having extended their conquests to the extremity ofPalestine, would, on the rumour of intestine commotionsin Egypt, hasten to take advantage of theopportunity thus afforded them of attacking theJoseph. Antiq. lib. x. c. i.x. 7.VOL. I. N17S THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.country. And the civil war, and the fatal consequencesof the disturbed state of Egypt, appear to benoticed by Isaiah* in the following prophecy : " Iwill set the Egyptians against the Egyptians, andthey shall fight every one against his brother, andevery one against his neighbour ; city against city,and kingdom against kingdom ; . . . and they shallseek to the idols, and to the charmers, and to themthat have familiar spirits, and to the wizards, tAnd the Egyptians will I give over into the handof a cruel lord, and a fierce king shall rule overthem."From a comparison of all these authorities, Iconclude that the civil war between Apries andAmass did not terminate in the single conflict atMemphis, but lasted several years ; and thateither Amass solicited the aid and intervention ofNebuchadnezzar, or this prince, availing himself ofthe disordered state of the country, of his ownaccord invaded it, deposed the rightful sovereign,and placed Amass on the throne, on condition ofpaying tribute to the Assyrians. The injury doneto the land and cities of Egypt by this invasion, andthe disgrace with which the Egyptians felt themselvesoverwhelmed after such an event, wouldjustify the account given in the Bible of the fall ofEgy})t : and to witness many of their compatriotstaken captive to Babylon, and to become tributaryiNaiiil), xix. 2. rt xtr/.•j- That is, coiiMilt the oracles, as Amass is said to have done previousto his oI)tainiii{^ the soverci^'iity of l^nypt. The aeconiit yivcn hyHerodotus (ii. 17 1.) of Amass' daily coiuluti, and the answers ofthe oracles, is ridiculous.CHAP. II. MARRIAGE OF AMASIS. 179to an enemy * whom they held m abhorrence,would be considered by the Egyptians the greatestcalamity, as though they had for ever lost their stationin the scale of nations And this last wouldsatisfactorily account for the title Melek, given toinferior or to tributary kings, being applied toAmass t in some of the hieroglyphic legends accompanyinghis name.It still remains a matter of uncertainty, whetherPsamaticus III. and Apries are the same person ;but the marriage of Amass with the daughter ofPsamaticus is no objection to their identity, sinceambition, or many other causes, might have urgedhim to rise against his father-in-law, and dispossesshim of the throne. That this marriage actuallytook place wee have abundant testimonies from thesculptures of Thebes ; and it goes far to disprovethe statement of Herodotus, relative to the " plebeianorigin" of Amass. Athenaeum attributes hisprevious rise to the circumstance of his having presentedApries with a beautiful chaplet of flowers onhis birthday, which so delighted the king that heinvited him to the feast, and admitted him amongthe number of his friends. Diodorus, however,who is more to be depended upon in this instance,asserts that Amass was a person of considerable consequence,which accords with his rank as a general,and a distinguished member of the military caste, asAtiimianus Marcellus says, the Carthaginianss also invadedEgypt; but this statement is very improbable.-f Vide my Materia Hierogl. p. 100.f He is generally styled, like the other Pharaohs, king of the upperand lower country; a Pharaoh, and an independent sovereign.N 2ISO THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.well as with monumental record, and his marriagewith the daughter of his sovereign. And the idletales told by the priests respecting his rise and thefall of Apries seem only to have been intended todeceive Herodotus, and to conceal from him thereal state of Egypt at that period.According to the same historian, the reign ofAmass was the epoch at which Egypt was mostflourishing, both *' with regard to the advantagesconferred by the river on the soil, and by the soilon the inhabitants ;" and that country " couldboast no less than 20,000 well inhabited cities." *The former assertion, indeed, if not fully proved,gains considerable weight, from the appearance ofpublic and private buildings raised during the reignsof this monarch and his two predecessors, from thenumber of splendid monuments erected by Amass,and from the immense booty carried out of Egyptby the Persians. That private persons enjoyedunusual affluence is evident from the style and richnessof their sepulchres, far exceeding in extentand ornamental detail any of those executed duringthe flourishing era of the 18th Dynasty : and thiscan only be attributed to an increase of wealth. Inorder, therefore, to reconcile that fact with thestate of Egypt, mentioned in the ]prophecies, wemay suppose the tributary condition to which itwas reduced by the Babylonian conqueror, thoughseverely wounding the })iide of the Egyptians,and degrading them as a nation, did not affect theWcwdot. ii. 177. riiii. v. II.CHAP. II. PROPHECIES. 181riches of individuals, which might continue toincrease through the immense resources of a fertilecountry, or, to repeat the words of Herodotus,through *' the advantages conferred by the river onthe soil, and by the soil on the inhabitants :"and the historian may refer to the latter end ofAmass' reign, when he had been freed from thehumiliating necessity of paying tribute to die Babylonians,themselves at length conquered by thearms of Cyrus. It is very possible that the propheciesmay parthia relate to the intervention ofNebuchadnezzar, aid the degraded condition ofEgypt, as tributary to the Babylonians ; and imrtlyto the final downfal of the country, when the Persiansinvaded it under Cambyses : for so remarkablean event would scarcely be omitted in aprophecy announcing the *' desolation of Egypt;"and, if this last and the previous invasion of theBabylonians are not distinctly described, we mayconclude that both are included in the generalprediction.*Nor was the military power of Egypt annihilatedby the civil war between A pries and Amass, or bythe unfortunate intervention of Nebuchadnezzar ;and though Amass did not think it prudent, by refusingthe tribute he had promised to pay, and byinvading Syria, to provoke a powerful enemy, or toengage in a doubtful struggle with that prince, yetXenophon pretends that Cyrus even invaded Egypt; but his modeof expressing himself is as vague as the circumstance is improbable.Oxen. Cyropajd. preliminary section.N 3182 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.he was sufficiently strong to make himself fearedand respected by his neighbours, and to extend hisarms beyond the frontiers of Egypt. And so confidentwas he of his power towards the close of hisreign, that he defied the mighty Persia, little expectinghe would thereby entail great and real calamitiesupon his country.After remedying the evils which civil commotionand the other events already alluded to had caused,at the close of his predecessor's reign, his attentionwas directed to the improvement of the militarystrength, as well as the commercial interests ofEgypt; and having fitted out a formidable expeditionagainst Cyprus, he succeeded in taking thecities of that island *, and subjecting it to hispower; being the first who had made it tributary tto the Pharaohs. He also gave great encouragementto foreigners who were willing to trade withhis subjects ; and as an inducement to them he favouredtheir interests, and showed them markedindulgence upon all occasions. " Such Greeks aswashed to maintain a regular communication withEgypt, he permitted to have a settlement at Naucratis: and to others, who did not require a fixedresidence, being only engaged in occasional commerce,he assigned certain places for the constructionof altars, and the performance of religiousrites; and the " Greeks," says Herodotus, *' stillpossess a very spacious and celebrated temple inEgypt, called Hellenic. Tt was built at the jointI^iodor. i. (i8. f 1 Icroilot. ii. |82.X Ilcrodot. ii. 178.CHAP. II. THE GREEKS IN EGYPT. 183expense of the lonians of Chios, Teos, Phocaea,and Clazomenae; of the Dorian of Rhodes, Cnidus,Halicarnassus, and Phases ; and of the Coins ofMitylene. Hellenic is the common property ofall these cities, who appoint proper officers for theregulation of their commerce ; and the claims ofother cities to these distinctions and privileges aretotally unfounded. The-^ginetae, however, constructedfor themselves a temple to Jupiter, as didthe Samian to Juno, and the Milesian to Apollo.Naucratis soon became a flourishing town, inconsequenceof the exclusive privileges it enjoyed,being the sole emporium of the Greeks in Egypt ;and not only was every merchant required to unloadhis cargo there, but if he came to any otherthan the Canopic mouth of the Nile, he wasobliged to swear it was entirely accidental, and wascompelled to go thither in the same vessel ; or, ifcontrary winds prevented his making that passage,his goods were taken out and conveyed in boats ofthe country by inland navigation, through or roundthe Delta to Naucratis.Many other marks of favour and liberality werebestowed by Amass on the Greeks. When thetemple of Delphi was consumed by fire, he presentedthe Delphian with a very large contribution towardsrebuilding it j and, having made an amicableconfederacy with the Cyrenians, he sent a goldenstatue of Minerva, with a portrait of himself, to theircity. To a temple of that goddess at Hindus hegave two marble statues, with a linen corselet, deservingof admiration :" and a thorax of the sameN 4184 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.materials was dedicated by him to the Minerva ofRhodes, which according to Piny was of remarkablyfine texture.* He also presented two figures ofhimself, carved in wood, to the temple of Juno atSamos ; which were placed immediately behind thegates, where they remained till the time of Herodotus,t'* The kindness shown by Amass to Samos wasowing," says the historian, " to the friendship whichsubsisted between him and Polycrates, the son ofjEaces ; but he had no such motive of attachmentto Hindus, and was only moved by the report of thetemple of Minerva having been erected there by thedaughters of Danaus, when they fled from the sonsof ^gyptus ;" and his affection for the Cyrenians,according to the same author, arose from his havingmarried Lattice t, a native of that country, who wasafterwards sent back by Cambyses to her parents,when he conquered Egypt.The friendship of Amass and Polycrates commencedat the period of the war between the Lacedaemonianssand the latter, who had forciblypossessed himself of Samos. It had been cementedby various presents on both sides, and appeared topromise a long continuance ; " but the wonderfulprosperity and uninterrupted successes of Polycratesexcited the attention and anxiety of Amass ;and as they were observed by him invariably to increase,he was induced to write him the followingletter § : —"crri.xv files singtiki iii coiistarc." I'lin. xix. 2.t 111 ro.lot. ii. 182. X l'^'''- '•• l*^!-^ Ibid. iii. 40.CHAr. IT. AMASIS AND POLYCRATES. 185jamais to Poly crates.' To learii that a friend and ally is blessedwith prosperity, cannot fail to give me the greatestsatisfaction ; but, knowing the invidiousness offortune, your extraordinary success excites my apprehension.For my own part, if I might beallowed to choose for myself or those I regard, Ishould prefer prosperity on some occasions, andon others disappointment ; and thus pass throughlife with an alternation of good and evil, ratherthan be fortunate in every undertaking. For Inever remember to have heard of a man blessedwith unceasing felicity, who did not end his careeroverwhelmed with calamities. Take, therefore,my advice, and apply this counterpoise to yourprosperity : endeavour to discover some favouriteobject whose loss would occasion you the deepestregret ; and as soon as this has been ascertained,remove it from you in such a manner that it cannever be recovered. If, then, your good fortunestill continues chequered by adversity, I stronglyrecommend you to repeat the remedy I propose.* "Polycrates, having received his letter, and deliberatedon its contents, felt persuaded that Amasshad given him excellent advice, and therefore determinedto follow it. Accordingly, he searchedamong his treasures for something whose loss wouldmost afflict him, and at length fixed upon a signet-ring,which he was in the habit of wearing. It186 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAp. II.was an emerald, set in gold, the work of Theodorathe Samian, beautifully engraved.* Resolved onsacrificing this precious jewel, he went on board afifty-oared vessel, and ordered the men to pull outinto the open sea ; and when they were a considerabledistance from land, Polycrates, taking off thering, in the presence of his attendants, cast it intothe sea, and then gave orders for their return toSam OS.The sacrifice he had made, though voluntary,afflicted him much ; and returning to his palace,he gave way to an excess of grief. Five or six daysafter, a fisherman having caught a fish of very greatsize and beauty, repaired to the palace, and requestingadmission into his presence, presented itto Polycrates in these word : — " Although, Sir, Ilive by the produce of my industry, I thought sofine a fish ought not to be exposed for sale inthe public market place ; and deeming it worthyof your majesty's table, I have brought it fir youracceptance." Pleased with his conduct, Polycratesreplied, " My good man, not only is your present,but the manner in which you have expressed yourself,highly gratifying to me ; and I invite you toThe word (T<l>(itjyir answers exactly to the Khatom of the Arabs; arin,!^, with an cnj^raved stone, or entirely of sold, with a name or devicecut upon it. Pliny and Soliiuis say the ring of Polycrates was asardonyx; and the former adds, that in his time tiicy showed one atRome, in the Temple of Concord, given by Augustus, which was saidlo be of the !samian king. Clement of Alexandria supposes a lyrewas figured upon it. Tiie Arabs have the story of Polycrates's ring,but they omit his name, and the reason of its loss; relating that itfell into the sea by accident. Vk/r Min. xxxvii. 2., and soin. c. xxxiii.p. G.'i.CHAP. II. THE RING OF POLYCRATES. 187supper at the palace." * The fisherman, delightedwith this mark of favour, returned home.Shortly after, the servants, on opening the fish,discovered the ring, and with great eagerness andjoy carried it to the king, relating in what mannerit had been found. Polycrates, concluding thatsuch a circumstance could only be the effect ofDivine interposition, carefully noted down everyparticular, and sent it to Egypt. Amass no soonerperused his letter, than he felt convinced it was outof the power of one mortal to deliver another fromthe fate which awaited him; and that Polycrates,who had been so uniformly lucky, and who hadeven recovered what he had taken pains to lose,could not terminate his days in tranquillity. Hetherefore sent a herald to Saraos, disclaiming allconnection with him for the future, in order that,when any grievous calamity befell Polycrates, hemight not have to bewail the misfortunes of afriend.Such is the account given by Herodotus ofAmass's desertion of Polycrates ; which took placeprevious to the difficulties he experienced from thedisaffection of his subjects, and the intervention ofthe Lacedaemonians, and some time before his cruelmurder by the treacherous Oraetes.f Diodorus,however, assigns a different reason for the conductIt is not necessary that the fisherman should have eaten at thesame table as his royal host. Herodotus uses the expression, " Iinvite you to supper," a t-i cmrvov KaXsoi-ni'. Many persons areinvited to sup at the house of a great man in the East without sittingat table with him.t Herodot. iii. 125. Valer. Max. calls him Orontes, vi. 9.X Diod. i. 95.188 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.of Amass. He affirms that the Egyptian monarchwas offended with the tyrannical conduct of Polycrates,and foresaw, from the feeling excited againsthim, both amongst his subjects and foreigners,that his fate was inevitable ; and, indeed the flightof many Samian to Crete*, and numerous instancesof their discontent and of his oppression,are recorded by Herodotus and many ancientwriters, tPolycrates has been represented as a great encouragerof learning, and the patron of eminentmen, spending great part of his time in the companyof persons of talent, among whom were Anacreonand Pythagoras. And his friendship with Amassenabled him to recommend the latter to that monarcht, when he visited Egypt, and to obtain forhim those facilities in studying the mysterioussciences and profound secrets of the Egyptians,which few foreigners were permitted to enjoy.Some §5 however, deny that his journey was undertakenat the suggestion, or even with the approbation,of Polycrates ; and affirm, on the contrary,that Pythagoras abandoned his native country,Ilerodot. iii. 44'.f Valer. Max.vi. 9. " Samos ainara scrvitutc (Polycrates) prcssa."Plin. xxxvii. 2. " Polj'crati Sainio, scvcro insulating ac litoriim tyranny."Diogenes, Poplin! y, Gillies, Euscbiiis, Diodorus, &c.j; Pliny says the name of the king wiio rcigncii in Egypt vvlien Pythagorasvisited it was Senncsertetis. (.'an this have l)een corruptedfrom Next-se, or Se-next, "the Son of Neath," which was the cognomenof Amass, Ames-Neit-se, or Ames-se-Neit r' It rather resemblesthe name Sen-osiris. ]lin. xxxvi. II'. Another reading gives Semeperhaps mistaken for, or corrupted iVom, the name ofPsannnenitus, the son of Amass.§ The authors mentioned in a preceding note.CHAP. II. PYTHAGORAS AND SOLON. 189being unable to endure the tyranny of his sovereign.Solon also visited Egypt during the reign ofAmass*; and being much pleased with the laws ofthe Egyptians, which, through the liberality of theking, he had every facility of studying, he introducedmany of them into the code established byhim at Athens.That Amass was a great encourager of art, wehave ample testimony from the monuments whichremain, as well as from the statements of ancientwriters; and being a native of Sa'is, or, as Herodotusaffirms, of Siuph, in the Sainte nome, his attention,as is reasonable to suppose, was directedmore particularly toward the embellishment of thatcity. With this view he erected at Sa'is a magnificentpropylaeum in honour of Minerva ; a splendidbuilding, far excelling any other of the kind, aswell in size and grandeur, as in the quality andmagnitude of the stones used in its construction ;and before it were placed several large colossi, witha series of immense androsphinxes, which formedthe avenue or drones leading to the main entrance.The propylaeum was a large court, openin the centre, and surrounded in the inside byrows of columns, with the usual pyramidal towersin front, forming one of the approaches to thetemple of Minerva, in the same manner as thepropylaea attached to the temples at Thebes conseili. 30. Thales is said, by Plutarch, in his Banquet of theSeven Sages, to have been in Eg)'pt in the reign of Amass ; and hementions the improbable story of his showing the Egyptians how tomeasure the height of the pyramid by its shadow.190 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.tune the entrance halls of those edifices.* Portionsof the same building, which had been erected byhis predecessors, requiring some repairs, Amasscollected for this purpose a quantity of stones ofamazing thickness, part of which were broughtfrom the quarries of IVIemphist, and part from thecataracts of Syene. " But what, in my opinion,"says Herodotus, " deserves the greatest admiration,is an edifice of a single stone, brought from thecity of Elephantine, a distance of about twenty days'journeys Two thousand men, chosen from theclass of boatmen, were employed for the space ofthree years in transporting it to Sai's. Its externallength is twenty-one cubits, its breadth fourteen,and height eight : and in the inside it measureseighteen cubits and twenty digits in length, twelvein breadth, and five in height. It stands near theentrance of the temple ; and the reason of its beingleft in this spot was that the architect, wearied withthe tedious duration of the undertaking, had beenheard to fetch a deep sigh, while they were employedin dragging it forward; upon which Amass,who happened to be present, gave orders they shouldstop, and carry it no further. Some, however, affirmthat one of the men while moving it with a leverAt Karnitk, in Thebes, are some instances of the avenues ofsphinxes ; they only differ in being cnosphinxcs, or surmounted withthe lira of a ram instead of a man.f Herodotus means the mountains opposite Memphis, of theTroiei capitis nions, which he mentions in the same manner on anotheroccasion, wlun speaking of the canal to the Ked Sea. Lib. ii.s. \58.J From Elephantine or E'Souan, where the granite (quarries maystill be seen, to Sais, is about 700 miles by land. It must have crossedthe river once at least.CHAP. II. MONUMENTS OF AMASIS. IQlwas crushed to death, and that on this accountthey were ordered to desist.*' Amass made many and magnificent presentsto other temples both in Upper and Lower Egypt.At Memphis, he placed a colossal recumbent figure,seventy-five feet long, before * the temple of Vulcan; and on the same basement two other colossiof Ethiopia stones, or granite, each twenty feet inheight, one on either side of the principal part ofthe building. There is at Sai's another statuesimilar to that of Memphis, and lying in the sameposition : and this prince erected the grand templeof Isis at Memphis, which deservedly claims universaladmiration."Many monuments still exist in different parts ofEgypt, bearing the name of Amass, one of which,a red granite monolith, at Tel-et-mai, resembles inform§ that described by Herodotus as having beenbrought from Elephantine to Sais. Thebes andother places also present memorials of the encouragementhe gave to architecture and other branchesof art ; and at the quarries of Syene several inscriptionsindicate the removal of granite blocks for theStrabo says, " Before the drones of the temple lies a colossus ofa single stone ; and in this drones are held the bull-fights." Strabo,lib. xvii.t Probably by the fnyapov Herodotus means the temple, properlyspeaking, independent of the outer courts: or the isolated sanctuaryin the centre of the temple, which was independent of the inner adytum,as at Luqsor, and the smaller temple of Medeenet Haboo atThebes.% They were very uncommon in Egypt.§ I am indebted to Mr. Burton for its dimensions, which are 21 ft.9 in. high, 13 ft. broad, and lift. 7 hi. deep, outside; and 19 ft. 3 in.,8 ft., and 8 ft. 3 in. inside.192 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.construction or decoration of edifices raised by himin the valley of the Nile.Pliny* affirms that some imagined him to havebeen buried in the celebrated Sphinx ; but thiserroneous notion arose from the similarity of thenames, Amosis and Thothmosist, and readily obtainsthat indulgence which cannot be extended toan assertion of Lucan, burying Amass in the pyramidsthemselves, t To Lucan, however, accuracywas never imputed ; and no one, after reading hisextravagant description of the cataracts at Philge §,is surprised to find him deposit the remains of thePolemics in the same monuments. ||The situation of Amass' tomb is mentioned byHerodotus It stood like all those of the Saintemonarchs, within the precincts of the temple ofMinerva, in the chief city of that nome ; which,during the reign of the princes of the 20th Dynasty,had become the royal residence and nominal metropolisof Egypt ; though Thebes and Memphis stillretained the titles of capitals of the upper and lowercountries.', * Plin. XXX vi. 17. " Aniasin rcgcni [)utaiit in ea (spliingc) condition."•|- This is still more striking when \vc consider that A, or loll, themoon, and Tiioth, are the same deity; and that Amosis, the leader ofthe 18th Dynasty, has been called by some Tethmosis. Amosis, orAmass, are the same; the real name being Ames. Thoth is also thefirst month.X " Pyramids tunniiis cvnlsis Amass." Lucan. Liars. ix. 155.Diodorus (i. (il.) says some attribute the second pyramid to Amass,the first to Armies, and the think to Inaron, as well as to Rhodope.§ Lucan, lib. x. yl5. ct scq.II " Cum Ptolenueonnn manes pyramids claimant." viii.6f>().t Tiie lake mentioned by Herodotus still exists at Sa'is (now ),as well as its extensive and solid crude prick walls. Ilerodot.ii. 170.CHAP. II. HIS QUARREL WITH CAMBYSES. 193Towards the latter end of the reign of thismonarch, Cambyses sent to Egypt to demand hisdaughter in marriage, a step to which he had beenprompted by a certain Egyptian, an enemy ofAmass. This man was a physician ; and whenCyrus had requested of the Egyptian king the bestmedical advice he could procure, for a disorder inhis eyes, Amass forced him to leave his wife andfamily, and go into Persia. Meditating revengefor this treatment, he instigated his successor torequire the daughter of Amass, that he mighteither suffer affliction at the loss of his child, or byrefusing to send her, provoke the resentment ofCambyses. Amass detested the character of thePersian monarch; and persuaded that his treatmentof her would neither be honourable nor worthy ofa princess, he was unwilling to accept the overture:but fearing to give a positive refusal, he determinedon sending the daughter of the late king. Hername was Aetatis, or, as Herodotus calls her,Nitetis. She was possessed of great personal attractions; and Amass, having dressed her in themost splendid attire, sent her into Persia as his ownchild. Not long after, Cambyses happening toaddress her as the daughter of Amass, she explainedthe manner in which he had been deceived,by a man who had dethroned and put Apries herfather to death, and had seized upon the throne,through the assistance of a rebellious faction :upon which Cambyses was so enraged that he resolvedto make war upon the usurper, and im-vol.I. o194) THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.mediately prepared to lead an expedition intoEgypt. *Such is the principal cause alleged by Herodotusfor his invasion of that country ; but it willnot bear the test of examination. Nitetis is representedto have been sent to Persia towardsthe close of the reign of Amass, which, accordingto the historian, lasted forty-four years; and allowingher to have been born immediately beforeApries was dethroned, she would have been of anage which in Egypt and Persia is no longer a recommendation,or the associate of beauty, tBut whatever may have been the real motive forthis war, it is certain that Cambyses was greatlyexasperated against Amass, and Egypt, when invadedby the Persian monarch, was treated withunusual barbarity.Temples and public buildings w^cre destroyed ;tombs were violated, and the bodies burnt; religionwas insulted, private property pillaged ordestroyed, and every thing which could tempt theavarice, or reward the labour, of the spoiler, wasseized and appropriated either by the chief or histroops. Gold and silver statues and other objectsOilier reasons arc given by Herodotus (iii. 2.). That of Cambysesbeinji born of the daiigliter of Aries is quite eastern, and rc-scmliU's the Persian .account of Alexander the Great.-f- For Nitetis to be yi-///" would have been agreeable to Cambyses;not so to be /<>rfi/..1 It is remarkable that (lie officers of the French frigate Luxor, whoremoved the obelisk from 'l"hel)es, found the sarcophagus of the (queenof Amass in a pit at I'll Qoorneh, the body entirely burnt, thoughplaced in its original repository. The tomb had been violated, probably,by the Persians, who burnt the body, and was afterwards rc-closed by the Egyptians with masonry. The body had been gilded.CHAP. II. INVASION OF CAMBYSES. 195of value were sent to Persia ; and it appears thatnumerous Egyptian captives were also transportedto that country.The death of Amass, which happened sixmonths before the arrival of the Persians, preventedCambyses from satiating his meditated revengeon the Egyptian monarch ; and judging fromthe savage rage which the Persian conqueror ventedupon his body, it was fortunate for Amass that hehad not fallen alive into his hands, and had diedunconscious of what was about to happen.Many circumstances occurred to induce Cambysesto undertake the invasion of Egypt and theoverthrow of Amass, independent of any insult hemay have offered him, or the ambition of a risingempire ; one of which is thus detailed by Herodotus* : — '* Among the auxiliaries of Amass wasa man named Phanes, a native of Halicarnassus,greatly distinguished by his mental as well as hismilitary accomplishments. This person being forsome reason incensed against Amass, fled in a vesselfrom Egypt, for the purpose of having a conferencewith Cambyses. As he possessed considerableinfluence, and was perfectly acquainted with theaffairs of Egypt, it was of paramount importancethat his designs should be prevented. Amass,therefore, despatched the most faithful of hiseunuchs in a trireme, with orders to overtake andbring him back. The pursuit was successful, andPhanes was taken in Lycia ; but having circumventedhis guards, he effected his escape, and fledHerodot. iii. 4.o '2196 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.to Persia. Cambyses readily accepted his services,and listened to the valuable information and advicehe gave respecting the affairs of Egypt, andthe precautions necessary for passing the deserton the frontier. At his suggestion a treaty wasmade with the Arabians, to supply the Persianswith guides, and abundance of water, and thusenable the army to pass a barren and inhospitabletract which would have been fatal to numbers ofthe invaders : " and the Arabian prince havingordered all his camels to be laden with skins filledwith water, retired into the desert, and thereawaited the arrival of Cambyses and his army** *At the death of Amass, Psammenitus, his son,succeeded to the throne. Conscious of the greatdanger to which his empire was exposed, from thethreatened invasion of Cambyses, he made greatpreparations for the defence of the frontier, andadvancing with his Egyptian troops, and the Ionianand Marian auxiliaries, to Pelusium, he encampedin a plain near the mouth of the Nile. ThePersians, having passed the desert, took np a positionopposite the Egyptian army, and both sidesprepared for battle. The Greeks, irritated withthe treachery of *' Planet, who had introduceda foreign invader into Egypt," and wishing to showtheir resentment against him, brought his two sonsforward into a conspicuous place, and slew themover a large vase in the sight of their father. Thisbeing done, they mingled wine and water withthe blood j and having all drank of it, they rushedHerodot. iii 9. f Illud iii. II.CHAP. II. DEFEAT OF THE EGYPTIANS. 197against the enemy. The conflict soon becamegeneral throughout the whole Une, and the battlewas for a long time obstinately disputed ; till atlength, a considerable slaughter having been madeon both sides, the Egyptians gave way, and fled.From Pelusium to Memphis was now open tothe invader, and with rapid marches he hastenedtowards the ancient capital of Lower Egypt.Hoping, however, to obtain advantageous termswithout the necessity of another battle, Cambysessent a Persian up the river in a Milesian vessel,to treat with the Egyptians : but as soon as theysaw the vessel enter Memphis, they rushed in acrowd from the citadel, destroyed it, and tore thecrew to pieces. At the news of this outrage, theindignation of Cambyses was excessive : he immediatelylaid siege to Memphis, and having succeededin reducing the place, he indulged hisresentment by putting many of the inhabitants tothe sword* : the king was taken prisoner, and 2000Egyptians of the same age as the son of Psam-penitus, preceded by the young prince, being compelledto march in procession before the conqueror,where condemned to death as a retaliation for themurder of the Persian and Milesian heralds ;ten of the first rank among the Egyptians beingchosen for every one of those who suffered on thatoccasion, t Psammenitus himself was pardoned jDiodorus (i. 46.) says that at this time numerous artificers,and immense wealth, were carried off to Persia ; and that the palacesand splendid buildings of Persepolis, Susa, and the cities of Media,were erected by them at the command of the victors."t- There were, therefore, 200 Mitylenians in the vessel destroyed atMemphis.o 3THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.and such was the respect entertained by the Persiansfor the persons of kings * that lie would in all probabilityhave been restored to a tributary throne, ifhe had not entered into an ill-timed conspiracyagainst the monarch who had spared his life.Egypt now became a province of Persia j andCambyses and his seven successors compose the27th Dynasty.Name fromAncient Authors.Name from theMonuments.Events.AscendedtheThrone.|5211 485■472("424(.414Cambyses -Darius, son of]Hystaspes -JXerxes the 1Great - JArtabanususArtaxerxesXerxes II. -SocinusDarius No "jthus, the son Iof Xerxes - JKanboshNtareeoshNdareoshKhsheershArtkhsheshcsr Conquers Egypt in his\ 4th year .r Battle of Marathon, 490;\ Egypt revolts, 486r Xerxes conquers Egypt,■1 484; birth of herodotusArtabanusus reigns 7 monthsr Egypt revolts, and Inarosand Amyrtanis are elected1 kings, 463 ; Herodotusvisits Egypt, 460Reigns 2 montis' -Reigns 7 monthsThe name of Cambyses, as may be easily imagined,is never met with on Egyptian monuments;but a visiter to the slate and breccia quarries on theroad from Coptos to the Red Sea has, at a laterperiod, recorded the name of this monarch in hieroglyphics,adding to it the date of his sixth year.Ilerodot. iii. IJ-, 1.5. "The Persians," says the historian, "areaccustomed to lionom' flic sons of kings, ami to restore the throne tothose whose parents have rebelled against them." The same feeling isevinced by the Turks and other Asiatics; and respect for the personol'a king was strongly marked in the case of Charles XII.CHAP. II. NAME OF DARIUS. J 99Two other ovals also occur: one of Darius, with thelumber 36 ; the other of Xerxes, with the yeartwelve : showing the inscription to have beenwritten in the twelfth of Xerxes ; and the date 36,intended as the full extent of Darius's reign, accordswith the authority of ancient history. Onanother rock, at the same place, are the sixteenthyear of Xerxes and the fifth of Artaxerxes (Longinus); and these four are the only monarchs ofthe 27th Dynasty whose names I have seen in Egypt.In the principal temple at El Charge, in the GreatOasis, that of Darius again occurs, a considerableportion of the building having been erected by him jand it is remarkable that he is the only Persianking whose phonetic name is accompanied by aprenomen, like those of the ancient Pharaohs ofEgypt ; a circumstance satisfactorily confirmingthe remark of Decorous, " that he obtained whileliving the appellation of Dives*, which was appliedto no other of the (Persian) kings, and receivedafter death the same honours which it had beencustomary to bestow upon the ancient sovereignsof the country. tThe rule of Darius was mild and equitable ; andhe was not only careful to avoid every thing thatmight offend the religious prejudices, or hurt theFeelings, of his foreign subjects, but having madeThe title " Good God" was given by the Egyptians to all thePharaohs.-f- Diodor. i. 25. This appears singular, since they were in open rebellionat the time of his death. They did not, however, destroy hismonuments or efface his name on that occasion ; which seems to indicatemore than usual respect for a foreign ruler.o 4200 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.diligent inquiry respecting the jurisprudence andconstitution of the Egyptians, he corrected someabuses, and introduced many salutary laws, whichcontinued to form part of their code, until, incommon with many of those enacted by his Pharaonicpredecessors, they were altered or abrogatedby the Polemics, after the Macedonian conquest.*Impatient, however, of foreign rule, and anxiousto free their country from the presence of apeople whose cruelties at the time of Cambyses'sinvasion they could never pardon or forget, theEgyptians, thinking the reverses of Persia duringthe Greek war offered a favourable opportunityfor throwing off the yoke, revolted towards theclose of Darius's reign t, and succeeded in expellingthe Persians from the whole valley of the Nile.For upwards of a year they continued in open rebellion,and defied the power of his successor; but inthe second year of Xerxes they were again subdued,and treated with increased severity, Acha3mcnes,the brother of the king, being appointed governorof the country.Affairs remained in this state one and twentyyears, until the death of Xerxes, when considerableconfusion took place in Persia ; which being augmentedby the intrigues of Artabanust, and therebellion of Bactria, afforded the Egyptians anotheropportunity for asserting their independence ; andDiodor. hoc. cit.f lltToilotiiK (vii. 1. 7.) says Darius riij;nctl HG scars, and that (lierevolt of the I\i;yptiaiis took |)lacc in the loiirlli your after the battleof Marathon, the year before iiis death.J (Tiresias, in Persians, calls him Artapaniis, and makes Allurementsa brother of Artaxerxes.CHAP. II. REVOLT OF THE EGYPTIANS. 201prevailing on the Athenians to assist them with afleet of forty sail, they attacked and overwhelmedthe Persian garrisons. Upon intelligence of this, anarmy of 400,000 foot, and a fleet of 200 sail* wereequipped by Artaxerxes, and placed under the commandof Chastened. Inarus the son of Psama-ticus, a native of Libya, and Amyrtseust of Sai's,who had been invested with sovereign power, andwere charged with the defence of the country, madeevery effort to resist him ; and the two armies havingmet, the Persians were defeated with the loss of100,000 men, and Chastened received a mortalwound from the hand of Inarus, of which he died.Enraged at the failure of an expedition whichhe had undertaken contrary to the advice of hisfriends t, Artaxerxes resolved on sending an overwhelmingforce, under the combined command ofMegabyzus and Artabazus, consisting of 200,000men, and a fleet of 300 sail, independent of theremnant of the former army, which swelled theamount to 500,000. Both armies fought valiantly,and many were slain on either side ; at lengthMegabyzus having wounded Inarus in the thigh,obliged him to leave the field, and the route becamegeneral. Inarus, with a body of Greek auxiliaries,having taken refuge in Byblus, which was stronglyfortified, obtained for himself and companions aCtesias says 80 ships. Diodorus considers Achaemenes the son ofDarius, lib. xi.f Ctesias only sa's, " Inarus the Lydian and another Egyptian."Thucydides (lib. i.) and other authors mention Amyrtsus. Someconsider Inarus a Lib-an; and Thucydides styles him " King" of thatcountry.J Ctesias, in Persia. »202 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.promise of pardon from Megabyzus, upon conditionof their surrendering themselves to the Persian monarch; but the remembrance of Achaemenes' deathovercame the regard lie owed to the promise of hisgeneral, and Inarus, by the command of Artaxerxes,was treacherously crucified. Amyrtseus was morefortunate : he escaped to the Isle of El bo, and remainingconcealed there, awaited better times ; thePersian troops again taking possession of the fortifiedtowns, and Sarsamas being appointed satrapor governor of Egypt.No attempts to throw off the Persian yoke weremade by the Egyptians during the remainder ofthis reign ; and though the Athenians sent them afleet of sixty sail*, in the fifteenth year of Artaxerxes,and some hopes were entertained of restoringAmyrtaeus to the throne, these projects were abandoned,and the Persians continued in undisturbedpossession of the country till the tenth year ofDarius Notus.Perceiving that the Egyptians bore with greatreluctance the presence of a foreign governor, andanxious to allay as much as possible the turbulentspirit and prejudices of that people, the Persianshad permitted Thannyrus the son of Inarus, andPausiris the son of Amyrta^ust, to hold the officeand nominal power of governors, or tributary kings;but nothing could conciliate the Egyptians. Theybelied their fortified towns garrisoned by PersianTluicyd. lib. i. The same sixty slips are nieiitioiieil by Pliitarcli inhis Life of Ciinoii, as liavinif l)cen sent liy bim to the coast of l\!:y|it.f Ilerodot. iii. 15. This iiiust have happened i)revioiis to the year445, since Herodotus had then conii)leted bis history.CHAP. II. Reign OF AMYRT^US. 203troops ; the degradation of paying tribute to a peoplethey detested was insupportable; and nothing butthe restoration of an independent monarch couldsatisfy them. They therefore made secret preparationsfor expelling the Persians ; and Amyrtaeusbeing invited to put himself at their head, advancedfrom his place of concealment, routed the Persians,and finally succeeded in obtaining possession ofMemphis and the whole country.Amyrtaeus now became independent master ofEgypt ; and he is stated in Manette's list to havebeen the only monarch of the 28th Dynasty. Hisreign continued six years, during which period helaboured to repair the many losses sustained byhis country from the hostile aggressions of Persia.Numerous restorations* were made to the templesof Thebes and other cities, many of which hadsuffered from the sacrilegious fury of Cambyses ;and in order still further to weaken their power,and to remove the Persians to a distance from histerritories, he engaged the Arabians, by a treaty,to assist him, and advance into Phoenicia. Hisconquests, however, in that quarter were not extensive,and his efforts were chiefly confined to thedefence of his own frontier.According to Manette, he was succeeded byNepherites, the first king of the 29tli Dynasty :though Diodorus mentions another, called Psam-amicus, descended from the first of that name.Some gateways and other monuments bearing his name still remain.The sarcophagus in the British Museum, called of Alexander,is of this Pharaoh.20i THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.whom he supposes to have preceded Nepherites orNeplireus ; but it is uncertain whether he reallyruled at this time, or whether he was confoundedby the historian with the father of Inarus.*Of the character of Psamaticus, Diodorus drawsa very unfavourable picture, representing t him tohave been guilty of an act of cruelty and meannessunequalled in the history of his country.Ramus, a Memphite by birth, had been appointedby the Persians prefect of Ionia ; and havingheld that post some time, he was obliged to leavehis province, in order to avoid the resentment ofTissaphernes, and fly to his own country. Feelingpersuaded he had nothing to fear from Psamaticus,whom he had formerly obliged by many friendlyoffices, he scrupled not to take with him all hisriches, and to confide in the protection of the Egyptianmonarch ; but no sooner had Psamaticus becomeacquainted with this circumstance, than,regardless of the laws of humanity, and of the indulgencehe owed to a friend, he perfidiously seizedhis treasures, and deprived him of life, tFor the name § of this Psamaticus it is needlessto look on Egyptian monuments; nor do the sculpturesof Inarus appear on any of the temples atThebes, or in the lower country : and Manetteomits the mention of Inarus || in his catalogue ofkings. But that he wus an independent, thoughIlcrodot. vii. 7-|- Diodor. lib. xiv."j: His (|iiittinf; the Persian service in the possession of'sncli treasuresdoes not ari;nc in favour of Tanuis ; and the kin niaj' have lead someiHOtivc for this extraordinary conflict besides avarice.§ Manette makes no mention of this I'saniaticus.II Diodorus omits Amyrta-iis.CHAP. II.THE 28th dynasty.not the sole, monarch of Egypt, during the shortperiod which elapsed between the commencementof their second revolt and the victory of ,is proved by the authority of several ancienthistorians ; and as the unsettled state of affairsduring the whole of his reign, and the preparationsrequired in order to resist the expected attack ofthe Persians, deprived the Egyptians of that tranquillitynecessary for the encouragement of art, theabsence of monuments bearing the name of Inarusis readily accounted for. By some writers he issupposed to have been a king of Lydia, by othersan individual of Libyan origin ; but as Libya wasincluded within the dominions of Egypt, it appearsmore probable that he was the rightful heir to thethrone, and had taken refuge there to avoid thetyranny of the Persians, and await an opportunity,which afterwards offered, of liberating his countryfrom a foreign yoke. And the fact of his being anative of Egypt is still farther confirmed by thename of his father, Psamaticus, which is purelyEgyptian.The 28th and 29th Dynasties, according to Manette,and the monuments, are as follows : —'2Sth Dynasty, of 1 Sciite King.Name fromAncient Authors.AinyrteusAmyrtseusName from theMonuments.Ao-ma-hor-te ?Events.AscendedtheThrone.B. c.THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. II.29^A Dynasty of Mendesian Kings.Name fromAncient Authors.Name from theMonuments.Events.AscendedtheThrone.Nepherites ~jNephreusof Di j.odors -JAchoris - - 1Acoris - -jPsammoutisNepheritesMouthisNefaorotHakoriIpse matr not met with "1■j on the mo Imoments Jf Death of Cyrus theL Younger, 401B. C.|402rossl 388Few monuments of this period occur in Egypt.Tiie arts, which had long been on the decline,received a severe blow from the Persian invasion ;and many of the finest buildings were mutilated ordestroyed. Numerous artificers were sent to Persia,and, with the encouragement required for the veryexistence of art, Egypt had lost the skill for whichshe was once so conspicuous. Of Ne})lierites thephonetic name once occurs amidst the ruins ofThebes ; and if some additions were made by histwo successors to the temples* there and in LowerEgypt t, the style of the sculpture, like the scaleof their monuments, was degraded, and unworthyof a Pharaonic era. Egy})t, however, free from aforeign yoke, enjoyed that tranquillity which hadbeen so long denied, and Nepherites was even enabledto join in active hostilities against the enemiesThe name of Acoris oeciir.s in the tuinplc of Meileenct Ilaboo.-|- Diiriiii; his reij,'ii many stones scire taken from the (barnes of theTroici hi|)i(lis Mons, opposite Memphis, probably for the erection ofl)nil(lin:;s in that city.CHAP. II. REIGN OF Acorns. 207of his country. He therefore entered into a confederacywith the Lacedaemonians, and sent a fleetof 100 ships to their aid, with a supply of corn fortheir army: though this last fell into the hands ofthe enemy, in consequence of the transports puttinginto Rhodes, which had lately submitted to thePersians.Acoris, who succeeded Nepherites, reignedthirteen years. He made a treaty with Euagoras,king of Cyprus, against the Persians, and endeavoured,by every means in his power, to weaken thestrength and thwart the schemes of his adversary ;and the defection of Gas, the son of Ramus*,who had been for some time commander of the Persianfleet, and now, abandoning their service, hadentered into a league with Acoris and the Lacedaemonian,added to the intrigues of Orontes, soembarrassed the affairs of Artaxerxes, that Egyptwas enabled to enjoy perfect security, and to defyhis threatened projects of invasion.Nothing of consequence transpired during thereign of Psammoutis, which lasted only one year ;and, as might be expected, his name rarely occurson any edifice, either of Upper or Lower Egypt, tOf the short period occupied by his two successors,Nepherites IL and Mouthis, little can belearned either from the monuments, or from theaccounts of ancient writers, but that the Persians,intent upon the recovery of a country they hadWho was put to death by Psamaticus. Diodor. xiv.■j- It is found at the temple of Karnak in Thebes. I^ide Egypt andThebes, pp. 185. 517., and Plate II, and my Topographical Survey ofThebes.THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. II.long possessed, prepared to make a descent uponEgypt, which was attempted without success in thereign of the succeeding monarch.Mouthis was the last of the 29th or MendesianDynasty: and the 30th was composed, accordingto Manette, of three kings from Sebennytus.Both Dynasty, of Sehennyte Kings.Name fromAncient Authors.Name from theMonuments.Events.AscendedtheThrone.Nectanebes, "jNectabis of \Pliny - -JTeos, TTachos of Dio Idoris - - JNectanebes, "1Nectanabis of lPlutarch - JNectanebo, or "1Nakht-iiebo Jr Defeated by the Persians,j and flies to Ethiopia,B c. 340.B. c.1 3G2J 3-10In the commencement of Nectanebo's reign, thePersian monarch equipped a formidable expedition,by land and sea, and sent it to Egypt under theconnnand of Pharnabazus and Iphicratcs. He confidentlyexpected that so imposing a force wouldspeedily reduce the strongholds, and firmly establishhis authority throughout the country ; but thejealousy of the two commanders prevented thatunion which was necessary to insure success. Elysiumwas found to be impregnable, and all thefortified towns had been put into a proper state ofdefence. Pharnabazus, therefore, despairing ofmaking any impression ujiou them, advanced intothe interior ; but being ()])))()sed by the Egyptianking with a considerable force, and, in consequenceCHAP. U. NECTANEBO's DREAM. 209of the want of boats, being constantly impeded inhis movements by the various channels of the risingNile, he was obliged to retreat, and relinquish thehope of driving Nectanebo from his throne, and ofsubjecting his country to the yoke of Persia.The Egyptian monarch, now free from the dreadof foreign aggression, directed his attention towardsthe internal administration of affairs and the encouragementof art. Many temples in various partsof the country, from Philag to the sea-coast, wererepaired or enlarged ; a fine obelisk was cut, andtransported from the quarries of Syene * and thename of Nectanebo still occurs, in Upper andLower Egypt, as a lasting testimony of his munificencein the erection of public buildings. If hewas censured, in a dream, by the god Mars, forallowing his temple at Sebennytus to remain unrepairedduring the early part of his reign, he madeample amends for this unintentional neglect by themanner in which the commands of the deity wereobeyed, the building being restored with greatsplendour ; and this circumstance, unnoticed byany ancient writer, is recorded in a curious Greekpapyrus, which chance has preserved and modernresearches have discovered in an Egyptian tombsNectanebo, after a reign of eighteen years, wassucceeded by Teos or Tachos. He had scarcelyascended the throne when he was alarmed by thewarlike preparations of the Persian monarch, whoPliny says it was without hieroglyphics. He calls him Nectabis.f This highly interesting document is in the possession of S'D'Anastasy, Swedish Consul-general at Alexandria.VOL. I. P210 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. TI.threatened once more to invade his country. Hetherefore applied to Sparta for assistance ; andAgesilaus, eager to assist a nation which had previouslybefriended the Lacedaemonians, repairedhimself to Egypt with a strong force of Greekauxiliaries.On the arrival of the Spartan prince, Tachos,whose expectations had been raised by his highmilitary reputation, and who looked for a person ofstriking exterior, was greatly disappointed by theappearance of a little old man, whose figure andhabits seemed contemptible, and unworthy of aking. Treating him, therefore, with scorn anddisrespect, he refused him the post of generalissimo,which had been promised ; and reserving itfor himself, appointed Agesilaus to the command ofthe auxiliaries, and intrusted the fleet to Chabriasthe Athenian. Nor did he regard the counsels ofthe Spartan general relative to the movements ofthe army ; and contrary to his advice, led histroops in person into Phoenicia, committing thewhole direction of affairs at home to the hands of aviceroy. He had no sooner quitted the country,than Nectanebo, his uncle, aided by one of hisprincipal generals, conspired against him * ; andAgesilaus, partly from resentment at his previousconduct, and partly from an interested motive,having basely deserted him, the Egyptian monarchwas obliged to fly to Sidon. Mendesius, however,According; to I'liitarcli. This is (lifTcrcntly related by Diodorus ;who says that, instigated by the viceroy he had Cit, his son Noctancboconspired against him, and was defeated hy Afjesilaiis, who tints restoredTachos to the throne.CHAP. II. USURPATION OF NECTANEBO II. 211whom Tachos had designed as his successor, resolvedon opposing the usurper, and marched toattack him with an army of 100,000 men. Innumber they were very superior to the troops ofNectanebo, but, being composed principally oftownsmen and artificers, were inferior in militaryskill: and being opposed by the experience of Age-silas,they were routed at the first onset; and thus,through the Spartan general, Nectanebo obtainedundisputed possession of the Egyptian throne.*On the death of Artaxerxes Menon, whichhappened about the second year of Nectanebo II. t,Ochus or Artaxerxes III. ascended the throne ofPersia.During his reign, the Sicilians and Phoenicianshaving revolted from the Persians, entered into aconfederacy with the Egyptians, and assisted by4000 Greeks, sent by Nectanebo under Mentorthe Rhodian, succeeded in expelling the Persiansfrom their territories. This event seemed tohave removed the enemy, and every prospect ofan attack, to a convenient distance from thefrontier, and the Egyptian monarch felt secureagainst their aggressions. Shortly after, a formidablearmy, led by Ochus in person, having reducedall Phoenicia, and Mentor treacherously desertingto the enemy, the affairs of Nectanebo beganCornelius Nepos (in Agesilao) says Agesilaus received 220 talentsfrom Nectanebo, for his aid in obtaining the kingdom. According tothe same author, Chabrias was recalled by the Athenians, in consequenceof a representation made to them by the Persian monarch (inCalabria). He calls Tacitus Thames, and, in another place, Lacus.f Diodorus only allows 43 years for the reign of Artaxerxes II.P 1212 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II.to wear an alarming aspect, and Egypt was itselfinvaded. Every precaution which skill or couragecould suggest was taken by the Egyptian monarch ;the passes were well guarded; all the fortified townswere strongly garrisoned ; and, though inferior innumbers, his troops, both natives and Greek auxiliaries,were animated with that enthusiasm whichvalour, confidence, and a good cause can aloneimpart. The soldiers were eager to meet theenemy, and boldly rushed to battle. The fightwas obstinate ; but numbers prevailed. After asevere contest, the Persians were victorious ; andNectanebo, having abandoned his positions, inorder to retire upon and secure Memphis, his armybecame dispirited, Pelusium surrendered, and resistancewas no longer offered to the arms of Ochus.Flying, therefore, from Memphis, Nectanebo retiredinto Upper Egypt, and at length withdrew toEthiopia : the Delta and all Lower Egypt falling aprey to the conqueror, who finally succeeded inreducing the whole country, about the year 340, inthe 21st of his reign.During the previous occupation of Egypt by thePersian troops the inhabitants had been exposed tocruel persecutions. They were now doomed togreater sufferings. If Cambyses had committed enormities ; if he had derided the religionand insulted the deities of Egypt; if he had orderedthe bull Apis to be brought before him, and hadstabbed it with his dagger*, and been guilty ofevery species of oppression, — these were triflingIlcrodot. iii. :i9.CHAP. II.CRUELTIES OF OCHUS.compared with the enormities of Ochus. Wantoninjustice, murders, profanation of religious rites,and continual persecutions, seemed to delight him.The sacred Apis was slain, and served up at a banquet,of which Ochus and his friends partook; andall Egypt groaned under the tyranny of this inhumandespot. Two years, however, fortunatelyrelieved them from his caprices ; and the Egyptians,to show their abhorrence for him, and theirhatred of his name, substituted for it the representationof a sword, the emblem of destruction, intheir catalogue of kings.*Ochus and his two successors constituted the31st Dynasty of Manette : during which periodnothing happened worthy of notice ; and the invasionof the Macedonians in the year 33^2 put an endto the dominion of the Persians in Egypt.31 St Dynasty, of Persians.Name fromancient Authors.Name from theMonuments.Events.Began toreign.Ochus (or ArtaxerxesIII.) -ArisesDarius Codo-"|manus - J"Not met with"on the monuments.■In his 20th year. Deathof Philip, 338r Alexander makes himselfmaster of Egypt, 332 ;\^ dies, 323 : Ptolemy becomes governor andking of Egypt, 322—305.-V B. c.■340-336The arrival of Alexander was greeted with universalsatisfaction. Their hatred of the Persians, andtheir frequent alliances with the Greeks, who hadPlut. de Side et Osiride, s. ii.p 3THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. II.fought under the same banners against a commonenemy, naturally taught the Egyptians to welcomethe Macedonian army with the strongest demonstrationsof friendship, and to consider their comingas a direct interposition of the gods ; and so wise andconciliatory was the conduct of the early Polemics,that they almost ceased to regret the period whenthey were governed by native princes.To detail the events of the Ptolemaic history isnot my present intention, nor is it necessary to introduceany account of their reigns in a work whichpurposes to relate solely to the history and mannersof the ancient Egyptians ; but if the readeris desirous of consulting a chronological notice ofthose princes, I refer him to that work* from whichI have taken the dynasties inserted in the precedingpages.• My Egypt and Thebes, p. 508. et seq.No. 6. Alabaster pillow for the head. Alnwicli Miisruin.CHAP. III.EXTENT OF EGYPT.'215Vignette C. View of the Ruins and Vicinity of Philae.CHAP. III.Extent of the Country, — Revenue and Commerce. — Seaports.The Castes of the Egyptians. — The Sacerdotal Order. —Kings. — First Caste. — The Priests. — Second Caste. — MilitaryClass. — Troops. — Auxiliaries. — Arms. — The Enemies andConquests of the Egyptians. — March to War. — Their Humanity .Triumph. — Captives. — Military Laws and Punishments.Other Members of the Second Caste. — Third Caste. —Fourth Caste. — Laws and Government. — The Kings. —Judges. — Laws. — Passports. — Murder. — Right of Fathers.Minor Offences. — Theft. — Debt. — Deeds. — Marriages.Slaves. — Children. — Respect for Old Age, and for theirKings. — Gratitude of the Egyptians. — Uniformity of theirLaws. — Differ exit Lawgivers. — Governors of Provinces.Egypt, properly so called, is that portion of thevalley of the Nile lying between latitude 24° S'and 31° 37', or between the island of Philje at thecataracts of E'Sooan * and the Mediterranean Sea. t• According to the Oracle of Ammon, all those who drank the waterof the Nile and lived to the north of Elephantine were Egyptians.Herodot, ii. 18. f At Cape Boors.P 4216 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.With the exception of the northern part aboutthe Delta, its breadth is very limited, and thecultivated, and consequently inhabited portion, isfrequently confined to less than half the distancebetween the eastern and Libyan chains. Theaverage breadth of the valley from one mountainrange to the other, between Cairo in Lower andEdfoo in Upper Egypt, is only about seven miles ;and that of the cultivable land, whose limits dependon the inundation, scarcely exceeds five and a half,being in the widest part ten and three quarters, andin the narrowest two miles, including the river.*The extent in square miles of the northernmostdistrict between the pyramids and the sea is considerable,and that of the Delta alone, which formsa portion of it, may be estimated at 1976 squaremiles ; for though it is very narrow about its apex,at the junction of the modern Rosetta and Damiettabranches, it gradually widens on approachingthe coast, where the base of this somewhat irregulartriangle is eighty-one miles. And as muchirrigated land stretches on either side E. and W.of the two branches, the northern district, withthe intermediate Delta included, will be found tocontain about 4.500 square miles, or double thewhole arable land of Egypt, which may be computedat 2255 square miles, exclusive of the Fyoom,a small province consisting of about 340.Tliiit is ill Middle I',fi;yi)t, ;mel to the north of luhbo j hetwccnwhich town and E'Sooan the valley is so narrow that in some placesthere is scarcely any soil on cither side of the river, so that this partdoes not enter into the general avenif^e 1 have t^iven.CHAP. in. POPULATION OF EGYPT. ^17The number of towns and villages reported tohave stood on this tract, and in the upper parts ofthe valley of the Nile, appears almost incredible ;and Herodotus affirms that 20,000 populous citiesexisted in Egypt during the reign of Amass. *Diodorus, with more caution and judgment, calculates18,000 large villages and towns ; and statesthat, under Ptolemy Tagus, they amounted to upwardsof 30,000, a number which remained even atthe period when he wrote, or about forty-four yearsbefore our era. But the population was alreadygreatly reduced, and of the seven millions who onceinhabited Egypt, about three t only remained in thetime of the historian.Josephus, in the reign of Vespasian §, stillreckons seven millions and a half in the valley ofthe Nile, besides the population of Alexandria,which amounted to more than-300,000 souls ; and,according to Theocritus il, the number of towns atan earlier period was 33,339 : we may here howeverinclude some of the neighbouring provincesbelonging to Egypt, as he comprehends Ethiopia,Libya, Syria, Arabia, Pamphylia, Cilicia, Caria,Herodot. ii. 177.■f- Diod. i. 31. There are two readings of this passage : according tathe other, Diodorus reckons 7,000,000, and in his own time a no lessnumber.J Josephus makes Agrippa say, " kiyvnTov »yr/c fKrtivoi.icvi]HfXPK AiOioTTiov Kai Tr]g ivSaifiovo^ Apa€iac, o^opot; re oixja ti}q IvtiKtic,TTiVTiKovra Trpog rain evTaKeaung ixovaa fivpia^aQ aj/OpoiTron'." Alexandria,he adds, is thirty stadia in length, and ten in breadth. De Bello Jut.ii. 16. 4.§ Or he may allude to the period when Egypt was conquered by theRomans.II Theocr, Id. xvii, 82.^18 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.and Lycia within the dominions of Ptolemy Philadelphus:and other authors may occasionally haveextended the name of Egypt to its possessions inLibya, Ethiopia, and Syria ; since, making everyallowance for the flourishing condition of thishighly fertile country, the number of towns theymention is too disproportionate for the sole valley ofEgypt lying between the cataracts and the sea.The produce of the land was doubtless muchgreater in the earlier periods of its history than atthe present day, owing as well to the superiorindustry of the people as to a better system ofgovernment, and sufficed for the support of a verydense population ; yet Egypt, if well cultivated,could now maintain many more inhabitants than atany former period, owing to the increased extentof the irrigated land : and if the ancient Egyptiansenclosed those portions of the inundated edge ofthe desert which were capable of cultivation, thesame expedient might still be resorted to ; anda larger proportion of soil now overflowed by therising Nile offers additional advantages. Thatthe irrigated part of the valley was much less extensivethan at present, at least wherever theplain stretches to any distance E. and W., or tothe right and left of the river, is evident from thefact of the alluvial deposit constantly encroachingin a horizontal direction upon the gradual slope ofthe desert ; and, as a very perceptible elevationof the river's bed, as well as of the land of Egypt,has always been going on, it requires no argumentto prove that a perpendicular rise of the water mustCHAP. III. INCREASED EXTENT OF LAND. 219cause it to flow to a considerable distance over anopen space to the E. and W.Thus the plain of Thebes, in the time of Amu-noahIII., or about 1480 before our era, was notmore than two thirds of its present breadth ; andthe statues of that monarch, around which the alluvialmud has accumulated to the height of nearlyseven feet, are based on the sand that once extendedsome distance before them. * How erroneous,then, is it to suppose the drifting sands of the encroachingdesert t threaten the welfare of this country,or have in any way tended to its downfall ;and how much more reasonable is it to ascribe thedegraded condition, to which Egypt is reduced,to causes of a far more baneful nature, — foreigndespotism, the insecurity of property, and the effectsof that old age which it is the fate of every country,as well as every individual, to undergo.Besides the numerous towns and villages in theplain, many were prudently placed by the ancientEgyptians on the slope of the desert, at a shortdistance from the irrigated land, in order not tooccupy more than was necessary of soil so valuableThe ancient Egyptians were constantly obliged to raise moundsround the old towns to prevent their being overwhelmed by the inundationof the Nile, from the increased height of its rise after the lapseof a certain number of years. Herodot. ii. 137. Vide stiprd, p. 9.-f- It is true that the sand has accumulated about Banana, and theedge of the irrigated land in its vicinity, as well as about Kerdassehand a few other places, owing to the form of the valleys which open onthose spots from the Libyan desert, but it is not general throughoutthe valley of the Nile, even on this side of the river ; and the progressof the sand can never be very great in any part of Egypt, however itmay extend itself in Nubia over the exposed and narrow strip of land,which the west bank presents above the cataracts of E'Sooan.220 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.for its productions ; and frequently with a view ofencouraging some degree of cultivation in the desertplain, which, though above the reach of the inundation,might be irrigated by artificial ducts, or bywater raised from inland wells. Mounds and ruinedwalls still mark the sites of these villages in differentparts of Egypt ; and in a few instances the remainsof magnificent temples, or the authority of ancientauthors, attest the existence of large cities in similarsituations. Thus Abydus, Arthritis, Tentyris, partsof Memphis* and Oxyrinchus, stood on the edge ofthe desert; and the town that once occupied thevicinity of Qasr Wharton, at the western extremityof the Fyoom, was far removed from the fertilisinginfluence of the inundation.When towns or villages were surrounded withsand, the constant attention of the inhabitants preventedtheir being encumbered by it ; but, so soonas they were deserted, it began to accumulatearound them, and we sometimes find their monumentshalf buried in large drifts collected by thewinds As population and industry decreased, theonce cultivated spots of land on the desert plainwere gradually abandoned, and the vestiges of canalsor artificial water-courses, the indication of fieldsonce portioned into squares, or the roots of fruittrees, only now serve to attest the unremitting exertionsof a civilised people. It is not, however, toStrabo says the Sfrapcuin was " in a very sandy spot."■f- As at Al)ydii8 ; l)iit considering,' the l( ■ni;tli of" time lliis city hasl)cen deserted, and its position, the state of the niins there is notsurprising.CHAP. III. NOTIONS RESPECTING THE SANDS. '221be inferred that the irresistible encroachments ofmoving downs have curtailed the limits, or threatenedthe existence, of this fertile country; and thefearful picture craven by M. De Luc* must ratherbe looked upon as a composition than a studyfrom nature. " The sands of Egypt," he observes,•' were formerly remote from that country: and theOases, or habitable spots, still appearing in themidst of them, are the remains of soil which formerlyextended the whole way to the Nile ; the sand,transported thither by the western winds, havingoverwhelmed and buried this extensive tract, anddoomed to sterility a land once remarkable forits fruitfulness." This singular statement is partlyfounded on the report of Demon, who, in his visitto Bahnasat (Oxyrinchus), observed some buildingsnear the town so much encumbered with sandthat their summits were scarcely visible above it,and who consequently concluded the Libyan deserthad made proportionate encroachments along thewhole of the western side of the valley. Theopening here formed by the accidental positionof the hills and neighbouring ravines, and thequantity of drifted sand in the interior of the desertto the westward, have been the cause of its accumulation,and of the partial formation of downs inIn the Mercure de France, September, 1809, on the Moving Sandsof Africa.f The proper orthography of this name is Banana, Behiiasa, orBehneseh, and is said to have been given it from one of its queens (orthe wife of the governor of thephice), signifying Bahanissa, " the beautyof woman," or the most beautiful of women. Such is the accountgiven in an Arabic MS. history of that city, written by Abo Abdillah,Mohammed, Ebn Mohammed el Mukkari.222 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. HI.the vicinity ; but neither these, nor any other sanddrifts in similar exposed situations, could, after acareful examination of the whole valley, be deemedof such a nature as to endanger the fertility ofEgypt; though it is possible that, if no inundationof the Nile counteracted its effects, or if the alluvialdeposit did not continue to increase in height, thesand might then interfere with the extent of thearable land, and gradually tend to narrow its limits.For the satisfaction of those who are contentedwith simple facts, it will be sufficient to state thatthe breadth of the irrigated portion of the valley ismuch more extensive than it was at any formerperiod, and this increase will continue in spite ofthe very few local impediments which the driftedsand may accidentally offer ; and it may not be irrelevantto observe that no soil is better suited tomany kinds of produce than the irrigated edge ofthe desert*, even before it is covered by the fertilisingdeposit of the inundation.M. De Luc's idea respecting the Oases is noveland amusing ; and if Egypt once extended to thatdistance westward, instead of considering the accountsof ancient writers on its former populousnessat all exaggerated, we should be inclined tothink they had failed to ascribe an adequate numberof inhabitants to so extensive a region. Sofarfrom being the remains of a once cultivatedand level tract, extending to the valley of the Nile,the Oases are surrounded by limestone mountains,It generally consist!) of a clay mixed vvitii sand.CHAP. III. NARROW TRACT OF NUBIA. 223rising to the height of several hundred feet, andgenerally bounding them on all sides ; whose levelsummit is part of the same table land, or mountainplain, extending to and bordering the western sideof Egypt, which is overlooked by these precipitouscliffs in the same manner as the similarly depressedthough less extensive tract of the Oases. * Likeother provinces of Egypt, they were much moredensely peopled than at present ; and remains oftowns and villages attest their flourishing condition,even to the late period of the Roman dominion.Nubia, or that part of Ethiopia lying betweenthe cataracts of E'Sooan and Wadeee Halfe, wasat all times a thinly inhabited and unproductiveprovince; and the vicinity of mountains, frequentlyreaching to the Mater's edge, prevented its receivingthose benefits from the inundation, which thevery great rise of the water would have affordedto a more level and extensive tract, t It is in thisnarrow strip of land that the noxious approach ofmoving sand is more particularly felt, since its advancesare more sudden and overwhelming thanon a gradual slope ; and the ancient towns andtemples on the west side of the Nile are thereforefrequently surrounded or partially buried by itsaccumulating drifts. They are mostly built onthis bank ; and it is not improbable that theThe Oases look very much like a portion of the valley of the Nilesurrounded by the same kind of limestone mountains, but without anyriver.f The more southward the greater the perpendicular rise of theNile. It decreases, of course, gradually towards the mouth ; and whilein Nubia it is upwards of ten yards, at Rosetta it is only a very fewfeet.^24 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.unproductive nature of the soil was the principalreason for placing the towns there; the land onone side, which they were taught to consider sovaluable, not being thus unnecessarily wasted, andthe religious respect due to the abode of their gods,and regard for their own comfort, being sufficientmotives for industriously striving to prevent theencroachments of the desert on the other. For thatthey were aware of the danger threatened by thesand is evident from the crude brick walls frequentlyerected there as a protection to the monuments; and the fall of one of those barriers gaveingress to the torrent which has overwhelmedand concealed the entrance of the great temple atAboosimbel.REVENUES AND COMMERCE.That the conquests of the ancient Egyptians extendedbeyond the limits of their valley, is abundantlyproved by ancient authors and monumentalrecords ; but as I have already noticed this fact inthe foregoing chapter, I shall proceed to the considerationof the revenues arising from them, aswell as the commerce and other fiscal resources ofthe country.Judging from the sculptures of Thebes, thetribute annually received by the Egyptians fromnations they had subdued in Asia and NorthernEthiopia was of immense vahie, and tended greatlyto enrich the colliers of the stiite; and the quantityof gold and silver in rings and ingots, the variousobjects of hixiiry, vases of j)orcehiin and differentCHAP. III. THE REVENUE AND EXPORTS. 225metals, ivory, rare woods, precious stones, horses,dogs, wild animals, trees, seeds, fruits, gums,perfumes, spices, and other foreign productionsthere described, perfectly accord with the statementsof ancient authors.* And though they arepresented to the king, as chief of the nation, wemay conclude they formed part of the publicrevenue, and were not solely intended for his use ;especially in a country where royalty was under therestraint and guidance of salutary laws, and wherethe welfare of the community was not sacrificed tothe caprice of a monarch.According to Strabo, the taxes, even underPtolemy Alleges, the father of Cleopatra, the mostnegligent of monarchs, amounted to 12,500 talents,or between three and four millions sterling ; andthe constant influx of specie resulting from commercialintercourse with foreign nations, who purchasedthe count and manufactures of Egypt,during the very careful administration of its nativesovereigns, necessarily increased the riches of thecountry, and greatly augmented the revenue at thatperiod.Among the exports were yarn, fine linen cloth,Tacitus (Ann. ii. 60.) says, " The tribute paid by conquerednations was recorded at Thebes, as well as the specific weight of goldand silver, the quantity of arms, the number of horses, the offeringsof ivory and rich perfumes presented to the temples of Egypt, themeasures of grain, and the vas-ious supplies administered by every nation,making altogether a prodigious revenue."f The present revenue of Egypt has been variously stated : at 2i3, 4, and even near 5 millions sterling.J " All countries came into Egypt to buy corn," in the time of thefamine of Joseph. Gen. xli. 57.§ " Linen yarn out of Egypt." 1 Kings, x. 28. j 2 Chron. i. 16.VOL. I. Q226 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. HI.and embroidered work*, purchased by the Tyriansand Jews j chariots and horses t, bought by themerchants of Judaea in the time of Solomon at6001: and 150 § sheets of silver; and other commodities,produced or manufactured in the country.The Egyptians also derived important advantagesfrom their intercourse with India and Arabia;and the port of Philoteras, which, there is reason tobelieve, was constructed at a very remote period II,long before the exodus of the Israelites, was probablythe emporium of that trade. It was situatedon the eastern coast of the Red Sea, in latitude26° 9'; and though small, the number of ships itsbasin would contain sufficed for a constant trafficbetween Egypt and Arabia, no periodical windsthere interfering with the navigation, at any seasonof the year.Whether they had a direct communication withIndia at the same early epoch, or were suppliedthrough Arabia with the merchandise of that country,it is not possible now to determine ; but evenan indirect traded was capable of opening to thema source of immense wealth ; and that the produceFine linen, with broidered work from Egypt," was purchased bythe Tyrians. Ezek. xxvii. 7. That painted or embroidered sail-clothwas used by the Egyptians for their pleasure-boats, at least those belongingto the kings and chief persons of the country, is prove by thesculptures of Thebes,■f 2 Clu-on. i. IG, 17.; and 1 Kings, x.t 70/. sterling. § 17/. 10.?.il Already noticed in Chap. II. p. 4.j. It was previously calledEnnui, " op])iduni parvuni est TlMinnm, pro (suo :dii Philomelascribunt." Strabo says it received the name of " i'liiloteras from thesister of the second Ptolemy." lib. xvii. I'lin. vi. 'Ji).1[ Strabo thinks that in former times a fleet of twenty ships neverpasseth the Straits of lkil)elMiandcl) ; but the Indian trade might havel)een carried on through Arabia. Strabo (il). xvii.) on Alexandria.CHAP. III. TRADE WITH INDIA. 2^7tions of India deil actually reach Egypt we havepositive testimony from the tombs of Thebes.The Scripture history shows the traffic establishedby Solomon with India, through the RedSea, to have been of very great consequence, producing,in one voyage, no less than 450 talents ofgold*, or 3,^240,000/. sterling; and to the samebranch of commerce may be ascribed the maincause of the flourishing condition of Tyre itself.And if the Egyptian trade was not so direct as thatof Solomon and the Tyrians, it must still be admittedthat any intercourse with India at so remotea period would be highly beneficial to the country,since it was enjoyed without competition, and consequentlyafforded increased advantages.The other harbours in this part of the ArabianGulf, — MyosHormos, Terence, Arsinoe, Nechesia,and Leucos Portus, — were built in later times ; andthe lucrative trade they enjoyed was greatly increasedafter the conquest of Egypt by the Romans:120 vessels annually leaving the coast of Egypt forIndia, at midsummer, about the rising of the dog-start,and returning in the month of December orJanuary. " The principal objects of oriental traffic,"says Gibbon, " were splendid and trifling : silk (apound of which was esteemed not inferior in valueto a pound of gold), precious stones, and a varietyof aromatics." When Strabo visited Egypt the MosHormos seems to have superseded Terence, and2 Chron. viii. 18. ; 1 Kings, ix. 26.■f- The Peripliis gives " the month of July, which is E[;iphi j " andPliny (lib. vi. 20.), " ante Canis ortum," about July 2(3.228 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.all the other maritime stations on the coast ; andindeed it possessed greater advantages than anyother, except Philoteras and Arsinoe, in its overlandcommunication with the Nile : yet Terence, in thelater age of Pliny, was again preferred to its rival.From both ports the goods were taken on camels byan almost level road across the desert to Coptos*,and thence distributed over different parts ofEgypt ; and, in the time of the Polemics andCigars, those particularly suited for exportation toEurope went down the river to Alexandria, wherethey were sold to merchants who resorted to thatcity at a stated season.At a subsequent period, during the reigns of theArab caliphs, Apollinopolis Para, or Quos, succeededCoptos, as the rendezvous of caravans fromthe Red Sea ; and this town flourished so rapidly,in consequences the preference it enjoyed, that inAboolfldda's time it was second only to Fostat, thecapital of Egypt ; until it ceded its place to Qeneii,as Myos Hormos was destined to do in favour ofKossayr. Philoteras, however, continued to beresorted to after the Arab conquest ; and it wasduring the reigns of the Egyptian caliphs that themodern Kossayr t took the place of that ancient port.The Myos Hormos, called also Aphrodite i, stood♦ " Coptos Iiulicaruni Aral)i<Tiniiii(|iic incrciimi Ts'ilo proNimuinfcm|Joriiiiii." I'lin. v. 9. " All the Indian and Arabian goods, andeven those that come from Ethiopia by the Red Sea, are brought toCopious." Strabo, xvii.+ Pliilotcras, now in ruins, is known by the name of Oltl Kossayr.4; Now called Abooshar. Stralx), " l-ira Mroij oji/ioj' K-ai A(l>fwCiTTfQcpiiov KdXtinVdi X(/if)'ff /tf-yar," lib. xvii. Agatharcides says, it wasafterwards culled the Port of Venus.CHAP. Iir. PORTS OF THE RED SEA. 229in latitude 27*^ 22', upon a flat coast, backed bylow mountains, distant from it about three miles ;where a well, the Fons Tadnos*, supplied thetown and ships with water. The port was morecapacious than those of Terence and Philoteras ;and though exposed to the winds, it was secureagainst the force of a boisterous sea. Several roadslimited at the gates of the town, from Terence andPhiloteras on the south, from Arsinoe on the north,and from Coptos on the west ; and stations suppliedthose who passed to and from the Nile with waterand other necessaries.Terence owed its foundation to Ptolemy Philadelphus,who called it after the name of his mother,the wife of Tagus or Soter.f The town was extensive,and was ornamented with a small but eleganttemple of Serapis ; and though the harbour wasneither deep nor spacious, its position in a recedinggulf t tended greatly to the safety of the vesselslying within-it, or anchored in the bay. A roadled thence direct to Coptos, furnished with theusual stations, or hydreumas ; and another, whichalso went to the emerald mines, joined, or rathercrossed it, from ApolHnopolis Magna." Mox deserta ad Myos Hermon, iii Fons Tadnos." Plin. vj. 29.f " Terence oppidum matris Philadelphia nomine, ad quod iter aCopts dedimus." Plin. vi. 29.J Strabo says, " Terence placed in a deep bay." The headland ofCape Nose stretches out on the east of it to the distance of 21 milesfrom the line of the shore, agreeing with another remark of the geographer,that " an isthmus projects into the Red Sea near the city ofTerence, which, though without a port, affords a convenient shelter,from the vicinity of the headland."Q 3230 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.Arsinoe, which stood at the northern extremityof the Red Sea, near the modern town of Sooez,was founded by the second Ptolemy, and so namedafter his sister.* Though vessels anchored thererode secure from the violence of the sea, its exposedsituation, and the dangers they encounteredin working up the narrow extremity of the gulf,rendered its position t less eligible for the Indiantrade than either Myos Hormos or Terence ; andhad it not been for the convenience of establishinga communication with the Nile by a canal, and theshortness of the journey across the desert in thatpart, it is probable it would not have been chosenfor a seaport.The small towns of Nechesia and the LeucosPortus were probably of Roman date, though thenatural harbours they possess may have been usedat a much earlier period. Their positions are stillmarked by the ruins on the shore, in latitude ^Zi° 51/and 25° 37\ where I discovered them in 1826,while making a survey of this part of the coastfrom Sooez to Terence. The former stands in, andperhaps gave the name to, the Wadeee Nukkarce ;" Arsiiiocn conditam morris nomine in sin cliarandra, aPtolemiL'o I'liihultilpho." Plin. vi. 29.•f It probably succeeded to some more ancient town. It is not certainthat Ciysma stood there; lint Qolzim appears to have occupiedthe site of Arsinoe and part of the nuclei Sooez. Vide my Egyptand Tiiel)es, p. TAO. note f. lIerodt)tus (ii. l.'iS.) says the canalentered the Red Sea near toPatiiinos; we may therefore concludethat town stood on the same spot as Arsinoe. We again trace in Patmosthe name Pi-thon. It was common to many towns. Thou,Tinmii, and others are evidently derived, like Tlnnnmim, from 'J'hmei,the goddess of Truth or Justice. In egyptian pi is " the," and \uibelonging to."CHAP. in. IMPORTS. EMERALDS. 231the latter is called E'Shoona, or " the Magazine *,"and, from being built of very white limestone, wasreadily indicated by the Arabs when I inquired ofthem the site of the White Harbour.Many other ports, the " Portus multi " of Pliny t,occur along the coast, particularly between Terenceand Kossayr ; but though they all have landmarksto guide boats in approaching their rocky entrances,none of them have any remains of a town, or thevestiges of habitations.The principal objects introduced in early timesinto Egypt, from Arabia and India, were spicesand various oriental productions t, required eitherfor the service of religion, or the purposes ofluxury ; and a number of precious stones, lapislazuli, and other things brought from those countries,are frequently discovered in the tombs ofThebes, bearing the names of Pharaohs of the18th Dynasty. The mines of their own desertdid, indeed, supply the emeralds they used ; andthese were worked as early, at least, as the reign ofAmunoph III., or 1425 b. c, but many otherstones must have come from India ; and someplants, as the Nymphs Nelumbo, could only havebeen introduced from that country. §Though we cannot ascertain the extent or exactThis word is taken from the Arabic Mukhzen, of similar import.f Plin, vi, 29.j Chinese bottles, with inscriptions in that language, are foundin ancient tombs at Thebes, but of what date I am uncertain.§ It was evidently not indigenous to Egypt, from the care that wasnecessary in planting it, and is now totally unknown in the valley of theNile. Before they introduced it, would they not have seen the plant?and who was likely to bring the roots but some of their own people ?Q 4252 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.quality of the various imports, of goods re-exportedfrom Egypt, or the proportion which these last boreto the internal consumption, it is reasonable toconclude that every article of luxury was a sourceof revenue to the government ; and that bothnative and foreign productions coming under thisdenomination, whether exported or sold in Egypt,tended to enrich the state, to which they belonged,or paid a duty.That the riches of the country were immense isproved by the appearance of the furniture and domesticutensils, and by the great quantity of jewelsof gold, silver, precious stones, and other objects ofluxury in use among them in the earliest times :their treasures became proverbial throughout theneighbouring states*, and a love of pomp andsplendour continued to be the ruling passion of theEgyptians till the latest period of their existence asan independent state, which is fully demonstratedby the history of the celebrated Cleopatra.Another source of wealth was derived from thegold mines in the desert of the upper country.Their position t, still known to the Arabs, is abouts.K. from Bahayreh, a village opposite the town ofEdfoo t, or Apollinopolis Magna, and at a distanceof nearly ten days' journey from that place, in the" Greater riches than the treasures in Egypt." Ep. Her. xi.26. " The pomp ofEjijnt." Ezck. xxxii. 12. Conf. also the jewelsof silver and gold which the Jews borrowed of the Egyptians. Exod.xii. 35.f They have lately been visited by Monsieur Linant and Mr. Honoswho have found the account of the Arabs to agree very well withtheir position.X Edfoo is in latitude 21" 58'.CHAP. III. GOLD AND SILVER MINES. 233mountains of the Bishareeh. The Arab authors,Edrisi, Ebn-Said, and Aboolfidda, place them atGebel Obligee, a mountain situated in the landof Began ; and this last word at once points out theBisharee desert, being still used by the tribe astheir own name. The gold lies in veins of quartz *,in the rocks bordering an inhospitable valley andits adjacent ravines : but the small quantity theyare capable of producing by immense labour,added to the difficulty of procuring water, andother local impediments, would probably renderthe re-opening of them at the present day an unprofitablespeculation ; and indeed in the time ofAboolfidda t they only just covered their expenses,and have never been worked since theywere abandoned by the Arab caliphs. Accordingto Agatharcides' account, the toil of extractingthe gold was immense : it was separated from thepounded stone by frequent washings, and this processappears to be represented in the paintings oftombs executed during the reign of Osirtasen, andother ancient Pharaohs. We have no positive noticeof their first discovery, but it is reasonable to supposethey were worked at the earliest periods of theEgyptian monarchy; and the total of their annualproduce is stated by Hecata[3us t to have been re-mohammedAli had an idea of re-opening them, but I believe theproject has been abandoned. Wherever the ancients met with veinsof quartz in the desert, I observe they invariably broke up portions ofit, doubtless to try if it contained gold.f Or Omad-e'deen-Aboolfeda, Ismail-ben-Nasser. He was king ofHannah in Syria, and lived about the year 730 of the Hegira, a. d.1334.J Diodorus. 49., on his authority.234 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.corded in a temple founded by a monarch of the18th Dynasty. He also notices an immense sumannually produced from the silver mines of Egypt,which amounted to 3,200 myriads of mine.* Besidesthese were valuable mines of copper, lead, iron,and emeralds, all of which still exist in the desertsof the Red Sea ; and the sulphur, which aboundsin the same districts, was not neglected by the ancientEgyptians.The riches, then, of the country were principallyderived from taxes, foreign tribute, monopolies,commerce, mines, and above all from the productionsof a fruitful soil. The wants of the poorerclasses were easily satisfied ; the abundance ofgrain, herbs, and esculent plants afforded an amplesupply to the inhabitants of the valley of the Nile,at a trifling expense, and with little labour ; and somuch corn was produced in this fertile country, thatafter sufficing for the consumption of a very extensivepopulation, it offered a great surplus for theforeign market ; and the quantity on hand enablingthe peasant to sell it at a low rate necessarilyafforded considerable profit to the government,being exported to other countries, or sold to thetraders who visited Egypt for commercial ]purposes.Though the lower classes of the people appearto have been contented with their condition, thereis no evidence of their having participated inVide Kuprii, ]). 1 13.■]• An idea may' Ix; former of the (|iiantity produced in F^jjypt fromthe account of the famine of Joseph, when they were enabled to lay upfrom the superabundance of Haven plenteous years enough corn tosuffice for seven years of dearth. (icn. xli. 47,CHAP. III. EGYPT HAPPY UNDER THE PHARAOHS. 235the affluence enjoyed by the higher orders ; andthe very great distinction between them and thericher classes is remarkable, as well in the submissiveobeisance to their superiors as in theirgeneral appearance, their dress, and the style oftheir houses. Some, indeed, seem to have beenlittle better lodged and fed than those of the presentday * ; and the degrading custom of prostrationbefore those in authority argues that theywere subject to severe discipline and punishment,though, doubtless, only administered accordingto the rules of justice. That they were happyunder their native princes, and contented with thelaws and early institutions of the Pharaohs, isstrongly argued by the constant feeling of dissatisfactionevinced by them against foreign rule, notonly in the time of the despotic Persians, but of thePolemics, who sought, on many occasions, to flattertheir religious prejudices, to content the priesthood,and even to court the good will of the people.And though some allowance must be made inthese cases for the effect of change, the influenceof the priests, and the impatience common to allpeople under a foreign master, we may fairlyconclude, that the spirit of their laws, under theoriginal system, was dictated by a scrupulous regardto justice and the benevolence of a paternalgovernment.Herodotus (ii. 47.) speaks of poor people in Egypt who hadscarcely any thing to live upon. I do not, however, imagine they sufferedfrom hunger like the modern peasants, nor could the taxes havebeen as numerous or as oppressive. Diod. i. 80.Q3() THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.CASTES.The great distinction of classes * maintained inEgypt was characteristic of the East, and customnaturally removed every unpleasing impressionwhich so readily occurs to men educated with differenthabits and ideas ; and provided justice wasregarded, it offered no cause of discontent in aneastern nation. The division of Egyptian societyinto separate classes, or castes, has been noticedby many authors. Herodotus t says they weredivided into seven tribes, one of which was thesacerdotal, another of the soldiers, and the remainingfive of the herdsmen, swineherd, shopkeepers,interpreters, and boatmen. Diodorus states that,like the Athenians, who being an Egyptian colonyderived this institution from the parent country,they were distributed into three classes, the priests,the peasants, or husbandmen, from whom thesoldiers were levied, and the artizans, who wereemployed in handicraft and other similar occupations,and in common offices among the people § ;but in another place || he extends the number tofive, and reckons the pastors, husbandmen, andartificers, independent of the soldiers and priests.The Etruscans were also divided into for castes ; but this institutionappears rather to have been derived from the East than to havetaken its rise in Italy. They were, 1. the Larches, Tyrant, or lords :2. the Tiisci, or priesthood : 3. the Kasen;e, or warriors; and, l. thepeople, or popular caste.t Herod, ii. HJ4. :j; Diodorns. i. 28.§ As public weighers, notaries, and oilier oCdie usual avocations oflargo towns.II Diod. i. 74.CHAP. in. CASTES. THEIR NUxMBEK. 237Strabo limits them to three, the military, husbandmen,and priests; and Plato* divides them intosix bodies, the priests, artificers, shepherds, huntsmen,husbandmen, and soldiers ; each peculiar art,or occupation, he observes, being confined to a certainsubdivision of the caste, and every one engagedin his own branch, without interfering with theoccupation of another: as in India and China, wherethe same trade or employment is followed in successionby father and son.From the statements above noticed, the exactnumber of classes into which the Egyptians weredivided appears uncertain ; but as there is reasonto conclude that some authors have subdivided themain castes into several of their minor branches,while others have been contented with the collectivedivisions, I shall endeavour to point out (as Ihave already had occasion to do in a former work)the four great comprehensive classes, and the principalsubdivisions of each.The first caste was the sacerdotal order ; thesecond, the soldiers and peasants, or agriculturalclass ; the third was that of the townsmen ; and thefourth, the plebs, or common people. The first wascomposed of the chief priests or pontiffs t, as wellas minor priests of various grades belonging to differentdeities, prophets, judges, hierophants, magistrates,hierogrammats or sacred scribes, basilicain TiinjEO, near the beginning.+ Egypt and Thebes, p. 230.J " Each deity has several priests and a high-priest." Herod, ii.37.THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.grammars or royal scribes, spliragistee *, Inerostoli for dressers and keepers of the sacred robes, doctors,embalmers, hierophori t, pterophori§, praecones,who appear to have been the same as the pasto-shrill,keepers of the sacred animals, hierolaotomior masons of the priestly order, sacred sculptorsand draughtsmen, beadles, sprinkles of water, andaTTOfxtjioiy mentioned by Hesychius, who droveaway the flies with chown'es, and several inferiorfunctionaries attached to the temples.The second was divided into the military, farmers,husbandmen, gardeners, huntsmen, boatmen,and others : the third consisted of artificers, tradesmen,shopkeepers, musicians, builders, carpenters,masons, sculptors, and ]probably potters, publicweighers*, and notaries ; and in the fourth maybereckoned pastors, poulterer, fowlers, fishermen,labourers, servants, and, generally speaking, thecommon people. Many of these were again subdivided,as the artificers and tradesmen, accordingto their peculiar trade or occupation, and as thePlutarch (dc Isiil. s. xxxi.) says the Phlogistic were a chess ofpriests whose office was to examine the victims, aiui to |)iit a seal uponthem, previous to their hoeing sacrifice. fide Herod, ii. 38.-|- Plutarch. de Is. s. iii. " Those who have access to the adytiunto dotlie the statues of the gods." rosetta stone.I The bearers of sacred emblems in the religious processions.^ Those wiio bore the flal)ella and fans in the processions in whichthe statues of the gods were carried.II Bearers of the small statues, or shrines, of the gods. J'ii!r Diod.i. 29.% Ilerod. ii. OH. " There are cci'taiu jji'rsons, both mi'u and women,whose business it is to take care of the sacred animals, and ofeach peculiar species: it is an honourable emphj^meut, and the son succeedshis father in the office."** The G'rtZi/^«w<'/( of the present day: who are also |)ul)lic scribes.CHAP. III. HINDOO CASTES. ^39pastors, into others, shepherds, goatherds, andswineherd ; which last were, according to Herodotus,the lowest grade, not only of the class but ofthe whole community, since no one would eithermarry their daughters or establish any family connectionwith them ; and so degrading was theoccupation of tending swine, that they were lookedupon as impure, and were even forbidden to entera temple without previously undergoing a purification.Herodotus, indeed, affirms*, "they couldnot enter a temple'* and the prejudices of theIndians against this class of persons almost justifyour belief of the historian.In my division of the Egyptian castes I havebeen guided by Diodorus, and have classed thesoldiers with the husbandmen ; though, I confess,to have placed them in a caste by themselves appearspreferable, or with the magistrates who werenot priests, as among the Hindoo. If they reallywere a class of the same caste as the peasants, thatclass must have ranked far above the others, andhave been almost as distinct as a separate caste ;nor did the fact of their occasionally following agriculturalpursuits reflect upon them any disgrace :and in like manner, a Hindoo soldier, or even abrahmin, may cultivate land without the fear ofreproach.Among the Indians are four castes: 1. Brahmins; 2. Cshatriyas ; 3. Vistas ; 4. Sudras. Thefirst is taken from the mouth, the organ of theintellectual part ; the second, from the arms, orHerod, ii. 47.240 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.defending part ; the third, from the thigh, or supportingpart ; and the fourth, from the feet, orlabouring part : comprising the priests and philosophers,the magistrates and soldiers, the husbandmenand merchants, and the artizans, labourers,and common people. Some ancient authors,among whom is Megasthenes, divide the Indiansdifferently ; and as it is interesting to compare hisaccount of the ancient Indian system with that ofthe Egyptians, I shall here introduce it.*According to Megasthenes, the whole populationof India is distributed into seven castes ;among which, that of the philosophers is held inestimation as the first, notwithstanding their numberis the smallest.Whenever any one sacrifices, or prepares thefeasts of the dead in private, it is usual for him tomake use of the service of one of them ; but thekings publicly gather them together in an assembly,which is called synod, held at the commencementof each new year, in the gate of the king,where all the ]philosophers assemble, in order thatwhatever useful information they have collectedrelative to the increase of the fruits and animals,or to the state, may be produced in public. Andit is a law, that if any among them be threetimes convicted of falsehood, he shall be doomed tosilence during life : but the upright, they releasefrom tax and tribute. The second division is theFrom Strabo, lib. XV. Cry. p. 'ilG.t This is an oriental expression. Tuis "the Sublime Porte.'Conf, Psalm xxvii. !>. and c. 4. llntli, iv. 1. Deut. xxi. 19.CHAP. III. Demosthenes' ACCOUNT. 241.caste of the agriculturists, who are the mostnumerous and worthy. They pursue their occupationfree from military duties and fear ; neitherconcerning themselves with civil, public, or anyother business ; and it often happens that, at thesame time and place, the military class is arrayedand engaged with an enemy, whilst the agriculturalpopulation, depending upon the other for protection,plough and dig without any sort of danger ;and since the land is all held of the king, they cultivateupon hire, paying a rent of one fourth of theproduce.The third caste is that of the shepherds andhuntsmen, whose sole occupation is hunting, grazing,and selling cattle, for which they give a premiumand stipend : and for clearing the land ofwild beasts and birds which destroy the grain, theyare entitled to a portion of corn from the king, andlead a wandering life, dwelling in tents.After the huntsmen and shepherds, the fourthrace is that of the landholders, artisans, and bodilylabourers of all kinds ; of whom some bring tribute,or, instead of it, perform stated service in thepublic works. But the manufacturers of arms andbuilders of ships are entitled to pay and sustenancefrom the king, as they labour only for him. Thekeeper of the military stores gives out arms to thesoldiers, and the governor of the docks lets shipsfor hire to the sailors and merchants.The fifth caste is the military, who, when disengaged,spend the rest of their time at ease instations properly provided by the king; in orderVOL. I. R^242 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. Til.that, whenever occasion requires, they may beready to march immediately, carrying with themnothing else than their bodies. The sixth are theinspectors, whose business it is to pry into all mattersthat are carried on, and report them privatelyto the king ; for which purpose, in the cities theyemploy women of the town, and in the army thefollowers of the camp. They are chosen from themost upright and honourable men. The seventhclass are the counsellors and assessors of the king,by whom the government laws and administrationare conducted.It is unlawful either to contract marriages fromanother caste, or to change one profession or occupationfor another, or for one man to undertakemore than one, unless the person so doing shall beone of the philosophers, which is permitted onaccount of their dignity.Of the governors, some preside over rural, othersover civil, others again over military affairs. Tothe first class is intrusted the inspection of therivers, and the admeasurements of the fields, afterthe inundations as in Egypt, and the covered aqueductsby which the water is distributed into channelsfor the equal supply of all according to theirwants. The same have the care of the huntsmen,with the power of dispensing rewards and punishmentsaccording to their deserts. They collectalso the tribute, and inspect all the arts which areexercised upon the land, as of wrights and carpenters,and the workers of brass and other metals.They also construct the highways, and at every tenCHAP. III. OF THE CASTES IN INDIA. 243stadia place a milestone, to point out the turningsand distances.The civil governors are divided into six petals,some of whom overlook the operative works, andothers have charge of all aliens, distributing tothem an allowance, and taking cognizance of theirlives, if they give them habitations ; some they sendaway, but they take care of the goods of such ashappen to die, or are unwell, and bury them whendead. The third class registers the births anddeaths, how and when they take place ; and thisfor the sake of the tribute, that no births either ofgood or evil, nor any deaths, may be unnoticed.The fourth has the care of the tavern keepers andexchanges : these have charge also of the measuresand qualities of the goods, that they may be soldaccording to the proper stamps. Nor is any onepermitted to barter more, aimless he pay a doubletribute. The fifth class presides over the manufacturedarticles, arranging them, and separatingthe stamped from the common, the old from thenew, and laying a fine upon those who mix them.The sixth and last exacts the tithe of all thingssold, with the power of inflicting death on allsuch as cheat. Each, therefore, has his privateduties. But it is the public business of them allto control the private as well as civil affairs of thenation, and to inspect the repairs of the publicworks, the prices, markets, ports, and temples.After the civil governors, is the third college,which presides over military affairs, and this in likemanner is divided into six petals, of which theR !2244 THE Ancient EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.first is associated with the governor of the fleet ;the second, with him who presides over the yokesof oxen, by which the instruments are conveyed, theprovisions for themselves and the oxen, and all theother baggage of the army : they have with them,moreover, attendants who play upon drums andbells, together with grooms, smiths, and their under-workmen: and they send forth their foragers to thesound of bells, recompensing their speed withhonour or punishment, and attending to theirsafety. The third class has the charge of the infantry.The fourth, of the cavalry. The fifth, ofthe chariots. The sixth, of the elephants. Moreover,there are royal stables for the horses andbeasts, and a royal arsenal, in which the soldierdeposits his. accoutrements when he has done withthem, and gives up his horse to the master of thehorse, and the same with respect to his beasts.They ride without bridles : the oxen draw thechariots along the roads ; while the horses are ledin halters, that their legs may not be injured, northeir spirit impaired by the draught of the chariots.In addition to the charioteer, each chariot containstwo riders ; but in the equipment of an elephant itsconductor is the fourth, there being three bowmenalso upon it.Such is the account given by Megasthenes ofthe Indian castes.The Egyptian nobles were of the upper classes,cither of the ]priestly or military orders ; and thoughDiodorus* tells us all the J*'.gy[)tians were equallyDioil. i. 92,CHAP. III. EGYPTIAN CASTES. — THE KING. ^Z'\f5noble, it is not to be supposed that this applied totheir rank in society, during life, since in no country,except perhaps India, does the distinction ofcastes appear to have been so arbitrarily maintainedas with the ancient Egyptians. After death, however,no grade was regarded, and every good soitwas supposed to become united to that essencefrom which it derived its origin ; and the title ofOsiris was applied indiscriminately to men andwomen of every rank.THE KING.It was also from one or other of those tv/o ordersthat the king was obliged to be chosen j and if hehad been a member of the military class, previousto his ascending the throne, it was peremptorilyrequired by the laws* that he should then be admittedinto the sacerdotal order, and be instructedin all the secret learning of the priests.He was the chief of the religion and of thestate t, he regulated the sacrifices in the temples,and had the peculiar right of offering them to thegods upon grand occasions ; the title and office ofPlutarch, de Is. ix. " If the choice fell on a soldier, he was immediatelyinitiated into the order of priests, and instructed in theirabstruse and hidden philosophy."■f- Like the caliphs and Moslem sultans.j In the absence of the kings, the priests officiated. Psammaticusoffered libations with the other eleven kings. Herod, ii. 151. In thesculptures the kings always make the offerings in the temples. At Rome,the sovereign held the office of Pontifex maximus. Conf. also Aristotle," (JTparrjyoQ rei' Kai SiKacrrrjc; 6 fiaaiXivi;, kcu rii)v vpog tovq Beovi;Kvpiog." Arise. Polit. iii. 14'. Melchizedec was king, priest, and prophet.Among the Indians of America, the sovereign was also a priest. TheLacedaemonian monarchs were consecrated, at their coronation, priestsof Jupiter Uranus. The kings of Athena were intrusted with theVOL. I. *R 3246 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.president of the assemblies " belonged exclusivelyto him, and he superintended the feasts andfestivals in honour of the deities. He had theright of proclaiming peace and war; he commandedthe armies of the state, and rewarded those whoseconduct in the field, or on other occasions, meritedhis approbation ; and every privilege was grantedhim which was not at variance with good policyor the welfare of his people.The sovereign power descended from father toson; but in the event of an heir failing, the claimsfor succession were determined by proximity ofparentage, or by right of marriage.* Nor werequeens forbidden to undertake the management ofaffairs t; and on the demise of their husbands theyassumed the office of regent ; but, though introducedinto the annals of Manette, and Nitocris ismentioned by Herodotus as a queen, their namesdo not appear in the lists of sovereigns sculi)tinedin the temples of Thebes and Abydus.In some instances the kingdom was usurped bycare of divine worship and the performance of the sacred rites ; andmany ancient monarchs are mentioned, as uniting the office of priestand king : thus Virgil, " Rex Anus, rex idem honiinum, Phcrliicjucsacerdos." With the Jews, the King provided the offering, and thepriest officiated. Ezck. xlv. 17. 2 Chron. xxix. 21. Nnnib. iii. 10.and xvi. 10. It was imputcil to Saul a sin for having offered a l)iM"ntoffering in the plate of samuel. 1 Sam. xiii. 9. 1.3.This I coiichulc from the motte of deriving their right from ancientkings, sometimes passing over many intermediate names, when theymention their predecessors.-|- The egyptians, at a later period, do not seem to have been favour-illic'to female government, and obliged (Cleopatra to marry her youngerbrother, on the death of the elder Ptolemy; and even afterwards wefid the name of her son, Neoctesar, introduced into tiic sculptureswith her own. v, vol. ii. p. 5!).CHAP. Iir. RIGHT OF SUCCESSION. 24?a powerful chief, as in the case of Amass, or bysome Ethiopian prince, who either claiming a rightto the Egyptian crown from relationship with thereigning family, or taking advantage of a disturbedstate of the country, secured a party there, and obtainedpossession of it by force of arms ; but thereare no grounds for supposing that the Egyptianmonarchy was elective, as Synesius would lead usto conclude. He affirms that the candidates forthe throne of Egypt repaired to a mountain atThebes, on the Libyan side of the Nile, where allthe voters assembled, and according to the showof hands and the proportionate consequence ofeach voter, who was either of the sacerdotal ormilitary order, the election of the king was decided.But his authority is not of sufficient weighton so doubtful a question, and from being at variancewith all that history and monumental recordhave imparted to us, cannot possibly be admitted.We find the kings recorded on the monumentsas having succeeded from father to son for severalgenerations ; and if the election of a king ever tookplace in Egypt it could only have been when alllawful aspirants were wanting. Diodorus* says,*' In ancient times kings, instead of succeedingby right of inheritance, were selected for theirmerits:" but whether this really was the case atthe commencement of the Egyptian monarchy itis difficult to determine. Indeed, both Herodotusand Diodorus mention the first kino-s beings succeededby their children ; and we have positiveDiod. i. 43.R 4248 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAr. III.authority from the sculptures that this was the caseduring the eighteenth and succeeding dynasties :nor did Plutarch*, in saying "the kings werechosen from the priests or the warriors," mean thatthe monarchy was elective, except when an heir waswanting. And this is further confirmed by the formulain the Rosetta stone : ** The kingdom beingestablished unto him and unto his children for ever."But they did not presume, in consequence of theright of succession, to infringe the regulationsenacted for their public and private conduct ; andthe laws of Egypt, which formed part of the sacredbooks, were acknowledged to be of divine origin,and were looked upon with superstitious reverence.To have called them in question, or to have disobeyedthem, would have been considered rebellionagainst the Deity, and the offender wouldhave paid the forfeit of his presumption and impiety.That their laws were framed with the greatestregard to the welfare of the community is abundantlyproved by all that ancient history has impartedtons; and Diodorus observes, "this unparalleledcountry could never have continuedthroughout ages in such a flourishing condition,if it had not enjoyed the best of laws and customs,and if the people had not been guided by the mostsalutary regulations." Nor were these framed forthe lower orders only; and their kings, says thesame author, so far from indulging in those actsPint, lie Is. ft. t i^'oil- '• ♦>!>.I Diod. i. 70.CHAP. III. DUTIES OF THE KINGS. 249of arbitrary will, unrestrained by the fear of censure,which stain the character of sovereigns inother monarchical states, were contented to submitto the rules of public duty, and even of privatelife, which had been established by law from theearliest times. Even their daily food was regulatedby prescribed rules, and the quantity of wine waslimited with scrupulous exactitude.When a sovereign, having been brought up inthe military class *, was ignorant of the secrets ofhis religion, the first step, as 1 have already observed,on his accession to the throne, was to makehim acquainted with those mysteries, and to enrolhim in the college of the priests. He was instructedin all that related to the gods, the serviceof the temple, the laws of the country, and theduties of a monarch ; and, in order to prevent anyintercourse with improper persons, who might instilinto his mind ideas unworthy of a prince, or atvariance with morality, it was carefully providedthat no slave or hired servant should hold anyoffice about his person, but that the children of thefirst families of the priestly order t, who had arrivedat man's estate, and were remarkable forhaving received the best education and profited byit, should alone be permitted to attend him. Andthis precautionary measure was dictated by thepersuasion that no monarch gives way to the im-thegreater part of the kings, if we may judge from the sculptures,appear to have been of the military caste, at least during the gloriousera of the 18th dynasty.f This agrees very well with the sculptor-es. The king's sons alsoheld the offices of pages and fan-bearers. Diod. i. 70.250 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.pulse of evil passions, unless he finds those abouthim ready to serve as instruments to his caprices,and to encourage his excesses.It was not on his own will that his occupationsdepended, but on those rules of duty and proprietywhich the wisdom of his ancestors hadframed, with a just regard to the welfare of theking and of his people.* They argued that he wasan officer of the state ; that the situation he heldhad not been made for his sole benefit, but for thatof the nation, which he was bound to serve as wellas to govern ; and the king was thought rather tobelong to the nation than the nation to the king.Impressed with these ideas, the Egyptian monarchsrefused not to obey tliosc lessons which the lawshad laid down for their conduct : their occupations,both by day and night, were regulated by prescribedrules ; a time was set apart for every duty, and asystematic method transacting business was foundto lead to those results which a disregard of orderusually fails to produce. At break of day t publicbusiness commenced, all the epistolary correspondencewas then examined, and the subject of eachletter was considered with the attention it required.The ablutions for prayer were then performed, andthe monarch, having put on the robes of ceremony,and attended by proper officers, with the insigniaof royalty, repaired to the temple to superintendA ffW injunctions Cor the coiuhut of a Jewish iii;; arc given inDent. xvii. Hi.-|- Diod. i. 70. 1 herodotus (ii. 17.'!.) says that Aiiia.sis eiii|)l()\e(l hiiii-Kcir about public i)nsines.s Iroiii (layl)rcak till market time, or ahoiil tiiuthird iioiir ol day.CHAP. III. EULOGY AND PRAYER FOR THE KING. 251the customary sacrifices to the gods of the sanctuary.The victims being brought to the altar, itwas usual for the high priest to place himself closeto the king, while the whole congregation* presenton the occasion stood round at a short distancefrom them, and to offer up prayers for the monarcht, beseeching the gods to bestow on himhealth and all other blessings t, in return for hisrespect to the laws, his love of justice, and hisgeneral conduct towards the people he ruled. Hisqualities were then separately enumerated ; and thehigh priest particularly noticed his piety towardsthe gods, and this clemency and affable demeanourtowards men. He lauded his self-command, hisjustice, his magnanimity, his love of truth, hismunificence and generosity, and, above all, his entirefreedom from envy § and covetousness. HeThis ceremony must have taken place in the court of the templeand not in the sanctuary, since the people were admitted to it. The entranceinto the holy of holies, or the sanctuary, was only on particularoccasions, as with the Jews. Ezek. xlii. 13, 14., in speaking of thetemple, and Exod. xxviii. 29.■\- As in the Moslem moses, from the times of the caliphs to the presentday. On the conquest of Egypt by Sultan Spleen, the aristocracyof the Memlooks was left, on contrition of annual tribute to the ,obedience in matters of faith to the Mooted of Constantinople,and the insertion of the name of the sultan in the public prayers andon the coin. Mohammed Ali had an idea of introducing his owninstead of Sultan Manhood's name during the war of Syria in 18321833.J Conf. the Rosetta stone : " In return for which, the gods havegiven him health, victory, power, and all other good things, the kingdombeing established unto him and unto his children for ever," which is,perhaps, the real formula here alluded to by Diodorus.§ Some of the king's names seem even to bear a similar meaning, ifwe may believe the Laterculus of Eratosthenes, where one is translatedAscanius, i.e. invidiii cares, though I confess Sirius does notappear to admit of that interpretation. Many of these eulogistic epithetsoccur in the obelisk inscription of Hermapion ; as, " the mightylover of truth," " whom the Sun has preferred;" " to whom the godshave given a life free from satiety," &c.252 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.exalted his moderation in awarding the most lenientpunishment to those who had transgressed, andhis benevolence in requiting with unboundedliberality those who had merited his favours.These and other similar encomiums having beenpassed on the character of the monarch, the priestproceeded to review the general conduct of kings,and to point out those faults which were theresult of ignorance and misplaced confidence.And it is worthy of remark, that this ancientpeople had already adopted the principle, that theking should be exonerated from blame *, whileevery curse and evil was denounced against hisministers, and those advisers who had given himinjurious counsel. The object of this oration,says Diodorus, was to exhort the sovereign tolive in fear of the Deity, and to cherish that uprightline of conduct and demeanour, which wasdeemed pleasing to the gods ; and they hoped,that, by avoiding the bitterness of reproach andby celebrating the praises of virtue, they mightstimulate him to the exercise of those duties whichhe was expected to fulfil. The king then proceededto examine the entrails of the victim, andto perform the usual ceremonies of sacrifice ; andthe hierogrammatcus, or sacred scribe, read thoseextracts from the holy writings which recorded thedeeds and sayings of the most celebrated meu.It was recommended, that the prince shouldThat the king could do no wrong is a nnich older notion than wegenerally imagine. Vidr Diod. i. 70. riii> im' /^(tmXin tioi> (yK\7iiiaTf)vti^niinii'fin'or, &c. The title given to tliein, " living for ever," seeni.s alsoto bear analogy to the idea of the king ticrcr djjiiig.CHAP. III. RULES FOR HIS PRIVATE LIFE. 9.5Slisten to that good advice which was dictated byexperience, and attend to those lessons which werederived from the example or history of formermonarchs ; and he was particularly enjoined toconform to a line of conduct which in other instanceshad proved beneficial to the state. Butit was not in public alone that he was warned ofhis duty ; and the laws subjected every action ofhis private life to as severe a scrutiny as his behaviourin the administration of affairs. Thehours for washing, walking, and all the amusementsand occupations of the day, were settled withprecision, and the quantity as well as the qualityof his food were regulated by law : simplicity wasrequired both in eating and drinking, and Diodorusaffirms that their table only admitted the meat ofoxen and geese. * A moderate allowance of winewas also permitted ; but all excess was forbiddenand prevented, upon the principle that food wasdesigned for the support of the body, and not forthe gratification of an intemperate appetite. And,though we cannot admit the opinion of Plutarch t,who, on the authority of Eudoxus, affirms thatwine was not allowed to the kings previous to thetime of Psamaticus, this statement of Diodorusderives from it an additional testimony that thekings at all times conformed to the laws in privateThey were the most usual meats ; but they had also the wild goat,gazelle, oryx, and wild fowl of various kinds, as we learn from thesculptures."t" De Isid. et Sir. s. vi.X We find that as early as the time of Joseph the Egyptian kingsdrank wine ; since the chief butler of Pharaoh is mentioned in virtue ofhis office pouring out wine to the monarch. Gen. xl. 11.254 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. 111.as well as in public life. In short, he adds, theregulations concerning food and temperance wereof such a salutary nature, that one would ratherimagine them the regimen of some learned physician,who anxiously consulted the health of theprince, than an extract from a legislative code.But the most admirable part of their institutions,says the same historian, did not consist in sanatoryregulations, which forbade the sovereign to transgressthe rules of temperance, nor has the conductof the princes, who submitted themselves to suchlaws, the chief claim upon our admiration ; ourpraise is mainly due to those wise ordinances whichprevented the chief of the state from judging oracting thoughtlessly, and from punishing any onethrough the impulse of anger, revenge, or anyother unjust motive. And as he was thus constrainedto act in obedience to the laws, all punishmentswere inflicted according to real justice andimpartiality.To persons habituated to the practice of virtue,these duties became at length a source of gratification,and they felt convinced that they tended aswell to their own happiness as to the welfare of thestate. They acknowledged the mischief whichwould arise from allowing the passions of men tobe unbridled, and that love, anger, and other violentimpulses of the mind, being stronger than therecollection of duty, were capable of leading awaythose even who were well acquainted with the ]preceptsof morality. Tlicy, therefore, willingly submittedto those rules of conduct already laid downCHAP. III. FUNERAL OF THE KING. 255and sanctioned by competent legislators ; and bythe practice of justice towards their subjects, theysecured to themselves that good will which wasdue from children to a parent ; whence it followedthat not only the college of priests but the wholeEgyptian nation was as anxious for the welfare ofthe king as for that of their own wives and children,or whatever was most dear to them. Andthis, as Diodorus observes, was the main cause ofthe duration of the Egyptian state, which not onlylasted long, but enjoyed the greatest prosperity,waging successful wars on distant nations, andenabled by immense riches, resulting from foreignconquest, to display a magnificence, in itsprovinces and cities, unequalled by that of anyother country.Love and respect were not merely shown tothe sovereign during his lifetime, but were continuedto his memory after his demise; and themanner in which his funeral obsequies were celebratedtended to show, that, though their benefactorwas no more, they retained a grateful senseof his goodness, and admiration for his virtues.And what, says the historian, can convey a greatertestimony of sincerity, free from all colour of dissimulation,than the cordial acknowledgment ofa benefit, when the person who conferred it nolonger lives to witness the honour done to hismemory ?On the death of every Egyptian king, a generalmourning was instituted throughout the country^56THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. III.for seventy-two days*, hymns commemorating thisvirtues were sung, the temples were closed, sacrificeswere no longer offered, and no feasts or festivalswere celebrated during the whole of thatperiod. The people tore their garments t, and,covering their heads with dust and mud, formed aNo. 7.People throwing dust on their heads, in token of grief.procession of '200 or 300 persons of both sexes,who met twice a day in public to sing the funeraldirge. A general fast was also observed, and theyneither allowed themselves to taste meat or wheatbread, and abstained, moreover, from wine andevery kind of luxury.Conf. the ciistoni of the Jews, :iiul Genii. 1. .'{. " The Egyptiansmourned for Jacob) threescore and ten days," for " so are iidlilled thedays of those which are enchained."f A common custom to the present day in rage and grief. Conf.the Scriptum-cs, passim. They have different modes of rending theirgarments, according to the degree of anger, the excess of grief, or thedisplay of feeling requisite upon cacti occasion ; and thus, when 1)6-waiting the U)ss of a parent, the rent is proportionably greater thanwlicn mourning the death of an acquaintance.CHAP. III. FIRST CASTE. Priests. 257In the meantime, the funeral was prepared, andon the last day the body was placed in state withinthe vestibule of the tomb, and an account was thengiven of the life and conduct of the deceased. Itwas permitted to any one present to offer himselfas an accuser, and the voice of the people mightprevent a sovereign enjoying the customary funeralobsequies ; a worldly ordeal, the dread of whichtended to stimulate the Egyptian monarchs to thepractice of their duty far more than any feelinginculcated by respect for the laws or the love ofvirtue.FIRST CASTE : THE PRIESTS.The Egyptians, as I have already observed, weredivided into four principal castes : the sacerdotalorder, the peasants*, the townsmen, and the commonpeople. Next to the king, the priests heldthe first rank, and from them were chosen hisconfidential and responsible advisers t, the judges,and all the principal officers of state. They associatedwith the monarch, whom they assisted inthe performance of his public duties, and to whomthey explained, from the sacred books, those morallessons which were laid down for his conduct, andwhich he was required to observe j and by theirI have included the military under this general denomination onthe authority of Diodorus ; but I suppose a great distinction existedin the subdivisions of the caste, and the military order, which was one ofthem, must have held a rank far above the others.f " The wise counsellors of Pharaoh," Isaiah, xix. 11. Diodorus,i. 7.3.VOL. I. S258 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.great experience, their knowledge of the past, andtheir skill in augury and astronomy, they were supposedto presage future events, and to foresee animpending calamity, or the success of any undertaking.It was not one man or one woman, asDiodorus observes, who was appointed to thepriesthood, but many were employed together inperforming sacrifices and other ceremonies ; andeach college of priests was distinguished accordingto the deity to whose service it belonged, or accordingto the peculiar office held by its members.The principal classes into which the sacerdotalorder was divided have been already enumerated ;there were also many minor priests of variousdeities, as well as the scribes and priests of thekings*, and numerous other divisions of the caste.Nor should we omit the priestesses of the gods,or of the kings and queens, each of whom bore atitle indicating her peculiar office. Of the former,the Bellies, or Fallacies, of Amun, are the mostremarkable, as the importance of their post sufficientlyproves ; and if we are not correctly informedof the real extent and nature of their duties,yet, since females of the noblest families, and princesses,as well as the queens themselves, esteemedit an honour to perform them, we may concludethe post was one of the highest to which they couldaspire in the service of religion.They are the same whom Herodotus mentions(long. the Rosetta stone .mil the sculptures, as well as the papyrimentioned bv Dr. Youiii;, Ilicroi,'. Lit. p. 72.CHAP. III. THE Fallacies OF Amen. 259as yovaixas if'r,7ag *, consecrated to the ThebanJove, whose sepulchres, said by Diodorus to havebeen about ten stadia from the tomb of Osmanare still seen at Thebes, in a valley 3000 feetbehind the ruins of Medeenet Haboo : and thisfact strongly confirms, and is confirmed by, theevidence of the sculptures, which show them tohave been females of the highest rank, since all theoccupants of those tombs were either the wives ordaughters of kings.Besides this class of priestesses, was another ofsimilar rank, apparently a subdivision of the same,who fulfilled certain duties entrusted only to thewives and daughters of priests, and not unusuallyto members of the same family as the Fallacies.They had also the privilege of holding the sacredsisera in religious ceremonies, before the altar andon other occasions, and were attached to the serviceof the same deity, tThe ridiculous story of their prostitution couldonly have originated in the depraved notions andignorance of the Greeks, fond of the marvellous,and notorious as they were for a superficial acquaintancewith the customs of foreign nations ;and it is unnecessary to request a sensible personto consider, whether it is more probable thatwomen, who devoted themselves to the service ofreligion, among the most pious people of antiquity§, and who held the rank and consequenceHerod, ii. 54. f Diod. i. 47.if See wood-cut, p. 260.§ I mean, of course, of profane nations.s 2THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. Til.^IS^'-I^^T.^IfrZ'"seoCHAP. III. PRIESTESSES. unnecessarilyenjoyed by the wives and daughters ofa monarch, and of the principal nobles of a country,should have sacrificed every feeling of delicacy andvirtue, or that the authors of the story were deceived,and perhaps intended to deceive others.Herodotus states that women were not eligibleto the priesthood, either of a male or female deity,and that men were alone admitted to this post* ;but his remark evidently applies to the office ofpontiff, or at least to some of the higher sacerdotalorders, from his referring in another placet towomen devoted to the service of Amun, as well asfrom the authority of other writers. Diodorus,indeed, describes Athyrtis, the daughter of Sesos-tris, so well versed in divination that she foretoldto her father the future success of his arms, and engagedhim to prosecute his designs of conquest :her knowledge in these matters being sufficientto influence the conduct of the monarch, whowas himself, in the capacity of high priest, wellversed in all the secrets of religion : and hervisions and omens were observed in the templeitself. Again, in the Rosetta stone, and the papyriof Paris and Sig. D'Anastasy§, we find directmention made of the priestesses of the queens.In the former, " Area, the daughter of Diogenes,being priestess of Arsinoe, the daughter of Philadelphus: and Irene, the daughter of Ptolemy,priestess of Arsinoe, the daughter of Philopator :Herod, ii. 39. f Herod, ii. 54.X Diod. i. 53.§ Dr. Young's Hicrog. Literature, p. 72. and 65.s 3£62 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.and Pyrrha, the daughter of Philips, beingcanefora (or basket-bearer) of Terence, the daughterof Euergetes;" and in the latter, are *thepriestess of Arsinoe, the father-loving:" and "theprize-bearer of Terence Euergetes : the basket-bearerof Arsinoe Philadelphus : and the priestessof Arsinoe Equator :" and those of the three Cleopatra.*The same office usually descended from fatherto sont, but the grade was sometimes changed;and it is probable that even, when a husband wasdevoted to the service of one deity, a wife mightperform the duties of priestess to another. Theyenjoyed important privileges, which extendedto their whole family. They were exempt fromtaxes ; they consumed no part of their own incomein any of their necessary expenses t ; and they hadone of the three portions into which the land ofEgypt was divided, free from all duties. Theywere provided for from the public stores, out ofwhich they received a stated allowance of cornand all the other necessaries of life ; and we find thatwhen Pharaoh, by the advice of Joseph, took allthe land of the Egyptians in lieu of corn §, thepriests were not obliged to make the same sacrificeof their landed property, nor was the tax of thefifth part of the produce entailed upon it, as onIn p. 72. of Dr. ^'ouiif,'.f Diod. i. 7.'i. Proofs of this arc frequently met with in the sculptures; but I believe that thou};li a priest was son oi'a priest, the peculiaroffice held i)v a son may sometimes have been different in point ofrank from that of his hither.X llerodot. ii. 37. § IJcn. xlvii. W. 22.CHAP. III. LANDED PROPERTY OF THE PRIESTS. 263that of the other people.* Diodorus states, thatthe land was divided into three portions, one ofwhich belonged to the king, the other to thepriests, and the third to the military order ; and Iam inclined to think this exclusive right of freeholdproperty is alluded to in the sculptures of theEgyptian tombs. And if the only persons thererepresented as landed proprietors are the kings,priests, and military ment, this accordance of thesculptures with the scriptural account is peculiarlyinteresting, as it recalls the fact of Pharaoh'shaving bought all the land of the Egyptians, whofarmed it afterwards for the proprietor of the soil,on condition of paying him a fifth of the annualproduce ; though Herodotus would lead us toinfer that Sesostris divided the lands among thepeople ti and having allotted to each a certain portion,received an annual rent from the peasant bywhom it was cultivated.In the sacerdotal, as among the other classes, agreat distinction existed between the differentgrades, and the various orders of priests rankedaccording to their peculiar office. The chief andhigh priests held the first and most honourablestation ; but he who offered sacrifice in the templeappears to have had, at least for the time, theGen. Lxvii. 26.f The priests and soldiers had an allowance from the government ;though the latter are not mentioned as having profited by this duringthe famine of Joseph.J Herodot. ii. 189. J'ide infra, on the lawgiver ; and supra, p. 74.Unless he means that the crown lands were portioned out, and givento the peasants to farm, on payment of a certain rent, or a fifth of theproduce, as mentioned in Genesis, xlvii. 26.s 4264 THE Ancient EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.highest post, and one that was usually filled bythe kings themselves. It is, however, probablethat the chief priests took it by turns to officiateon those occasions, and that the honour of doingsacrifice was not confined to one alone ; but thepriests of one deity were not called upon to performthe ceremonies in the temple of another,though no injunction prevented any of themmaking offerings to the contemplate gods, and stillless to Osiris in his capacity of judge of Menti.Some also, who were attached to the service ofcertain divinities, held a rank far above the rest ;and the priests of the great gods were looked uponwith far greater consideration than those of theminor deities. In many provinces and towns, thosewho belonged to particular temples were in greaterrepute than others ; and it was natural that thepriests who were devoted to the service of the presidingdeity of the place should be preferred by theinhabitants, and be treated with greater honour.Thus the priests of Amun held the first rank atThebes, those of Pthah at Memphis, of Re atHeliopolis, and the same throughout the nomes ofwhich these were the chief cities.One of the principal grades of the priesthoodwas the ]prophets. They were particularly versedin all matters relating to religion, the laws, theworship]) of the gods, and the discipline of thewhole order; and they not only presided over thetemple and the sacred rites, but directed the managementof the ]priestly revenues.* In the solemnClciii. Ak'X. Strom, i. [). 7.jS,CIIAIMII. PROPHETS PRIVILEGES OF PRIESTS. QG5processions, their part was conspicuous ; they borethe holy hydra or vase, which was frequentlycarried by the king himself on similar occasions ;and when any new regulations were introduced inaffairs of religion, they, in conjunction with thechief priests, were the first whose opinion was consulted,as we find in the Rosetta stone, whereinpassing a decree regarding the honours to beconferred on Ptolemy Epiphany, *' the chief priestsand prophets" headed the conclave assembled inthe temple of Memphis.*The sacred office of the priests, by giving themthe exclusive right to regulate all spiritual matters,as well as to announce the will, threaten the wrath,and superintend the worship, of the gods, was calculatedto ensure them universal respect ; and theywere esteemed for a superior understanding, andfor that knowledge which could only be acquiredby the peculiar nature of their education. In considerationof the services they were bound to performin the temples, for the welfare of the countryand of its inhabitants, they were provided withample revenues, besides numerous free gifts ; forthe Egyptians deemed it right that the administrationof the honours paid to the gods should not befluctuating, but be conducted always by the samepersons, in the same becoming manner, and thatthose, who were above all their fellow-citizens" The chief priests and prophets, and those who have access tothe adytum, to clothe the gods, and the pterophorae, and the sacredscribes, and all the other priests assembled in the temple atMemphis, established the following decree." Ros. St. line 6.S66 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.in wisdom and knowledge, ought not to be belowany of them in the comforts and conveniences oflife. A\'ith a similar view, a stated portion was assignedalso to the kings, in order that they mightbe enabled to reward the services of those whomerited well of their country, and that by havingample means for supporting their own splendourand dignity, they might not burthen their subjectswith oppressive and extraordinary taxes.*The chief cause of the ascendency they acquiredover the minds of the people was the importanceattached to the mysteries, to a thorough understandingof which the priests could alone arrive ;and so sacred did they hold those secrets that manymembers of the sacerdotal order were not admittedto a participation of them, and those alone wereselected for initiation who had proved themselvesvirtuous and deserving of the honour : a fact, satisfactorilyproved by the evidence of Clement ofAlexandria, who says, " the Egyptians neitherentrusted their mysteries to every one, nor degradedthe secrets of divine matters by disclosing them tothe profane, reserving them for the heir apparentof the throne t, and for such of the priests as excelledin virtue and wisdom." tFrom all we can learn on the subject, it appearsthat the mysteries consisted of two degrees, denominatedthe greater and the less § ; and in order toDiod. i. 7.'}.+ If of the priestly order.:|; (klein. Alex, strom. i. j). ()7(). He adds " Therefore, in theirliiddeii character, the eiiiL^iiias of the I'>p;y|)tiaiis arc very similar to thoseof the .K's."§ Like the lileu^^iiiiaii, wliieli were l)orrc)\ved from Kgyi)!.CHAP. III. THE GREATER AND LESS MYSTERIES. ^l&]become qualified for admission into the higher class,it was necessary to have passed through those of theinferior degree : and each of them was probablydivided into ten different grades. It was necessarythat the character of the candidate for initiationshould be pure and unsullied ; and novitiates werecommanded to study those lessons which tended topurify the mind, and to encourage morality. Thehonour of ascending from the less to the greatermysteries was as highly esteemed as it was difficultto obtain: no ordinary qualification recommendedthe aspirant to this important privilege ; and independentof enjoying an acknowledged reputationfor learning and morality, he was required to undergothe most severe ordeal*, and to show thegreatest moral resignation ; but the ceremony ofpassing under the knife of the Hierophantt, wasmerely emblematic of the regeneration of theneophyte.That no one except the priests was privileged toinitiation into the greater mysteries, is evident fromthe fact of a prince, and even the heir apparent, ifof the military order, not being made partaker ofthose important secrets, nor instructed in them untilhis accession to the throne, when, in virtue of hiskingly office, he became a member of the priesthoodand the head of the religion. It is not, howdo not allude to the method of frightening the novice, which Ido not suppose to have been practised on these occasions, especiallyin the initiation of the members of the priestly order; if, indeed, thiswas ever done in Egypt before the time of the Romans.f I suppose some of the headless figures in the tombs of the kings,at Thebes, refer to this ceremony.sos THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.ever, less certain that, at a later period, manybesides the priests, and even some Greeks, wereadmitted to the lesser mysteries ; yet in these casesalso their advancement through the different gradesmust have depended on a strict conformance to prescribedrules.On the education of the Egyptians Diodorus*makes the following remarks : — '* The children ofthe priests are taught two different kinds of writingt, — what is called the sacred, and the moregeneral ; and they pay great attention to geometryand arithmetic. For the river, changing the appearanceof the country very materially everyyear, is the cause of many and various discussionsamong neighbouring proprietors about the extentof their property ; and it would be difficult for anyperson to decide upon their claims without geometricalreasoning, founded on actual observation.Of arithmetic they have also frequent need, bothin their domestic economy, and in the applicationof geometrical theorems, besides its utility in thecultivation of astronomical studies ; for the ordersand motions of the stars are observed at least asDiodor. i. 81. Conf. Ilerod. ii. 'M. " They have two sorts of■writiiif^, the sacred and the demotic."-j- Perhaps Diodorus and Herodotus hoth refer to the hieratic andenchorial, or demotic, without considering the hieroglyphic ; but Porphyryand Clement of Alexandria are more explicit. The former statesthat I'ytlKir^oras (when in l''.gypt) became acquainted with the threekinds of writing;, the apostolic, the hicr()i,dypliic, and the S3nib()lic; andthe latter says, " that in the education of" the I-'i^yptians three stylesof writing; are taught : the first is called the epistolary (enchorial, ortheistic); the second, the sacerdotal (hieratic), which the sacred scribesemploy; and the third, the hieroglyphic. Porch. in Vita Pythian.,p. I.'j. <'leni. Alex, strom. I), vol. ii. p. ().')7. The egyptian languagesand characters I shall have occasion to notice hereafter.CHAP. III. EDUCATION OF THE Egyptians. !^f)l)industriously by the Egyptians as by any peoplewhatever ; and they keep record of the motions ofeach for an incredible number of years, the studyof this science having been, from the remotesttimes, an object of national ambition with them.They have also most punctually observed the motions,periods, and stations of the planets, as wellas the powers which they possess with respect tothe nativities of animals, and what good or evil influencesthey exert ; and they frequently foretelwhat is to happen to a man throughout his life, andnot uncommonly predict the failure of crops, or anabundance, and the occurrence of epidemic diseasesamong men and beasts : foreseeing also earthquakesand floods, the appearance of comets, anda variety of other things which appear impossibleto the multitude. It is said that the Chaldeansin Babylon are derived from an Egyptian colony,and have acquired their reputation for astrology bymeans of the information obtained from the priestsin Egypt.But the generality of the common people learnonly from their parents or relations that which isrequired for the exercise of their peculiar professions,as we have already shown ; a few only beingtaught anything of literature, and those principallythe better classes of artificers."Hence it appears they were not confined to anyparticular rules in the mode of educating their children,and it depended upon a parent to choose thedegree of instruction he deemed most suitable totheir mode of life and occupations, as among othercivilized nations.^i70 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.In their minute observations respecting everyevent of consequence, Herodotus states that theEgyptians surpassed all other men ; and " whenany thing occurs," says the historian*, "they putit down in writing, and pay particular attention tothe circumstances which follow it ; and if in processof time any similar occurrence takes place,they conclude it will be attended with the sameresults."If the outward show and pomp of religion, forwhich the ancient Egyptians were so noted, appearto us unnecessary, and inconsistent with realdevotion, we must make suitable allowance for themanners of an eastern nation, and bear in mindthat the priests were not guilty of inculcating maximsthey did not themselves follow ; but on thecontrary, by their upright conduct, and by imposingon themselves duties far more severe thanthose required from any other class of the community,they set an example to the people bywhich they could not fail to benefit. And thestrict purification of body and mind they werebound to undergo, both as members of those sacredinstitutions, and as persons devoted to the serviceof the gods, not only obtained for them the esteemof the rest of the Egyptians, but tended also toameliorate their own character ; and their piety andvirtue t were as conspicuous as their learning.Ilcrod. ii. 32.-f- Tlioiii,'li iiiiiiiy enjoyed the comforts and luxuries of this world, itdocs not follow that they failed, on tlxis account, in the practice ofmorality.CHAP. Iir. CONDUCT OF PRIESTS TO THE PEOPLE. 271We may, perhaps, feel disposed to blame theEgyptian priests for their exclusiveness in thestudy of religion, and in keeping concealed from thepeople those secrets which it imparted j but it wasargued that being fully engaged in the temporaloccupations of the world, the theories of metaphysicalspeculation were unnecessary for their welfare,and incompatible with their employments. Theydeemed it sufficient to warn them of their duty,and urge them to conform to the rules laid downfor the encouragement of morality ; and the dreadboth of a temporal, and a future, ordeal, was heldout to them as an inducement to lead a just andvirtuous life. Restrained by the fear of punishmenthereafter, and by the hope of a happier state, anddreading the displeasure of their rulers and theseverity of the laws, they were necessarily taughtto command their passions, and to practise, or atleast to appreciate, virtue ; and respect for theirspiritual pastors being heightened by the idea oftheir possessing superior talents, they obeyed theircommands with deference and submission.It appears to have been the object of the prieststo enhance the value of their knowledge, andthereby more easily to gain an ascendency overthe minds of a superstitious people ; a measurewhich naturally strikes us as illiberal and despotic :but if we remember how much the force of habitand the sanctity of established laws serve to reconcilemen to the form of government under whichthey have long lived, we cease to be surprised atthe fondness of the Egyptians for their ancient THE Ancient EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.situations ; and if they were so well satisfied withthem that every innovation was resisted, and thePolemics and Caesar vainly endeavoured to suggestimprovements in their laws, we may concludethat the system and regulations of the Egyptianpriests were framed with wisdom, and tended tothe happiness as well as to the welfare of thepeople. And when the members of the legislativebody are possessed of superior talents, even thoughtheir measures are absolute, they frequently governwith great benefit to the community; and thispaternal authority is certainly more desirable in theruling power than physical force.Some will also question the policy or thejustice of adopting such exclusive measures in thestudy of religion ; but we may be allowed to doubtthe prudence of allowing every one, in a nation *peculiarly addicted to speculative theory, to dabblein so abstruse a study. We have observed theinjury done to the morals of society in Greece, atRome, and in other places, by the fanciful interpretationof mysteries and hidden truths, whichbeing misunderstood, were strangely perverted ;and licence in religious speculation has always beenthe cause of schism, and an aberration from thepurity of the original. At a later period, whenevery one was permitted to indulge in superstitioustheories, the Egyptians of all classes Marcflliniis (lib. xxii. c. xvi.) says, " HominesTEfiyptii ijlcricjiic siil)f'H.stiili sunt, ct strath, niagiscjuc niicstiores, graceset arid, ail singiilos niotiis cxcandcsccntcs, controversy, el rrpaa-cofics accruing."CHAP. III. Their SYSTEINI CARRIED TOO FAR. 2/3came notorious for their wild and fanciful notions,which did not fail eventually to assail Christianity,for a time tainting the purity of that religion ; andwe find from Viscus, that the Emperor Aurelianconsidered them "smatterers in abstruse science,prophecy, and medicine ; eager for innovation,which formed the subject of their songs andballads ; always turning their talents for poetry andepigram against the magistrates, and ready to asserttheir pretended liberties."There is therefore less reason to censure theEgyptian priests for their conduct in these matters,though a little insight into the foundation oftheir theological system would have been morebeneficial to the people than the blind creed of animaginary polytheism, which was contrary to thespirit of the religion they themselves professed, butwhich the people were taught or left to believe.For it was unjust and cruel to conceal under thefabulous guise of a plurality of gods that knowledgeof the attributes and omnipotence of the Deitywhich the priests themselves possessed*; and itwas iniquitous to degrade the nature of the divinityby bringing it down to the level of the gross imaginationsof the people, when they had the meansof raising their minds, by giving them an insightinto some of those truths which have merited thename of "the wisdom of the Egyptians'* Theunity of the Deity would have been a doctrinewhich all classes might have been taught ; and theI allude to the priests of an early epoch, and not in the time of theRomans.VOL. T. TQJ4) THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.eternal existence and invisible power of Ihoah*would have offered a higher notion of the Causeand Ruler of all things than any mention of hisattributes, or the fanciful representation of a godinthe sculptures of their temples. It would havebeen unnecessary to explain the nature or peculiaroccupation of a trinity, the mysterious connectionbetween truth and the creative power (which isreferred to in their sculptures) ; and imprudentto confuse their ideas with the notion of intermediatetemporal and intellectual agents, or withthe abstruse science of numbers and geometricalemblems.If the priests were anxious to establish a characterfor learning and piety, they were not lessso in their endeavours to excel in propriety ofoutward demeanour, and to set forth a proper exampleof humility and self-denial; and if not intheir houses, at least in their mode of living, theywere remarkable for simplicity and abstinence.They committed no excesses either in eating ordrinking ; their food was plain, and in a statedquantity!, and wine t was used with the strictestregard to moderation. And so fearful were theylest the body should not " sit light upon the soul,"• I use the Hebrew luiine of the deity in unity the Being ofBeings," " who is and was ; " Jehovah (Ychonali) ; this word has beenstill t'urtlier changed In' our custom of giving J the ft)rce of (1: ofwhich there are many instances, as Jael), .ludali, jot, and others.t llcrodot. ii. :ilDuring the fasts, which were frequent, I'hitarcli says they abstainedIron it entirely. (Smut. de Is. s. vi.) The .Jewish priests werenot permitted to drink wine when they went " into the tabernacle ofthe congregation." Levity. x. 9.§ I'iut. dc Is. s. V. ; on the principle of plus dc corps, nioiits (Tcsimt.CHAP. III. FOOD OF THE PRIESTS. 275and excess should cause a tendency to increase " thecorporeal man," that they paid a scrupulous attentionto the most trifling particulars of diet : andsimilar precautions were extended even to the deifiedanimals: Apis, if we may believe Plutarch*,not being allowed to drink the water of the Nile,since it was thought to possess a fattening property.They were not only scrupulous about the quantity,but the quality of their food ; and certainviands were alone allowed to appear at table.Above all meats, that of swine was particularlyobnoxious ; and fish both of the sea and the Nilewas forbidden them, though so generally eaten bythe rest of the Egyptians. And indeed, on the9tli of the month Thotht, when a religious ceremonyobliged all the people to eat a fried fish beforethe door of their houses, the priests were noteven then expected to conform to the generalcustom, and they were contented to substitutethe ceremony of burning theirs at the appointedtime. Beans they held in utter abhorrence ; andHerodotus affirms § that " they were never sownin the country; and if they grew spontaneously,they neither formed an article of food, nor evenif cooked were ever eaten by the Egyptians."But this aversion, which originated in a supposedsanitary regulation, and which was afterwards soPlut. de Is. s. V.t Pythagoras borrowed his aversion to fish froiii Egypt. Plut.Samp. viii. 8.J Plutarch says, " the first month," which was Thoth. The 1st ofThoth coincided, at the time of the Roman conquest, with the 29th ofAugust. Phil. de Is. s. vii. Vide Herodot ii. 37.Herodot. ii. 37.T 2276 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.scrupulously adopted by Pythagoras, " did not," asI have already had occasion to observe*, " precludetheir cultivation ;" and Diodorus expressly states,that some only abstained from them, as fromothers of the numerous pulse and vegetables whichabounded in Egypt. Of these, lentils, peas, garlick,leeks, and onions were the most objectionable,and no priest was permitted to eat themunder any pretence ; but that the prohibition regardingthem, as well as certain meats, was confinedto the sacerdotal order, is evident from thestatements of many ancient writers ; and evenswine were, if we may believe Plutarch |!, not forbiddento the other Egyptians at all times : " forthose who sacrifice a sow to Tycho once a year, atthe full moon, afterwards eat its flesh."It is a remarkable fact that onions, as well asthe first fruits of their lentils, were admittedamong the offerings placed upon the altars of thegods, together with gourds*, cakes, beef, goose,or wild fowl, grapes, figs, wine, and the head ofthe victim ; and they were sometimes arranged inahollow circular bunch, which, descending uponthe table or altar, enveloped and served as a coverIn my Eijypt and Tlicbcs, p. 210.f Diod. i. 89.i l*lut. s. viii. Diod. i. 81. Juv. sat. xv. " Porriim ct cepc nefasviolate ac Irani^crc nior.sn."§ On the day ol" the full moon, says Herodotus, the |)c'ople cat partof the victim they have sacrificed to that deity, int t)M no other occasiondo they taste tiic meat of .swine, ii. 47.II Pint, de Is. s. viii.11 They were offered in themontli of Measure (Angnst). Pint, de Is.s. Lxviii.*♦ Cncnrbita lagenaria, y, friictn longford, ednli, of Lii. Arab,(laura towel.CHAP. III.ABSTINENCE OF THE PRIESTS.to whatever was placed upon it. And the privilegeof presenting them in this form appears to havebeen generally enjoyed by that class of priests whowore the leopard-skin dress. *7?g-3No. 9.Mode of tying up the onions for some offerings.In general, "the priests abstained from mostsorts of pulse, from mutton, and swine's flesh ;and in their more solemn purifications, even excludedsalt from their meals f ; " but some vegetableswere considered lawful food, being preferred bythem for their wholesome nature, and it is certainthat the leguminous productions and fruits of Egyptare frequently introduced into the sculptures, andare noticed by Pliny and other authors 1: as abundant,and of the most excellent quality.In their ablutions as in their diet, they wereThis spotted skin has been mistaken for that of the vtf3pic, orfawn. Pint, de Is. s. xxxv.t Pint, de Is. s. V.j When Alexandria was taken by Amer, 4000 persons were engagedin selling vegetables in that city.T 327S THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.equally severe, and they maintained the strictestobservance of numerous religious customs. Theybathed twice a day and twice during the night*;and some who pretended to a more rigid observanceof religious duties, washed themselveswith water which had been tasted by the ibis, supposedin consequence to bear an unquestionableevidence of its purity ; and shaving the head andthe whole body every third day, they spared nopains to promote the cleanliness of their persons,without indulging in the luxuries of the baths Agrand ceremony of purification took place previousand preparatory to their fasts, many of which lastedfrom seven to forty-two days, and sometimes evena longer period : during which time they abstainedentirely from animal food, from herbs and vegetables,and above all from the indulgence of the passions.DRESSES.Their dress was simple ; but the robes of ceremonywere grand and imposing, and each gradewas distinguished by its peculiar costume.The high priest who superintended the immolatingof the victims, the processions of the sacredboats or arks, the presentation of the offerings atthe altar §, or at funerals, and the anointing of theIlcrodot. ii. .T/. Porphyry says thrice a day, and the nocturnalablutions wiTc only rcciiiirt'd on certain occasions.-|- It is sni)[)osc(l that llonicr alhidcs to this when speaking of thepriests of Jove (Il.xvi. 2:iH.), thon;^ii lie describes tiieni with unwashedfcrf: —niKpi ^t ^tWni'Hat vaiovi^ vjTO(pi]Tai avnrToiroStQ, x"/'f"n'»'f<'."I Porphyry. de Abstinence, 1. iv. s.7.§ Probably in the capacity of priest to the lung.CHAP. III.DRESS OF THE PRIESTS.king, was covered with a sort of mantle made ofan entire leopard skin ; and this badge was alsoattached to the dress of the monarch when 4280 THE ANCIENT Egyptians. CHAP. HI.gaged in a similar office. Various insignia wereworn by them, according to their rank or theceremony in which they were engaged ; and necklaces,bracelets, garlands, and other ornamentswere put on during the religious ceremonies in thetemples. Their dresses were made of linen, ^vhich,as Plutarch observes, is perfectly consistent with thecustoms of men anxious to rid themselves of all naturalimpurities ; for certainly, he adds, it would beabsurd for those who take so much pains to removehair and all other superfluities from the body, towear clothes made of the wool or hair of animals.Their prejudice, however, against woollen garmentswas confined to the under robes, it beinglawful for them to put on a woollen upper garmentfor the purpose of a cloak ; and cotton dresses weresometimes worn by the priests, to whom, if we maybelieve Pliny*, they were particularly agreeable.But no one was allowed to be buried in a woollenrobe, from its engendering worms, which would injurethe body ; nor could any priest enter a templewithout previously taking off this part of hisdress, t Their sandals were made of the papyrus tand palm leaves, and the simplicity of their habitsextended even to the bed on which they slept. Itwas sometimes a simple skin extended upon thebare ground § ; sometimes it consisted of a sort ofwicker work made of palm branches ||, on whichPlin. xix. I. J Iciodotns says tlu'v only wore linen, iii. .T/.-|- Ilcrod. ii. HI. ^ Conf. Herod, ii. 37.§ l\iistatli. ill Homer II. xvi. 2.35.II Mo doiil)t the same as tiic i-fij/iisa ol" the present day, which is sogenerally used for bedsteads in l'>f;yi't- Porphyry is rij^lit in sayingthe palm bravely (in Aiwh'u- g/rcr/) was called /w/. Lib. iv. s. 7.CHAP. III. HABITS OF THE PRIESTS. 281they spread a mat or skin ; and their head, saysPorphyry, was supported by a half cylinder ofwood, in Heir of a pillow.*The same mode of resting the head was commonto all the Egyptians, and a considerable number ofthese stools t have been found in the tombs ofThebes : generally of sycamore, acacia, or tamariskwood ; or of alabaster, not inelegantly formed,and frequently ornamented with coloured hieroglyphics,t In Abyssinia, and in parts of UpperEthiopia, they still adopt the same support for thehead ; and the materials of which they are madeare either wood, stone, or common earthenware.Nor are they peculiar to Abyssinia and the valley ofthe Nile : the same custom prevails in far distantcountries ; and wee find them used in Japan, China,and Ashantee §, and even in the island of Otaheite,where they are also of wood, but longer and lessconcave than those of Africa.Of the peculiar dresses worn by the differentclasses of priests I shall speak hereafter in describingthe costume of the Egyptians, the preceding-remarksbeing merely introduced in connectionwith the habits and character of the sacerdotalcaste.Though excesses in their mode of living, andall external display of riches were avoided by theVide infra, on the furniture of the houses.t It is remarkable that the ancient Egyptians denominated themJcoorsee (Jwrsi), a name still applied by the Arabs to a stool, orchair.J Vide siij)ra, p. 214'.§ Those of the Chinese and Japanese are also of wood, but they arefurnished with u small cushion.282 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.priests, we cannot reconcile the great distinctionmaintained between the different classes of society,or the disproportionate extent of their possessions,with the boasted simplicity of their habits ; andjudging from the scale of their villas, and the wealththey enjoyed, we feel disposed to withhold muchof that credit we should otherwise have bestowedupon the Egyptian priesthood.Besides their religious duties, the priests fulfilledthe important offices of judges* and legislators, aswell as counsellors of the monarch ; and the laws,as among many other nations of the East, formingpart of the sacred books, could only be administeredby members of their order. But as the officeof judge and the nature of their laws will bementioned in another part of this work, it is unnecessaryto enter upon the subject at present, andI therefore proceed to notice the military class,which was the first subdivision of the succeedingor second caste.SOLDIERS.Next in rank to the priests were the military.To them was assigned one of the three portionsinto wliicli the land of Egypt was divided by anedict of Sesostrist, in order, says diodorus, "thatthose who exposed themselves to danger in the fieldmight be more ready to undergo the hazards of• Elicn. Hist. Var. 1. xiv. c. ;M.•j- The Jews, Moslems, and others.:j; Diodor. i. ./l. § J)iotlor. i. 73.CHAP. III. THE MILITARY CLASS. 283war, from the interest they felt in the country asoccupiers of the soil ; for it would he absurd tocommit the safety of the community to those whopossessed nothing which they were anxious topreserve. Besides, the enjoyment of comfort hasagreat tendency to increase population ; and theresult being that the military class becomes morenumerous, the country does not stand in need offoreign auxiliaries : and their descendants receivingprivileges handed down to them from theirforefathers, are thus encouraged to emulate theirvalour; and studying from their childhood to followthe advice and example of their fathers, they becomeinvincible by the skill and confidence theyacquire." For it was forbidden that a child shouldfollow a different profession from that of his father,or that the son of a soldier should belong to anyother profession than that of arms. *Whether the Egyptians had any military schools,where their youth were instructed in the scienceof war, is uncertain ; though in the account givenby Diodorus of the early education of Sesostris,there is distinct allusion to a system, which, fromits having succeeded so satisfactorily, may havebeen continued by that monarch and his successors.And when we consider that the sole educationrequired for the children of soldiers was suchas prepared them for their future duties, and thatthey were obliged to follow the profession of theirfather, we shall find much stronger reasons forbelieving those establishments to have been set onHerodot. ii. 1G6.284 THE ANCIENT Egyptians. CHAP. III.foot by the Egyptians, than by any other peopleof antiquity.Each man was obliged to provide himself withthe necessary arms, ostensive and defensive, andevery thing requisite for a campaign ; and theywere expected to hold themselves in readinessfor taking the field when required, or for garrisonduty. The principal garrisons were posted in thefortified towns of Pelusium, Mare, Eilethyas*,Hieraconpolisf, Syene, Elephantine, and other intermediateplaces ; and a large portion of the armywas frequently called upon by their warlike monarchsto invade a foreign country, or to suppressthose rebellions t which occasionally broke out inthe conquered provinces.Herodotus tells us each soldier, whether on dutyor no, was allowed 12 around of land §, free from allcharge and tribute ; which was, probably the modeof dividing the portion mentioned by Diodorus,though it may of course be inferred that every oneobtained a share proportionate to his rank. Andthis system of portioning out land (but more particularlyof a conquered country), and makingallotments for soldiers, has been prevalent at alltimes throughout the East.Another important privilege was that no soldierSo I conclude, fioiii the fortified cnclosiiics that reinaiii tlicrc, distinctfrom tiic wails of the town.■f This and iMlctliyas arc nearly opposite each other, and commandthe passage of the valley.J Diodor. i. 47., and the sciilj)tin-es.§ TIcrodot. ii. Its. Tlic aroma was a scjnarc measure, containing10,000 cubits.II Diodor. i. 54-. 73.11 Diod.i. 7y.CHAP. III. AMOUNT OF ARMY. THE GUARDS. 285could be cast into prison for debt ; and this law,though it extended to every Egyptian citizen, wasparticularly provided by Bocchoris in favour of themilitary, who, it was urged, could not be arrestedby the civil power without great danger to thestate, of which they were the chief defence.The whole military force, consisting of 410,000*,was divided into two corps, the Calamities andHermotybies. They furnished a body of men todothe duty of royal guards, 1000 of each beingannually selected for that purpose ; and eachsoldier had an additional allowance of five mine ofbread t, with two of beef, and four trustees ofwine, as daily rations, during the period of hisservice.The Calamities were the most numerous, andamounted to 250,000 men, at the time that Egyptwas most populous. They inhabited the nomes ofThebes, Bubastis, Aphthis, Tanis, Mendes, SevensArthritis, Pharbsethis, Thmuis, Onuphis,Anysis, and the Isle of Myecphoris, which was oppositeBubastis; and the Hermotybies, who lived inthose of Busiris, Sais, Chemist, Papremis, and theIsle of Propontis, and half of Nato, made up theremaining 160,000. It was here that they abodewhile retired from active service, and in thesenomes the farms or portions of land before alludedHerodot. ii. 165, 166. Diodorus (i. 34.) gives a much largeramount to the army of Sesostris, which, he says, consisted of600,U00foot, besides 24,o6o horse, and 27,000 chariots. He must have includedthe auxiliaries.f 5 lbs. 3 oz. 1 dwt. J 2 lbs. 2 oz. 8 grs.§ If the auster is the same as the cot la, these four vvill be little Icesthan 2 pints English.286 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.to were probably situated: which were not onlya substitute for regular pay*, but tended to encouragehabits of industry, and to instil a tastefor the occupations of a country life. For theEgyptians justly considered that such employmentspromoted the strength of the body, as much asthe idleness of a town life injured the physicaland moral constitution, and the soldier was taughtto look upon the pursuits of a mechanic as unmanlyand contemptible. Indeed they were absolutelyforbidden to engage in any such occupation ; as inSparta, they made war their profession, and deemedit the most worthy pursuit of generous and freebornsouls. They did not, however, confine theexercise of trades to slaves, like the Lacedaemonian,because the number of the military classalone, in a country so well peopled as Egypt,sufficed for all the purposes of defence ; but theirprejudices against mechanical employments, as faras regarded the soldier, were equally strong as inthe rigid Sparta.The sports of the field, and gymnastic exerciseswere recommended, as beneficial to their physicalforce, and as diversions peculiarly suited to theactive habits of a soldier ; and mock fights, wrestling,leaping, cudgelling, and numerous feats ofstrength t, and agility, were their constant amusement.• Tlic military chiefs, like the kings ami priests, let out their landsto hiisi)aii<hnen.f According,' to Diodorus (i. 5.'i), when Sesostris was a hoy he wasobliged, like all the others educated with him, to run 180 stadia, orbetween 22 and 2."} miles, every morning before breakfast. The heatof an Egyptian climate must have addeil greatly to the unpleasant jjartof this feat.CHAP. III.MERCENARY TROOPS.AUXILIARIES.Besides the native corps they had also mercenarytroops, who were enrolled either from the nationsin alliance with the Egyptians, or from those whohad been conquered by them. They were dividedinto regiments, sometimes disciplined in the samemanner as the Egyptians, though allowed to retaintheir arms and costume j but they were not on theM- 1-fg- 2. fg. 3.Allies of the Egyptians.fg- 4.Thchcs.same footing as the native troops ; and instead ofland they'd regular pay, like other hired soldiers.Strabo speaks of them as mercenaries*; and themillion of men he mentions must have includedStrabo, lib. xvii.288 THE ANCIENT EGYrTIANS. CHAP. III.these foreign auxiliaries. When formally enrolledin the army they were considered as part of it,and accompanied the victorious legions on theirreturn from foreign conquest ; and it is not improbablethat they assisted in performing garrison dutyin Egypt, in the place of those Egyptian troopswhich were left to guard the conquered provinces.THE EGYPTIAN ARMY.The strength of the army consisted in archers,whose skill appears to have contributed mainly totothe success of the Egyptian arms, as it did inthe case of our own ancestors during the wars wagedby them in France. They fought either on footor in chariots, and may therefore be classed underthe separate heads of a mounted and unmountedcorps ; and they probably constituted the chief partof both wings. Several bodies of heavy infantry,divided into regiments, each distinguished by itspeculiar arms, formed the centre ; and the cavalry,which according to the scriptural accounts wasnumerous, covered and supported the foot.Though we have no representation of Egyptianhorsemen in the sculptures, we find them toofrequently and ]positively noticed in sacred and]profane history to allow us to question their employment; and it is reasonable to suppose themwell acquainted with the proper mode of using thisserviceable force. In the battle scenes of thetemples in Upper Egypt, we meet with five or sixinstances of men fighting on horseback j but theyCHAP. III.CAVALRY.are part of the enemy's troops, and I can thereforeonly account for their exclusive introduction, andthe omission of every notice of Egyptian cavalry,by supposing that the artists intended to show howmuch more numerous the horsemen of those nationswere than of their own people.Once indeed, and once only, we find an instance *of an Egyptian mounted on horseback ; but it is inthe hieroglyphics of the portico at Esneh, whichare of a Roman era, and unconnected with anyhistorical bas-relief. It, however, appeared to Mr.Salt and myself so singular, from the action of theman and from being the only one so represented,that we took an impression of it, a copy of whichI have here introduced.No. 12.Egyptian on horseback.In the collection of S D'Athanasi, is a hatchet, having a man onhorseback upon the blade, which is apparently of an ancient epoch.Vide end of this chapter.VOL. T. U290 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.The Greeks before the Persian war had Httlecavalry, the country of Attica and the Peloponnesianbeing ill suited for the employment of that arm ;and it was not till they were called upon to copewith an enemy like the Persians, that they becameaware of its utility. The same argument may beurged in the case of the Egyptians ; and their distantexpeditions into Asia, and the frequent encounterswith troops which served on horseback,would necessarily teach them the expediency ofemploying cavalry, even if they had not done sopreviously.* Egypt was in fact famous for itsbreed of horses, which were not less excellent thannumerous, and we find they were even exportedto other countries.!At Jacob's funeral a great number of chariots andhorsemen are said to have accompanied Joseph t ;horsemen as well as chariots § pursued the Israeliteson their leaving Egypt ll ; the song of Moses mentionsin Pharaoh's army the " horse and his rider ^;"Herodotus also** represents Amass "on horse-allnations noted for great progress in the art of war have madethe main force of their army consist of infantry ; others, less skilful inmilitary tactics, have depended upon cavalry. This has always beenthe case in the East; and even in europe, till the later wars in Spainagainst the Moors, foot soldiers were in no repute as an effective corps ;and the name of infantry records their Spanish origin, and is derivedfrom the infants or [princes of that country. Light infantry has onlybeen in use in modern Europe since 165(). According to Robertson(in his Charles V. p. 105.), modern infantry originated in Switzerland ;and during the wars of the Swiss against the Austrians the utility andforce of these troops were so fully shown, that they were afterwards introducedinto (germany and Spain, in which latter country great improvementswere suggested. Their example was afterwards followed inItaly and France.f 2 (!l)ron. i. 17. X Gen. 1. f).^ Conf. 2 Kings, xviii. 24. " Put thy trust in I'^gypt for chariotsand for horsemen."1] (Jen. xiv. 9. 28. 1 (ion. xv. 21,^* Herod, ii. U)2.292 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.back" in his interview with the messenger ofApries ; and Diodorus speaks of 24,000 horse inthe army of Sesostris, besides 27,000 war chariots.Shishak, the Egyptian Sheshonk, had with him60,000 horsemen when he went to fight againstJerusalem * ; and mention is made of the Egyptiancavalry in other parts of sacred and profane history :nor are the hieroglyphics silent on the subject ;and we learn from them that the *' command ofthe cavalry " was a very honourable and importantpost, and generally held by the most distinguishedof the king's sons.The Egyptian infantry was divided into regiments,very similar, as Plutarch observes, to theXo^Qi and ra^eig of the Greeks ; and these wereformed and distinguished according to the armsthey bore. They consisted of bowmen, spearmen,swordsmen, clubmen, slingers, and other corps, disciplinedaccording to the rules of regular tactics t;and the regiments being probably divided intobattalions and companies, each officer had hispeculiar rank and command, like the chiliarchs,hecatontarchs, decarchs, and others among theGreeks, or the captains over thousands, hundreds,fifties, and tens, among the Jews.t Masses of heavyinfantry, armed with spears and shields, and a falchion,or other weapon, moved sometimes in closearray in the form of an impregnable phalanx §;sometimes they deployed, and formed into longcolumns or small distinct bodies ; and the bowmen• 2 Chron. xii, 3. Vide also Isaiah, xxxvi. 9.f See wood-cut preceding page. J Dcdt. i. J.5.§ See wood-chit next page.CHAP. III.HEAVY INFANTRY.'2i)SNo. liT/ube>i.Phalanx of heavy infantry.as well as the light infantry were taught either toact in line, or to adopt more open movements, accordingto the nature of the ground, or the state ofthe enemy's battle.u 3THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.STANDARDS.No. 15. Ko-yptiiiii St.iiulards. Tliebct.Each battalion, and indeed each company, leadits particular standard, which represented a sacredSLd)ject, — a king's name, a sacred boat, an animal*,Similar to tlicsc were some of the (Jrcek l)aiiners. Those ol'Athens hail an owl, of Titles a sphinx, &c.CHAP. III. STANDARDS. ^95or some emblematic device ; and the soldiers eitherfollowed or preceded it, according to the serviceon which they were employed, or as circumstancesrequired. The objects chosen for their standardswere such as were regarded by the troops with asuperstitious feeling of respect ; and it is natural tosuppose they must have contributed greatly to thesuccess of their arms *, since every soldier was readyto stand by and defend what prejudice as well asduty forbade him to abandon ; and their wonderfuleffects in rallying desponding courage, and in urgingmen to court danger for their preservation, have notonly been recorded in the history of Roman battles,where a general frequently ordered a standard tobe thrown into the opposing ranks to stimulate histroops to victory, but are witnessed in every age.And being raised, says Diodorus, on a spear (orstaff), which an officer bore aloft t, each standardserved to point out to the men their respectiveregiments, enabled them more effectually to keeptheir ranks, encouraged them to the charge, andoffered a conspicuous rallying point in the confusionof battle. And though we cannot agree withPlutarch §, that the worship of animals originatedin the emblem chosen by Osiris to designate thedifferent corps into which he divided his army, itis satisfactory to have his authority for concludingSolomon, in his Song, says, " Terrible as an army with banners."vi. 4. They were used by the Jews. Ps. xx. 5. Isaiah, xiii. 2.t Diodor. i. 86.t Vide wood-cut No. 13.J Plut. de Isid. s. 72. His argument is merely that the animal wasadored by the band to which it belonged. This could not affect theworship paid them by the cities of Egypt.U 4THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. III.that the custom of using these standards was of anearly date in the history of Egypt.The post of standard-bearer was at all times ofthe greatest importance. He was an officer, and aman of approved valour ; and in the Egyptianarmy he was sometimes distinguished by a peculiarbadge suspended from his neck, which consisted oftwo lions, the emblems of courage, and other twodevices apparently representing flies, so poeticallydescribed by Homer as characteristic of an undauntedhero, who, though frequently repulsed, aseagerly returns to the attack. *Besides the ordinary standards of regiments Iought to mention the royal banners, and thoseborne by the principal persons of the householdI 2OtHccrs of till household.Tlomtr, II. p, 570.: —Fie (11 fiviin; ^iipnor in nTiiOtfrnii' n'liKtr,Uti K(ti npyn/in'ti fitiXd TTffi \()iiii<; ni'0(>i>ntoin,CHAP. III. ARMS. 297near the king himself. The peculiar office ofcarrying these and the Arabella was reserved for theroyal princes or the sons of the nobility, who maybeconsidered the staff corps. They had the rankof generals, and were either despatched to takecommand of a division, or remained in attendanceupon the monarch ; and their post during the royaltriumph, the coronation, or other grand ceremonies,was close to his person. Some bore the fans ofstate behind the throne, or supported the seat onwhich he was carried to the temple ; others heldthe sceptre, and waved flabella before him ; andthe privilege of serving on his right or left handdepended on the grade they enjoyed. But as theprocessions in which the flabella were carried appertainmore properly to the ceremonies than to themilitary affairs of the Egyptians, I shall defer thedescription of them for the present.The troops were summoned by sound of trumpet* ; and this instrument, as well as the long drum,was used by the Egyptians at the earliest periodinto which the sculptures have given us an insight:trumpeters being frequently represented in thebattle scenes of Thebes, sometimes standing still,and summoning the troops to form, and at othersin the act of leading them to a rapid charge. tARMS.The offensive weapons of the Egyptians werethe bow, spear, two species of javelin, sling, a shortVide supra, wood-cut No. 13.-f- Vide irfia, on military music.tip: ancient Egyptians.CHAP. III.and straight sword, dagger, knife, falchion, or en-sisalcaeus, axe or hatchet, battle-axe, pole-axe,mace or club, and the lissdn *, a curved stick similarto that still in use among the Ababdeh and modernEthiopians. Their defensive arms consisted of ahelmet of metal, or, quilted l^, headpiece ; a cuirass,or coat of armour, made of metal plates, or quiltedwith metal bands; and an ample shield. But theyhadno greaves ; and the only coverings to the armswere a part of the cuirass, forming a short sleeve, andextending about half way to the elbow.The soldier's chief defence was his shield,which, in length, was equal to about half his height,and generally double its own breadth. It was mostcommonly covered with bull's hide, having theNo. 17.Tlichfs .• Lhsi'in is the modern name of tlii.s \\c:i|)<)n, and signifies, in Aral)ie,a tongue, which it is supposed in form to resemble.CHAP. 111.SHIELDS.hair outwards, like the Xajo-yjiov of the Greeks,sometimes strengthened by one or more rims ofmetal *, and studded with nails or metal pins ; theinner part being probably wicker-work t, or awooden frame, like many of those used by theGreeks and Romans, which were also covered withhidesThe form of the Egyptian shield was similar tothe ordinary funereal tablets § found in the tombs,circular at the summit and squared at the base,frequently with a slight increase or swell towardsthe top; and near the upper part of the outersurface was a circular cavity in lieu of a boss.Ross of the ShieldConf. Horn, II. v, 406. : —(AffTTifa) oy' tv pwoiin /Sowv Kai VMponi \a\KqiAlVOJTtjV (pOpUGKi.And II. V, 161. 163.: —AffTTiSa ravptiTjv"And II. TT, 360. ; and ;t, 425.f Those of their enemies were in many instances wicker, and notcovered with any hide. Conf. Virgg. ^n. vii. 632. : —Flectuntque salinasBonum crates."J That of Ajax had seven folds, that of Achilles nine folds, of bullhide.§ They probably borrowed their form from the shield, owing, perhaps,to a military custom of making the shield a monument in honourof a deceased soldier.THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. III.This cavity was deeper at the sides than at itscentre, where it rose nearly to a level with theface of the shield ; but there is great difficulty inascertaining for what purpose it was intended, nordoes its appearance indicate either an offensive ordefensive use. To the inside of the shield wasattached a thong*, by which they suspended itupon their shoulders ; and an instance occurs of ashield so supported, which is concave within, and,what is singular, the artist has shown a knowledgeNo. 19.Thong inside Hie Sliielil.The TiXainov of the Greeks.air lofiojvAuTTu; (jvv rtXctfiiovi x"/^'" Turf." llimi. II. tt, 803.'IcfMomt fill' rtv rtX(r/(aji' (//k/ii art]OnT(Tii>AffTTuuif «/i(/»(f^()orj/(,'." Loin. II. /^, .'{88.Tj; paViiw'*T(X«/i(ijj'( TTfpi (JTtjOKTai riTctnOiir,Hrn» n'niv' rrnKK>(;, '' '^* ifxtnyavov apyvpntjXiii',^' 11. ;11(1 II. M, 17 f). ; V, 119. ; /', 400. ; y, 3.11., rl alii.101.CHAP. in.SHIELDS.of perspective in his mode of representing it.*Sometimes the handle was so situated that theyNo. 20. Concave sliced. Thrln-s.No. 21. Grasping a spear while supportingthe shield Thei s.might pass their arm through it and grasp a spear :but this may be another mode of representing theshield slung at their back, the handle being frequentlyfixed in a position which would preventtheir holding the spear in that manner ; and thoughinstances occur of the horizontal as well as the perpendicularhandle t, the latter appears to have beenthe more usual of the two.No. 22. Handle of shield. ThebesWood-cut, No. 20. f Wood-cuts, Nos. 19. and 29.THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN'S.CHAP. III.Some of the lighter bucklers were furnishedwith a wooden bar, placed across the upper part,which was held with the hand ; not intended, asin some round Greek shields*, for passing thearm through, while the hand was extended to thethong encircling the cavity of the inside, but solelyas a handle ; and from their general mode of holdingit, we may conclude this bar was sometimes placedlongitudinally, an indication of which is even tracedin that of fig. 4. They are, however, seldom represented,except at Beni Hassan, having beeneither peculiar to certain troops, and employedsolely on particular occasions, or confined toforeigners in the pay of Egypt ; like those of a10 IIRiicklprfi of luiiisM.il foririf/r Hope's Costumes, pi. Iii.CHAP. Ill,SHIELDS.still more unusual appearance figured in the samepaintings.*Some Egyptian shields were of extraordinarydimensions, and varied in form from those generallyused, being pointed at the summit, not unlike someGothic arches ; but as we seldom find any instancesNo. 24.Large shields.of them, we may conclude they were rarely of suchan unwieldy and cumbrous sizes Indeed, thecommon Egyptian shield was as large as was consistentwith convenience, and if not constructedof light materials, would have been an encumbrancein long marches, or even in the field ; and we mayVile figs. 10, II. Wood-cut, No. 23.t They are met with in a tomb at E'Sioot (Lycopolis), of very ancientdate. To them the description of Tyrtseus would apply : —Mt]povg Tf, Kvt]fiaQ Tt Sarto, kcu dTtpvct, kcu lOfiovQAffTTiCoQ evptitjQ yooTpi Ka\v\paixtvoc."And the expression of Virgil,Clypeique sub orbe teguntur." Tea. ii. 227.Conf. Horn. II. v, 40 j. ; 0, 266.; and p, 128. Ajax' shield, tjvtsitvpyov.304 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.even doubt if it ever was covered with a surface ofmetal.The Egyptian bow was not unlike that used inlater times by European archers. The string waseither fixed upon a projecting piece of horn, or insertedinto a groove or notch in the wood, at eitherextremity, differing in this respect from that of theKoofa and some other Asiatic people, who securedthe string by passing it over a small nut which projectedfrom the circular heads of the bow.No. S.'). String of bow belonging to the Koofa. Thebes.The Ethiopians and Libyans, who were famedfor their skill in archery, adopted the same methodof fastening the string as the Egyptians, and theirbow was similar in form and size to that of theirneighbours : and so noted were the latter fortheir dexterity in its use that their name is accompaniedin the hieroglyphics by a representation ofthis weapon.The Egyptian bow was a round piece of wood,from five to five feet and a half in length, eitheralmost straight, and tapering to a point at bothends, some of which are represented in the sculptures,and have even been found at Thebes, orcurving inwards in the middle, wlicn unstrung, asCHAP. III. MODE OF STRINGING THE BOW.in the paintings of the tombs of the kings ; and insome instances a piece of leather or wood wasattached to or let into it, above and below thecentre.fg- 1-Egyptian bows.Thebes.In stringing it, the Egyptians fixed the lowerpoint in the ground, and, standing or seated, theknee pressed against the inner side of the bow,they bent it with one hand, and then passed thestring with the other into the notch at the upperextremity ; and one instance occurs of a man .27.VOL. I.Mode of stringing the bow.XTlichcs ami Be7ii Hassan.THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. III.ing the bow on his shoulder, and bracing it inthat position. While shooting they frequentlyNo. 28.Stringing a bow.Hrti? ffiisinn.wore a guard on the left arm, to prevent its receivingan injury from the string ; and this was notonly fastened round the wrist, but was secured by athong tied above the elbow. Sometimes a grooveNo ^'»A Kii.ird \vCHAP. III.MODE OF DRAWING THE BOW,of metal was fixed upon the fore knuckle, in whichthe arrow rested and ran when discharged*; andthe chasseur, whose bow appears to have been lesspowerful than those used in war, occasionally heldspare arrows in his right hand, while he pulled thestring, tCarrying spare arrows in the hand.Their mode of drawing it was either with theforefinger and thumb, or the two forefingers ; andthough in the chase they sometimes brought thearrow merely to the breast, instances of which occurin the two preceding wood-cuts, their customin war, as with the old English archers, was to carryI found an instance of this in a tomb at Thebes ; the person wasa chasseur. I regret my being unable to give a copy of it, havingmislaid the drawing,•^ This is rare ; I have only met with it twice so represented,X '2308 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.it to the ear, the shaft of the arrow passing verynearly in a Une with the eye.The ancient Greeks, on the contrary, adopted theless perfect mode of placing the bow immediatelybefore them, and drawing the string to the body*;whence the Amazonian women are reported to havecut off the right breast, lest it should be an impedimentin its use. And if the Greeks, in later times,abandoned that inefficient method, and handled thebow in the same manner as the Egyptians, theynever did attach much importance to it t, and fewonly excelled in archery, with the exception of theCretan, who, from their skill, were supposed bysome to have been the original inventors of thebow. The Scythianss, Persians, and other orientalnations, also placed their principal reliance on thisarm, whose power was often severely felt by thedisciplined troops of Greece and Rome ; and ourown history furnishes ample testimony to the advantagesit presented tln-ougliout the Avhole courseof a battle, and in every species of conflict.The Egyptian bow-string was of hide, catgut,or string; and so great was their confidence inthe strength of it and of the bow, that an archerfrom his car sometimes used them to entangle hisopponent, whilst he smote him with a sword.Their arrows varied from twenty-two to thirty-fourinches in length ; some were of wood, others(!oil('. Horn. II. «', \2'.i. " >ifVptp> flU' fllli:./;! TTtXftTH'.'''f Tims I loiiicr says : —O'Ckti rt TrfXt/otrrffi Km ahvvfm ^rf^-oiTO,Km ttijicriv /if yirXtiiii, Kith ty^trriv ajKJityviHni ." II. o, 71 I.X Coif. I loin. II. (•, 122. " I'lvixt lUm"(HAP. III.ARROWS TIPPED WITH STONEof reed *; frequently tipped with a metalhead, and winged with three feathers t,No. 31.Arrows maJe of reid.glued longitudinally, and at equal distances,upon the other end of the shaft,as on our own arrows. Sometimes, insteadof the metal head, a piece of hardwoodwas inserted into the reed, whichterminated in along tapering point; butthese were of too light and powerless anature to be employed in war, and couldonly have been intended for the chase ;in others, the place of the metal was suppliedby a small piece of flint, or otherr^V/e wood-cuts, Nos. 31. and 32.f Vide wood-cut, No. 30. p. 307.J 1'idc wood-cut. No 32.^g. 1.X 3THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. III.sharp stone, secured by a firm black paste * ; andthoiigli used occasionally in battle, they appearfrom the sculptures to have belonged more particularlyto the huntsman; and the arrows of archersare generally represented with bronze heads t, someBarbed, others triangular, and many with three orfour projecting blades, placed at right angles, andmeeting in a common point. Stone-tipped arrowsJVIet.il heads of arrows.AlnivUk Museum, and Tlicbcs.were not confined to an ancient era, nor were theypeculiar to the Egyptians alone ; the Persians andother eastern people frequently used them, even inwar ; and recent discoveries have ascertained thatthey were adopted by the Greeks themselves,several having been found in places unvisited bythe troops of Persia t, as well as on the plain ofMarathon, and other fields of battle where theyfought.VnIc wood-cut, No. 32. fur. 2. i)£igc 30!).-| Vide wood-cut, No. .SO. p. ."507.t I am iiidibtc'd lor this curious (act to Colony 1 l-( akc, whose research( s arc kuowu to cvcrv reader.CHAP. III. QUIVERS AND BOW-CASES. oilEach bowman was furnished with a capaciousquiver, about four inches in diameter, and consequentlycontaining a plentiful supply of arrows,which was supported by a belt, passing over theshoulder, and across the breast, to the oppositeside. Their mode of carrying it differed from thatof the Greeks, who bore it upon their shoulder*,and from that of some Asiatic people, who suspendedit vertically at their back, almost on a levelwith the elbow J the usual custom of the Egyptiansoldier being to fix it nearly in a horizontal position,and to draw out the arrows from beneath his arm.Many instances also occur in the sculptures ofthe quiver placed at the back, and projecting abovethe top of the shoulder ; but this appears to havebeen only during the march, or at a time when thearrows were not required. It was closed by a lidor cover, which, like the quiver itself, was highlydecorated, and, when belonging to a chief, surmountedwith the head of a lion, or other ornament; and this, on being thrown open, remainedattached by a leather thongsThey had also a case for the boat, intended toprotect it against the sun or damp, and to preserveits elasticity ; which was opened by drawing off aApollo is so represented by Homer, II. a, 45. : —ro' (ofioiciv £xwi', ajKpTjptfia re ^optrpjji'."Fide Hope's Costumes, pi. ccxx. Vide also infra, plate 3.+ Vide infra, on the march of the Egyptian army. Wood-cut, No. 70.l The Greeks sometimes had the bow-case attached to the quiver,but open at the top. Vide Hope's Costumes, pi. Xxvi. and xxvi.X 431Q THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.moveable cap of soft leather sewed to the upperend. It was always attached to the war chariots ;and across it inclined, in an opposite direction,another large case, containing two spears and anabundant stock of arrows * ; and besides the quiverhe wore, the warrior had frequently three othersattached to his car.Archers of the infantry were furnished with asmaller sheath for the bow t, of which it coveredthe centre, leaving the two ends exposed ; and beingof a pliable substance, probably leather, it was putround the bow, as they held it in their hand duringa march. Besides the bow, their principal weaponof offence, they, like the mounted archers, whofought in cars, were provided with a falchion,dagger, curved stick, mace, or battle-axe, for closecombat, when their arrows were exhausted ; andtheir defensive arms were the helmet, or quiltedheadpiece, and a coat of the same materials ; butthey were not allowed a shield, being consideredan impediment to the free use of the bow.The spear, or pike, was of wood t, between fiveand six feet in length, with a metal head, intowhich the shaft was inserted and fixed with nails :and one of them preserved in the Berlin Museum §satisfactorily accords with the general appearanceof those represented in the sculptures. The headndf iiifid, the l-lnyptian chariot. Wood-cut, No. 53. a.■\ Vide wood-cut, No. I."}.(. Homer mentions scars ol ali, with l)rafis or bronze lilacs. Videwood-cuts, Nos. I.'i, II. 21.§ This s|)car is about five feet and a half iouu, but the shank of itsinonze head i.s much lower than usual. Vidi wood cut, .rit. (i. fi<^. I.CHAP. Itl. SPEARS AND JAVELINS. 313was of bronze or iron, sometimes very large, usuallywith a double edge, like that of the Greeks * ; butthe spear does not appear to have been furnishedwith a metal point at the other extremity, calleda-aupcvTYjp by Homer t, which is still adopted inTurkish, modern Egyptian, and other spears, inorder to plant them upright in the ground, as thespear of Saul was fixed near his head, while helay sleeping within the trench, "t Spears of thiskind should perhaps come under the denominationof javelins, the metal being intended as well for acounterpoise in their flight as for the purpose abovealluded to ; and such an addition to those of theheavy-armed infantry would neither be requisitenor convenient.The javelin, lighter and shorter than the spear,was also of wood, and similarly armed with a strongtwo-edged metal head, generally of an elongateddiamond shape, either flat, or increasing in thicknessat the centre, and sometimes tapering to avery long point § ; and the upper extremity of itsshaft terminated in a bronze knob, surmounted bya ball, to which were attached two thongs or tassels,intended both as an ornament and a counterpoiseHorn. II. 0, 712. " Ey^^fffij^ ctfiipiyvoiai"t Horn. 11 K, 151.aix(pi 5' iTcupoiEvSov vico Kpamv ^' f^oj' a(nri5aQ' fyxJfi Si GfivOp' tTTt aavpiOTt]poQ eXrjXaTo."i 1 Sam. xxvi. 7. Conf. Virgg. ^n. xii. 130: —Defiant tellure hastes, et scuta reliant."§ /7f/c wood-cut at end of Chap. III. ^g. 9.THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.to the weight of its point.* It was sometimes usedJig 1.M- 2.Jig 3.Javelin and spear heads.Thebes.fig !•Spear head and drum-stick.Berlin Museum.as a spear, for thrusting, being held with one orwith two hands ; and sometimes, when the adversarywas within reach, it was darted, and still retainedin the warrior's grasp, the shaft beingallowed to pass through his hand till stopped bythe blow, or by the fingers suddenly closing on theband of metal at the end ; a custom I have oftenobserved among the modern Nubians and Ababdeh.They had another javelin apparently of wood, taperingto a sharp point, without the usual metal heart;and a still lighter kind, armed with a small bronzepoint t, which was frequently four-sided, threesIt rcsciiiblc's the Puritan javelin. J'tJr Hope's Costumes, vol. i.|)1. xiii.f Wood-cut, No. .'} l.Jlti. :i.I Wood-cut, No. ^o. y/i,'. 1.; and wood-cut at cud of Clap. III.CHAP. III.JAVELINS.bladed* , or broad and nearly flat ; and from theupper end of the shaft being destitute of anymetal counterpoise t, it resembled a dart now usedby the people of Dartmoor, and other Africantribes, who, without any scientific knowledge ofprojectiles, or the curve of a parabola, dexterouslystrike their enemy with its falling point.Heads of small javelins.Fenwick Museum and TlubcsAnother inferior kind of javelin was made of reed,with a metal head ; but this can scarcely be considereda military weapon, nor would it hold a highrank among those employed by the Egyptian chasseur,most of which were of excellent workmanship,and adapted to all the purposes of the chase, whetherin the river or the field. Of these last, themost remarkable was one used for spearing fish :it was propelled by the hand with the assistanceof a thin cord X passing over its notched summit,and extending down the shaft : but being solelyintended for sportsmen, and not among the armsWood-cut, No. 33.^. 2. f Wood-cut, No. 35./^. 4.J I do not find any instance of the omentum, mentioned by Seneca,Virgil, and other writers, which was a thong bound round the middleof a heavy dart. Mn. ix. 665. " Amentaquc tonjuent."THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. III.borne by the soldier, it is unnecessary here to describeit more minutely.The sUng was a thong, of leather*, or stringplaited t, broad in the middle, and having a loopat one end, by which it was fixed upon and firmlyheld with the hand ; the other extremity terminatingin a lash, which escaped from the fingers asthe stone was thrown : and when used, the slingerwhirled it two or three times over his head, tosteady it, and to increase the impetus.h- '•/^•2.Slingers.licHt Hassan and Thebes.It was an arm looked upon by many of theGreeks with great contempt, especially by heavy-infantry,though generally carried by some of thelight troops ; and Q. Curtis tells us that Alex-homermentions one made of a sheep's fleece, and describesAgenor binding the wounded hand of Ilclcnus with it :AuTIJl' St ^VVIC1)(TIV l\l(TT(H»pH> OIOI- (tlor<l)'S.<j>iv£ovy, I'll' papa ol ^ffxnrMV txi Troifinn Xmov." 11. v, 5f)9.t As that still used in l^g\ |)t to drive away births from the cornfields.yi(fc wood-cut at end of Chap. III. Ji^x. 'l ami b.t Conf. Virgg. Thin. ix. .jH7, : —Ipse ter mlducta circum caput cit libera."CHAP. Iir. SLINGS. 317under, wisliiiig to picture an enemy in a despicablelight, represented them armed with javelinsand slings. The Canadians, however, were proudof their skill in managing it, and were surpassed bythe Achaean alone, of all the Greeks, who evenvied with the natives of the Balearic Islands ; andso expert were these last, and of such importancedid they consider the sling, that the principal careof a parent was to instruct a boy in its use : andit has been affirmed that, in those islands, youngchildren were not permitted to taste their fooduntil they had dislodged it from a beam with thesling. This unpleasant alternative does not appearto have been imposed on the more fortunate sons ofan Egyptian family, nor was the same consequenceattached to the sling as to the bow and many otherweapons.Besides stones and arrows, the Greeks threwleaden plummets from the slung, called [xoT^uS^i^isg or[xo7^u€^ivai o-cpaipa/, which were of an elongated sphericalshape, or, rather, like an olive, pointed at eachend, frequently with three or four sides; sometimesweighing as much as an Attic pound, or one hundreddrachms. Some had a single or winged thunderboltrepresented upon them ; and others bore thename of the person to whom they belonged, or aword, as AFGNIS, or AEHAI,— "Take this."Similar plummets were generally used by theMacedonians ; those of the Achaean where simpleroimd pebbles found on the sea-shore, where theywere in the habit of practising the sling : and theEgyptians employed round stones for this purpose.THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAT. III.which they carried in a small bag, hanging from abelt over the shoulder. *The Egyptian sword was straight and short,from two and a half to three feet in length, havingapparently a double edge, and tapering to a sharppoint. It was used for cut and thrust; but on someoccasions they held it downwards, and stabbed aswith a dagger. The handle was plain, hollowed inStabling an onomy.Thchcithe centre, and gradually increasing in thicknessat either extremity, sometimes inlaid with costlystones, precious woods, or metals ; and the pomp1-ll'i. 2.daggers in their sheaths, with inlaid handles. Tlichcs.Vidr VVOOlI-CIlt, No .'Ui. flit,. 1.CHAP. in.SWORDS AND DAGGERS.mel of that worn by the king in his girdle was frequentlysurmounted by one or two heads of a hawk,the symbol of Phrali, or the sun, a Pharaonic titlegiven to the monarchs of the Nile. Strictly speak.39.Mode of wearing the dagger.ing, the short sword, so worn, should come underthe denomination of a dagger, which was also acommon Egyptian weapon, as is proved by thosefound in the excavated ruins of Thebes. It wasmuch smaller than the sword : its blade was aboutten or seven inches in length, tapering gradually inbreadth, from one inch and a half to two thirds ofan inch, towards the point ; and the total length,with the handle, only completed a foot or sixteeninches. The handle, like that of the sword, wasgenerally inlaid* : the blade was bronze, thicker inthe middle than at the edges, and slightly groovedVide also wood-cut at end of Chap. III. Jig. 7.THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. III.in that part; and so exquisitely was the metalworked, that some of those I have examined retaintheir pliability and spring after a period of severalthousand years, and almost resemble steel in elasticity.Such is the dagger of the Berlin collection,which was discovered by Sig. Passalacqua in aTheban tomb ; and, in noticing it, I avail myselfof the opportunity of acknowledging his kindness,which has enabled me to introduce a representationof it, in the actual state in which it was found, JDagger out of the sheathBack of the sheath.No. 40. Dagger, with its sheath.Hiilin Museum.closed in a leathern sheath. * The handle is partlycovered with metal, and adorned with numeroussmall ]pins and studs of gold f, which are purposelyshown through suitable openings in the front partof the sheath ; but the upper extremity consistssolely of ]pone, neither ornamented, nor coveredwith any metal casing : other instances of whichWood-cut, No.'IO. /if. y.I Like the swords nientioiied by Homer : —'• hihru- (tpyiifioijKov x;aXK-fo)'." II. 7r, \'.ih. ; and r, 372.CHAP. III. FALCHIONS, AND OTHER WEAPONS. 321have elsewhere been found*, offering, m this respect,remarkable exceptions to the usual inlaid handlesof Egyptian daggers!, already noticed.The knife was also shorter than the sword, and hada single edge, intended only for cutting, as was thefalchion, a species of mensis Jcdcatus. This last wascalled Shops, or Khopsh ; and the resemblance ofits form and name to the xoTrigt of the Greeks suggeststhat the people of Argos, an Egyptian colony,by whom it was principally adopted, originallyderived that weapon from the falchion of Egypt.It was more generally used than either the knifeor the sword, being borne by light as well asheavy armed troops ; and that such a weapon musthave inflicted a severe wound is evident, as wellfrom the size and form of the blade as from thegreat weight it acquired by the thickness of theback, which was sometimes cased with brass, theblade itself being of bronze or iron. §Officers as well as privates carried the falchion ;and the king himself is frequently represented inclosecombat with the enemy, armed with it, or withthe hatchet, battle-axe, pole-axe, or mace. A simplestick is more usually seen in the hand of officerscommanding corps of infantry, though we cannotVide also wood-cut, No. 1. page 23., a dagger in Mr. Salt's collection.+ Another dagger with a simple unornamented handle is given in thewood-cut at the end of Chap. IH.^g. 3.; but I am not certain about itsdate.J Q. Curtis says, " Copies vacant glacis letter curates, falconssimiles, quibus appellant belluarum manus." lib. 3. conf. Apud.Metal. lib. 11." copies et venabula."§ From the colour of those in the tombs of the kings, we may concludeiron or steel. J'idc plate 3.VOL. I. Y32^ THE ANCIENT Egyptians. CHAP. 111.thence infer that they were not always providedwith some other more efficient weapon ; and inleading their troops to the charge, we see themarmed in the same manner as the king when hefought on foot. In chariots they had the bow ;and every chief prided himself upon his dexterityin archery, and emulated the skill as well as thevalour of the monarch.The axe, or hatchet*, was small and simple,seldom exceeding two, or two feet and a half, inlength : it had a single blade, and no instance is metwith of a double axe resembling the bipennis of theRomans. Of the same form was that used by theEgyptian carpenters ; and not only did the soldierscarry it as a serviceable weapon in close combat,but even for breaking down the gates of a town,and felling trees to construct engines for an assault.Independent of bronze pins which secured theblade, the handle was bound in that part withthongs of hide, in order to prevent the wood, splitto admit the metal, from opening when exposed tothe Sin ; and the same precaution was adopted inthose belonging to joiners and others, who workedin their own shops.The axe was less ornamented than other weapons; some bore the figure of an animal, a boat, orfancy device, engraved upon the blade : and thehandle frequently terminating in the shape of agazelle's foot, was marked with circular and diagonallines, representing bands, as on the proaliatclict ill (;(>|)lif is /,i/i/)i>i ; but it docs not appt'iir vvlictlicr itwas apiilial to this weapon. The name; kil(jl)iii calls to mind the Saxoncicofan, to cleave ; as the words Konroi and kiiopsli, or siiopsli, to chop.CHAP. III. HATCHETS AND Battle-axes.3^3jesting torus of an Egyptian temple, or like theligature of the Roman fasces.* The soldier, on hismarch, either held it in his hand, or suspended it athis back, with the blade downwards ; but it doesnot appear from the sculptures whether it wascovered by a sheath, nor is any mode of wearinga sword indicated by them, except as a dagger inthe girdle, the handle sloping to the rightsNo. U.Axes or hatchets.Tlifbcs, and Sales Collection.The blade of the battle-axe was, in form, not unlikethe Parthian t shield; a segment of a circle,• Vide wood-cut. No. 41., and at the end of Chap. III. fig. 1.t As in wood-cut. No. 39.j Vide Hope's Costumes, vol. i. pi. xx.Y '2,3^t THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. HI.divided at the back into two smaller segments,whose three points were fastened to the handle withmetal pins. It was of bronze, and sometimes, ifwe may be allowed to judge from the colour ofthose in the paintings at Thebes, of steel; and thelength of the handle was equal to, or more thandouble that of, the blade. Mr. Salt's last collection,part of which was purchased by the BritishMuseum, contained a portion of one of these weapons*,whose bronze blade was thirteen inches anda half long, and two and a half broad, inserted intoa silver tube, secured with nails of the same metal.The wooden handle once fixed into this tube waswanting ; but, judging from those represented atThebes, it was considerably longer than the tube,and even protruded a little beyond the extremityof the blade, where it was sometimes ornamentedwith the head of a lion or other device, recedingslightly t, so as not to interfere with the blow;and the total length of the battle-axe may havebeen from three to four feet. In some battle-axes,the handles were very short t, scarcely exceeding thelength of the silver tube, above-mentioned, whichin this specimen is only eleven inches and a halflonger than the blade, and may have been the entirehandle ; the small aperture at the lower end §serving equally for admitting the pin which securedthe wood inserted into it, whether this extendedbeyond, or merely filled, the tube.The blades of the battle-axes represented in theF/V/c wood out. No. 4>i. /i,'. I. f As/t^. :i.J As /J^'. G., wliicli is from the HCiiIpturc's. ^ Fi<^.)i.CHAP. IIJ.Battle-AXE AND Pole-axe.paintings of Thebes offer two forms, one of whichis more circular * than that of Mr. Salt's ; fromthe excellence, however, of its workmanship andmaterials, we may conclude that this last was of theBattle-axes, from the sculptures.Thebes and Bent Hassanmost general and approved shape, and perhapsbelonged to some military chief, or to the kinghimself; and it is singular that an axe very similarto this was formerly used by the Germans, andother European infantry.The battle-axe may answer to the TreXexu^, as thepole-axe to the a^ii/Tj of the Greeks.The pole-axe was about three feet in length, butapparently more difficult to wield than the preceding,owing to the great weight of a metal ball towhich the blade was fixed : and if this increased itsforce, and rendered the blow more destructive, itrequired, like the mace, a powerful as well as aFigs. 3. and 4.Y 33-26THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. HI.skilful arm to use it with success, and to make itas efficient a weapon as the battle-axe.We rarely find an entire corps of men armedwith it ; the only instance I remember occurringat E'Sioot, where the same soldiers bear the cumbrousshields already noticed*; it may, therefore,have been peculiar to certain troops, and to thechiefs, in whose hand it is usually represented.The handle was generally about two feet in length,sometimes much longer ; the ball four inches inits greatest diameter t, and the blade varied from tento fourteen inches, by two and three in breadth.Pole-axc.The mace was very similar to the pole-axe, withouta blade, and appears to correspond to thexo^uvt) of the Greeks, which was frequently ofiron. That used by the Egyptians was of wood,bound with bronze, about two feet and a halfin length, and furnished with an angular piece ofmetal, j)rojc('ling from the handle, wliicli may• Viilr vvood-ciit. No. .'}4'.t I suppose it to have boon a hall, gallic r lliaii a flat circular piece ofmetal.CHAP. III.MACES.3'i7have been intended as a guard, though in manyinstances they represent the hand placed above it,while the blow was given. *They had another mace, similar in many respectsto this, without the ball, and, to judge from its frequentoccurrence in the sculptures, more generallyused, and evidently far more manageable ; but theformer was a most formidable weapon against armour,like that used for the same purpose by theMemlooks]: and the modern people of Cutch; andno shield, helmet, or cuirass, could have been a sufficientprotection against the impetus given it by apowerful arm. Neither of these was peculiar to thechiefs: all the soldiers in some infantry regimentswere armed with them ; and a charioteer was furnishedwith one or more, which he carried in a caseattached with the quiver to the side of his car. §In ancient times, when the fate of a battle wasfrequently decided by personal valour, the dexterousmanagement of such arms was of primaryWood-cut, No. U.fg. 2.f Wood-cut, 'So. 4^4: figs. 3. and 4.i Called daboss, or abbots.5 Vide Egyptian chariot, in wood-cut, No. ,^3. ri. p. 346.V 1-828 IHE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.importance; and a band of resolute veterans, headedby a gallant chief, spread dismay among the ranksof an enemy; as Homer describes Areithous alonebreaking through an opposing phalanx with hisiron mace * : and notwithstanding the great improvementswhich have taken place in the art ofwar, by the introduction of artillery and themusket, and by the machinery of modern armies,physical strength and individual courage are stillconsidered the highest recommendation in closecombat ; and thus the Egyptians, though theyplaced their chief reliance in the skill of theirarchers, failed not to attach great importance toheavy infantry, and paid particular attention tothe nature of their offensive as well as defensivearms. And the variety of weapons used by differentcorps, as well as the care they took in allottingto each its respective duties during action, in selectingthose best suited for a peculiar service, andin the judicious arrangement of the army and itscomponent parts, argue the great experience acquiredby the Egyptians in the art of war.They had another kind of mace, sometimes ofuniform thickness through its whole length, sometimesbroader at the upper end, without either theball or guard, and many of their allies carried arude heavy club ; but no body of native troops wasHomer, II. //, 138. : —Aiov AfJiiWdoi', rnv nrtk-Xijirir, KupvinjTtivAVC^IUJ KlKXtjlTKOV KaWil^wvoi Tt yvvaiKnj,Ovpik' (tf)' uv ToXcini iiityKTKfTO, (^oiyu rt UriKplf,\\\n nuiffttuj KOftvvy iiiiyriicTKt ^uXctyyaf."+ rule wood-cut, No. V/./ifix. I. i\\u\ )i.l Vide wood-cut, No. I I. ///;. 'S.CHAP. III. CLUBS. HELMETS. 329armed with the last, and indeed it cannot be consideredan Egyptian weapon.The curved stick, or club, (now called lissan)*^was used by heavy and light-armed troops as well asarchers ; and if it does not appear a formidable arm,ui:Curved stick or club.yet the experience of modern times bears ampletestimony to its efficacy in close combat. To theBisharieen it supplies the place of a sword ; and theAbabdeh, content with this, their spear, and shield,fear not to encounter the hostile Mazy, whom theyfrequently defeat, though armed with the matchlockand the atagan. t In length that of the ancientEgyptians was probably the same, about two fee.{and a half, and made of a hard thorn wood, asthe mimosas, sellers and sum ; which are still usedfor the same purpose, as well as for the shafts of theAbabdeh lance.The shield, their principal defence, I have alreadynoticed. The helmet was usually quilted, but rarelyof metal ; and though bronze helmets are said tohave been worn by the Egyptians t, we may cont.e, " tongue," in Arabic.f A long knife, or straight sword, worn in the girdle, and calledgembceli (side arm) by the Arabs.X Vide Ilerod. ii. 161.330 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.elude that, in accordance with the authority of thesculptures, they preferred and generally adoptedthe former, which being thick, and well padded,served as an excellent protection to the head, withoutthe inconvenience resulting from the metal inso hot a climate.* Some of them descended to theshoulder t, others only a short distance below thelevel of the part; and the summit, terminating inan obtuse point, was ornamented with two tassels. §They were of a green, red, or black colour ; andthe long helmet, which fitted less closely to the backof the head, was fringed at the lower edge with abroad border ||, and in some instances consisted oftwo parts, or an upper and under folds]" Another,worn also by the spearmen, and many corps of infantryand charioteers, varied slightly from these,though very similar in many respects, being quilted,and descending to the shoulder with a fringe ; butit had no tassels, and fitting close to the top of thehead, it widened towards the base, the front, whichcovered the forehead, being made of a separate]piece** attached to the other part.If there is no representation of an Egyptian helmetwith a crest, we are less surprised, since eventhe ancient Greeks did not always adopt itt; butThis alone would not be a sufficient objection, since metal helmetsare still worn even in the far hotter climates of Dartmoor andKonlofan.f Wood-cut, No. '!(!., /?^'.9. 1. and :i. ± /'Vij.v. b, G, 7.\\ F^.v. 3, 't, 5, 0, 7. ■ (I Fifes. 2, 3.1 Fig. 4. ♦* Fi{>. 2.If This helmet was called KnTanvi.. . . " (ipipl (V (U KVVHJl' KHp(l\l)tpH' tOljKfr<(ii()fJi;j', (KJxiXot'Tt, Kin (tXi><liin', >;rf KdTiiiTv'iKf/cA/;ra»." Homer, II. k, 258.CHAP. HI.HELMETS. CUIRASS.that of the Shairetana, once enemies and afterwardsallies of the Pharaohs, is particularly interesting,No. 46. Helmets or head-pieces. Riches.since it shows the existence of a custom, as earlyas two hundred years before the Trojan war, wliicliwas afterwards introduced by the Greeks, of adorningthe helmet with horns ; whence the name eras(horn) was sometimes chosen to signify a crest.*The outer surface of the cuirass, or coat of armour,consisted of about eleven horizontal rows ofmetal plates, well secured by bronze joins ; and atthe hollow of the throat a narrower range of plateswas introduced, above which were two more, completingthe collar or covering of the neck. Thebreadth of each plate or scale was little more than aninch, twelve of them sufficing to cover the front ofthe body ; and the sleeves, which were sometimesso short as to extend less than half way to the elbow,consisted of two rows of similar plates, t Many,According to Suits. Oiir word crest bears a strong; rcsenil)lanceto the Greek. Vide Hope's Costumes, plate xxx. ; and infra, on theenemies of the Egyptians, p. 3C6.•j- Vide plate 3.332 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.indeed most, of the cuirasses were without collars ;in some the sleeves were rather longer, reachingnearly to the elbow, and they were worn bothby heavy infantry and bowmen. The ordinarycuirass may have been little less than two feet anda half in length : it sometimes covered the thighsnearly to the knee ; and in order to prevent itspressing heavily upon the shoulder, they boundtheir girdle over it, and tightened it at the waist.But the thighs, and that part of the body below thegirdle, were usually covered by a kelt*, or otherrobe, detached from the cuirass ; and many of thelight and heavy infantry were clad in a quilted vestof the same form as the coat of armour, for whichit was intended to be a substitute ; and some worecorselets, reaching only from the waist to the upperpart of the breast, and supported by straps over theshoulder, which, to judge from the sculptured representationsof them, appear to have been facedwith metal plates, tAmong the arms painted in the tomb of RemesesIII., at Thebes, is a piece of defensivearmour t, which, from the hollowed space left forthe arm, seems to have been a sort of coat, or coveringfor the body ; and were it not so highly ornamented,might be considered a vest, or ju,<rp>3, wornbeneath the cuirass. It is made of a rich stuff,worked, or painted, with the figures of lions andother animals, devices common upon the shield andother parts of Greek armour, and is edged with aThe O'liKi, or 'CiorTTin>, of ten'. lirvvks.t Fink' wooil-ciit, NoA7- Ji'gn. 10, i I, 1;^. j. I'u/c fiy. 8. plate 3.CHAP. Ti. ARMS OF DIFFERENT CORPS. 333neat border, terminating below in a broad fringe ;and though there is no appearance of metal plates,it may have been intended as a substitute for themore weighty coat of mail, which was not worn onall occasions either by infantry or charioteers. TheGreeks in like manner made some horace of hide,hemp, linen, or twisted cord. Ajax, the son ofOileus, from his having worn one of these, is styledby Homer* Linothorex : Alexander, according toPlutarch, had a double thorax of linen ; and CorneliusNepos tells us that Indicates ordered hissoldiers to lay aside their heavy metal cuirass, andto go to battle in hempen armour.ARMS OF DIFFERENT CORPS.Heavy-armed troops were furnished with a shieldand spear ; some with a shield and mace ; andothers, though rarely, with a battle-axe, or a pole-axe,and shield. They also carried a sword, falchion,curved stick or hassan, simple mace, or hatchet,which may be looked upon as their side-arms, tThe light troops, who were not archers, had nearlythe same weapons, but their defensive armourwas lighter; and some were without the incumbranceof a shield, as the slingers, and a fewothers, whose duty required great agility, and whofought in scattered parties, like the VeHtes of theRomans. The arms of the bowmen have been al-homer,11. /3, 329.\- r/rfc wood-cut, No. 47. \ nf/£> wood-cut, No. 30.. "Ot\?;of Ta^vQ AtaQoXiyof }iiv tt)v, Xivo9u)pt]K"33 iTHE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.ready mcntionctl : of the E«^yptiiin cavalry we areunable to ohtniii any salisfiulory intonation ; andil now remains lo notice the (•()rj)s oi' chariots,CHAP. III. CHARIOTS, ETC. 335which constituted a very large and effective portionof the Egyptian army.Each car contained two persons, Uke the di-pharos(^Kp^os*) of the Greeks. On some occasionsit carried three, the charioteer or driver and twochiefs ; but this was rarely the case, except in triumphalprocessions, when two of the princes ornoble youths accompanied the king in their chariot,bearing the regal sceptre, or the Arabella, and requireda third person to manage the reins, t Inthe field each had his own car, with a charioteer ;and the insignia of his office being attached behindhim by a broad belt, his hands were free for theuse of the bow and other arms. When on an excursionfor pleasure, or on a visit to a friend, anEgyptian gentleman, or even the king, mountedalone, and drove himself, footmen and other attendantsrunning before and behind the car, (likethe sj/is or grooms of modern Egypt and India,)who, when the carriage stopped, were ready to takethe reins, and walked the horses till their masterreturned, continuing, however, on foot, and notventuring to step into it ; a custom equally observedby those who wished to show marked respect tothe king, when passing before or following him,in state processions.A name which implies carrying two. The Roman war chariotalso contained two persons ; the relator, or warrior, and the auriga, ordriver. Virgg. ^n. ix. 330., ii. 4G9. 624. '".37. Cent. Isaiah, xi. 7.A chariot with a couple of horsemen." Or rather 1 Kegs, xxii. 34.,and 2 Chron. xviii. 33. ; since the former appears to refer to men ridingon horses, dUlD. Fares, is also in Arabic, a horseman (or a Persian);and arras, the mare, is the horse par excellence.f Vide wood-cut. No. 48. ^g. I. % ' '"'' wuod-ciit. No. 19.(^ Wood-cut. No. 4. p. 46.THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. III.In battle, also, many attendants were always inreadiness* ; and whenever a general dismountedfrom hrs car, to lead his troops over hilly and precipitousheights inaccessible to chariots, to the*' Coif. Tom. II. 0, los). ll:{.CHAP. 11/. CHARIOTS AND CHARIOTEERS. 337assault of a fortified town, or for any other purpose,they took charge of the horses, and keeping themin some secure place they awaited his return, orfollowed at a short distance ; and a second car *with fresh horses was always ready in the rear,in order to provide against accident, or the stillless welcome chance of a defeat.In the battle scenes of the Egyptian temples,the king is represented alone in his car, unattendedby any charioteer!, the reins fastened roundhis body, while engaged in bending his bow againstthe enemy ; but it may be doubted whether weareto infer the absence of that person : and he mayhave been omitted, in order not to interfere withthe principal figure and feature of the picture,which, with a similar notion of exclusiveness,they were accustomed to draw of colossal dimensions.The cars of the whole chariot corps containedeach two warriors, comrades of equal rank, bothjoining in the labours and glory of the fight; and ifthe charioteer who accompanied a chief t did nothold the same high station, he was probably appointedto the post as a mark of distinction ; andfrom the familiar manner in which one of them isrepresented conversing with a son of the greatRemeses, we may conclude the office was filled bypersons of consideration, who were worthy of thefriendship they enjoyed. §Conf. 2 Chron, xxxv. 24.f Conf. Homer, gods and heroes, passim.X Conf. Horn. U. X, 399. ; and ^•, 84.§ Conf. Horn. II. 9, 120.; and X, 318.VOL. I. ZTHE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. III.'Julie son of King Kemcscs, with his charioteer.Thebes.As with the Greeks, the employment was neitherservile nor ignoble; and if Hector*, Nestor t,Ulysses, and others were not ashamed to act inthis capacity, Egyptian officers of note,' in likemanner, undertook the management of their owncars, and prided themselves on their skill in driving,as in wielding the javelin and bow : but whetherthe chariot race was instituted in Egypt does notappear ; and we may conclude from the absenceof the subject hi their sculptures, and of the hippodromein the precincts of towns of early date,that the celebration of games similar to those ofGreece was unknown there, previous to the Macedonianconquest : the only hippodrome being atII. II, '.i!')2. " (KKrw()} jiaOTtyi KuToifKicov i]\(i<fn> itttt-ouc : " and thegods frc(|iiciitly.•j- II. 0, 1 Hi. Nestor iiioiiiits tile tar of Dioiiieil, aiiil taUtw thereins and whip.i II. ., .Oi:i.CHAP. HI.WHIPS.Alexandria, and at the Roman town of Antique,founded by Hadrian, in Upper Egypt.In driving, the Egyptians used a whip, like theheroes and charioteers of Homer ; and this, or ashort stick, was generally employed even for beastsof burden, and for oxen at the plough, in preferenceto thegoad.The whip consisted of a/3™No. 50.Whips.Thebes.single orsmooth round wooden handle, and adouble thong : it sometimes had a lash of leather,or string, about two feet in length, either twisted orplatted ; and a loop being attached to the lowerend, the archer was enabled to use the bow, whileit hung suspended from his wrist.*When a hero encountered a hostile chief, hesometimes dismounted from his car, and substitutingfor his bow and quiver the spear, battle-axe, or falchion,he closed with him hand to hand, like theVide wood-cut, No. !)\., next page.Z -2340 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.No. 51. Whip suspended from the wrist of the archer. Tlicbcs.Greeks and Trojans described by Homer : and thelifeless body of the foe being left upon the field,was stript of its arms by his companions. Sometimesa wounded adversary, incapable of furtherresistance, having claimed and obtained the mercyof the victor, was carried from the field in hischariot * ; and the ordinary captives, who laiddown their arms and yielded to the Egyptians,were treated as prisoners of war, and were sentbound to the rear under an escort, to be ]presentedto the monarch, and to grace his triumph, afterthe termination of the conflict. The hands of theslain were then counted before hint; and thisAt Kiiriiiik king; Osirei i.s represented carrying under each arm twovan(|Mislied chiefs ; and many inferior captives, pound with cords, followliiiii to Ills car.-|- In 2 Kings, x. H., the leads of the .seventy' sons of the king werel)roiii;lit in baskets to .lelni.who ordered them to be put" in two hipsat the entering in of the gate."CHAP. III. NO SEAT IN THE CAR. 341return of the enemy's killed was duly registered, tocommemorate his success, and the glories of hisreign; a subject which occurs more than once onthe walls of Medeenet Haboo ; and the great picture,sculptured in the inner area of that building,represents Remeses seated in his car, while thetellers, taking the hands by the thumb, place themin a heap before him, and count them to themilitary scribes.From the position of the king in this picture,the Egyptian chariot might appear to be furnishedwith a seat, but judging from the usual representationsin the Theban sculptures, and from thenature of other ancient cars*, it is more probablethat he is seated on the side or front. Indeed, forpersons frequently accustomed to forego the use ofseats, there could be little necessity for its introduction; and though the Egyptian rooms werefurnished with chairs and raised sofas, it was notunusual for persons of all ranks to sit upon theground, crouched like the Nubians on a pedestrianjourney, or cross-legged like the modern inhabitantsof Eastern countries, when in the house, andeven in their carriages, t The same remark appliesto the chariots of those enemies with whom theyfought ; and the representation of wounded warsof the Greeks. The Romans placed seats, or chairs, in theirtown cars, and the magistrates took with them the sella curtis whengoing to the senate house. This last folded like our camp stools, andmany of the Egyptian chairs.f Witness the Burmese carriage brought to England, which differprincipally from those of Europe in the absence of seats.34^ THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAT. III.riots falling backwards out of their car, frequentlyoccurring in the battle scenes of Thebes, and soforcibly calling to mind the descriptions of Horner *,may be adduced as an additional argument to provethe absence of any seat or bench within it.In some Egyptian chariots, the bottom part consistedof a frame interlaced with thongs or rope,forming a species of network, in order, by itselasticity, to render the motion of a carriage withoutsprings more easy : and this custom is veryprevalent at the present day in Italy and othercountries, in carts and carriages used by the lowerorders ; but it is difficult to determine whether itwas adopted in every Egyptian car.That the chariot was of wood is abundantlyproved by the sculptures, wherever workmen areseen employed in making it ; and the fact oftheir having, at the earliest period of their knownhistory, already invented and commonly used aform of pole, whose introduction into our owncountry dates only between thirty and fortyyears $, is a remarkable instance of the truth ofSolomon's assertion, " there is no new thing underthe sun," and shows the advancement they hadIliad, lib. 0, 122. ; uiid i, 585. : —AvTdQ oy' arrOfidii'tiii' ivtpytoQ tKTTien ^if/i()oii,+ In Joshua, wc read of the canaanites liavinji; " chariots of iron."xvii. 16. Solomon made a chariot of the wood of Lcl)anon. Sol.Song, iii. f).j The pole of the Greek chariots was usually straight; hut instancesare met with of it cnrvcd, as in those of I-lgypt.5 Ecclesiast. i. 0.CHAP. III.CHARIOTS OF WOOD.34^32 3No. 52. Making the polo and other parts of a chariot. Thchcs.made at that very remote era, and the skill oftheir workmen. And that this last was of wood,and not, as some have imagined, of bronze or othermetal, we have a decided proof, from the representationsof workmen, cutting and fashioning itwith an axe.*The body of the car was exceedingly light, consistingof a wooden framework, strengthened andornamented with metal and leather binding, likemany of those mentioned by Homer t: the bottompart, on which the charioteer stood, was flat, whetherof an entire piece, or of the thongs alreadyalluded to, the whole resting on the axle-tree andlower extremity of the pole, which was itself insertedinto the axle. Its centre was not placed directlyover the axle, in order to be on an equilibrium,but much more forward, the back part seldom extendingbehuid the middle of the wheel, so thatthe body pressed considerably upon the pole, toWood-cut, No. 52. fig. .3.f Homer, II. k, 438. Jesus' car was bound with sold and .silver ;that of Doomed with gold and tin.z 4344 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.which also the upper rim of its front was connectedby means of thongs or straps. The weightwas therefore divided between the wheels and thehorses ; but as a chariot was easily carried by oneman*, we may conclude that even with the additionof two persons it was not such as to fatiguethe horses, and this mode of placing it had the advantageof rendering the motion far more easy tothe drivers When the horses were taken out, thepole, unless propped up in some manner, fell tothe ground ; they therefore rested it on a support,which was sometimes a wooden figure of a man,intended to represent a captive, or enemy, whowas considered fitted for this degrading office.The greater portion of the sides, and the whole ofthe back, were open ; the latter indeed entirely so,without any rim or framework above ; and the hinderpart of the lateral framework commenced nearly in aline with the centre of the wheel, and rising perpendicularly,or slightly inclined backwards, from thebase of the car, extended with a curve, at the heightof about two feet and a half, to the front, serving aswell for a safeguard to the driver, as a support forhis quivers and bow-case. To strengthen it, threethongs of leather were attached at either side, andan upright of wood connected it with the base ofthe front part immediately above the pole, wherethe straps before mentioned were fastened ; as maybeseen in those 1 have already given from the ansIn the sculptures. Another supports the |)olc and traces.f The Ixxly of the (ir( ok car was also placed very forward, less sothan that of I^;,'V|>t ; hint it must have heeii nisi h heavier.CHAP. III.CHARIOTS.^4.5cent paintings and sculptures of Thebes, and in theaccompanying view of the simple body of a car, representedaccording to our European mode of drawn.53. sips. 1. 2. Chariots, in perspective.figs. 3. i. Saddles and part of the yoke. From dijfejcnt Sculpture.ing. It is, however, reasonable to suppose that theysometimes varied slightly in form, and that the carof war was of a different construction in some respectsfrom the plau.strum*y or from the curricle ofThe Roman plaiistrnm had two, sometimes four, wheels. Thewaggons, or rather carts, sent by Pharaoh for Jacob are called, inTHE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.(No. .W. a.) A war chariot, with bow cases and complete furniture. Tliiiics(No. rA I'.Chariot of the Itut-M-iio.CHAP. III. CHARIOTS. 150W-(:ASl!;. 847towns ; and we not only find the two last destituteof all the cases for weapons except that of the bow,and sometimes of that also, but the solid portion oftheir sides was generally lower than in the former,where greater protection was required for thosewithin ; and on this account the Greek cars wereentirely closed, except at the back.*The bow-case, frequently richly ornamented,with the figure of a lion or other devices, wasplaced in an inclined position, pointing forwards ;its upper edge, immediately below the flexibleleather cover, being generally on a level with thesummit of the framework of the chariot ; so thatwhen the bow was drawn out, the leather cover felldownwards, and left the upper part on an uninterruptedlevel. In battle this was of course a matterof no importance ; but in the city, where the bow-casewas considered an elegant part of the ornamentalhangings of a car, and continued to be attachedto itt, they paid some attention to the positionand fall of the pendent cover, deprived asit there was of its bow, since, as I have elsewhereobserved, the civilized state of Egyptian societyrequired the absence of all arms, except on service.Hebrew, m'?jy, wheeled carriages ; the chariot was rriDin, or nsi (uneventure). 1 use plaustrum for a two-wheeled chariot drawn by oxen.In pi. iii. of Hope's Costumes is a car less closed than usual.f The following passage of Homer shows that the how was suspendedto the car, and exemplifies what I have before remarked (p. 72.),the severity of filial duties in those times.A.VTup uy' vii; cffia^av ivrpo'^ov iiixioviU)v,'OnXinai i]Vi)jyii, irnpivOa Ct ^rjaca stt' avTiic."II. w, 189.; vide also lines 253. 2G7.348 THE ANCIENT EGYrTIANS. CHAP. HI.The quivers and spear-cases were suspended in acontrary direction, pointing backwards ; sometimesan additional quiver was attached close to the bow-case,with a mace and other arms, and every warchariot containing two men was furnished withthe same number of bows.The framework, as I have stated, was of wood,like the pole, wheels, and other parte* of the chariot ;and we even find the mode of bending the woodfor that purpose represented in the sculptures.* Inthe ornamental trappings, hangings, and binding ofthe framework and cases, leather was principallyused, dyed of various hues, and afterwards adornedwith metal edges and studs, according to the tasteof the workman or purchaser ; and the wheels,strengthened at the joints of the felly with bronzeor brass bands, were bound with a hoop of metal, tThe Egyptians themselves have not failed to pointout what parts were the peculiar province of thecarpenter and the currier. The body and frameworkof the car, the pole, yoke, and wheels, werethe work of the former ; the cases for the bows andother arms, the saddle and harness, the binding ofthe framework, and the coverings of the body, werefinished by the currier ; and lest it should not besufficiently evident that they are engaged in cuttingand bending the leather for this purpose, the artisthas distinctly jointed out (he nature of the subyidr wood-cut, No. .VI., next pact(Jon. Horn. II. t, 72i. : —'Edit' tjroi XC'""'/ ""('i- (ifOinir, iiiiriif) vTrtftDtvCHAP. III. THE VARIOUS TARTS OF A CHARIOT. 349constancethey employed, by figuring an entire skin,and the soles of a pair of shoes*, or sandals, suspendedin the shop ; and no European can look atVide wood-cut, No. j5. / and g.THE ANCIENT Egyptians.CHAP. 111.the subject without remarking that the semicircularknife * used by the Egyptians to cut leather wasprecisely similar to our own, even in the remoteage of king Amunoph II., who lived 1450 years beforeour era.Culliii;.; leather ami binding a car.In war chariots, the wheels had six spokes t, inmany curricles, or private cars, employed in towns,only four t ; and the wheel was fixed to the axleend by a small linch-i)in, sometimes surmountedwith a fanciful head, and secured by a thong whichpassed through the lower end : plainly provingthat the axletree itself did not turn, as some haveimagined. There are no instances of chariots withmore than two wheels § ; rttrnis fdUutti, or carsarmed with scythes, were unknown in Egypt, being♦ It occurs very fV("(jii("iitl>'. Vide vvooil-ciit, No. 55., c.\ The spokes appear to have lieeii generally roiiiul.j Homer gives the car of Jiiiio wheels with eight s|)okc.s, " kvk\<( . . ,oKTciKviiiifi" (II. f, 72',i.), which is the usual nnniher in the GreekScriptures ; instances, however, occur of four, six, and twelve. VideIIo|)e's Costumes, pii. iii. 205. and 2'.i(y.§ There is only one nprisiiitalion o( a carriage with four wheels.Viilc wood-lus at the t^nihof Chap. \J/CCIJAT. 111. CIIAUIOT HARNESS. 851probably contemned by them as by all nations whomade any great advances in military tactics ; norwas it their custom to use camels, or elephants, inwar, like the Indians and some other nations ofantiquity * ; and it is probable that the former wereonly employed in their army for the transport ofbaggage and provisions, much of which was carriedupon asses t, in those parts where water wasabundant.The harness of curricles and war chariots wasnearly similar ; and the pole in either case wassupported on a curved yoke fixed to its extremityby a strong pin, and bound with straps or thongsof leather. The yoke, resting upon a small wellpadded saddle, was firmly fitted into a groove ofmetal ; and the saddle, placed upon the horses'withers, and furnished with girths and a breast-band,was surmounted by an ornamental knob ;and in front of it a small hook secured thebearing rein. The other reins passed through athong or ring at the side of the saddle, andthence over the projecting extremity of the yoke ;and the same thong secured the girths, and evenappears in some instances to have been attachedto them. In the war chariots, a large ball, placedupon a shaft, projected above the saddle, which isgenerally supposed to have been connected withthe reins, and to have been intended to give aAnd even by the Greeks after the time of Alexander.■f Baggage carried by asses is represented at Thebes and otherplaces, but no camels have yet been met with, either in the sculpturesor the hieroglyphics ; a remark which has been made even by Abc-elAzccs, the Arab historian. For this I can give no reason, since we knowthat animal existed in Egypt in the time of Abraham. Gen. xii. 16.352 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. 111.greater power to the driver*, by enabling him todraw them over a groove in its centre ; but thereis reason to believe it was added solely for an ornamentalpurpose, like the fancy head-dresses of thehorses, and fixed to the yoke immediately abovethe centre of the saddle t, or to the head of a pinwhich connected the yoke to the poles The samekind of ornament §, though of a different form, ismet with in Persian cars; and that it was not aNo. 5ft Saddle of a horse yoked in a Persian ear. British Museum.necessary part of the harness is shown by the manyinstances of its omission in Egyptian curricles, andeven in some of the chariots of war. IIThe traces were single, one only on the innerside of each horse, fastened to the lower part of the]pole, and thence extending to the saddle ; but noexterior trace was thought necessary : and no provisionwas made for attaching it to the car. Indeed theSuch was my own opinion ; lout on further examination of numerousdrawings of chariots, lam inclined to believe it stood on the yoke orthe pole.+ Vide wood-cut, No. .'i3. ,//;,'. 2.i i'(V/r wood-cut. No. ."i^./fX'. I. y^ /ji/t wood-cut, No. 50., at f.y Vult wood-cuts, Nos.lB. and 4!>.CHAP. III. THE TRACES. 353yoke sufficed for all the purposes of draught as wellas for backing the chariot ; and being fixed to thesaddle, it kept the horses at the same distance andin the same relative position, and prevented theirbreaking outwards from the line of draught, a remarkwhich applies equally to the Greek car ; andthe description given of it by Homer * agrees veryII. £, 722. et seq. : —'H6»j 5' Oju^' oxfff^o'* ^o<j)q ^aXc Kafinvka kvkXo,XaXicea, OKraicvjjfia, aiSripiq) a^ovt afxipig'Tuv 7]T0i xpvaer) iTvg a<pBiTOQ, avrap viripGevXa\Kt' eniaaojrpa, TrpoaapijpoTa, dav/ia idtaOaCllXrjixvM S' apyvpov iii mpiSpoixoi aiKportpatOsv'Ai(ppo£ ^t \pv<Teoi(n Kai apyvptoiaiv iiiairivEvreraTai' doing St irtpidpofioi avrvytg tianTov £' £$ apyvpeoQ pvfiog irtXiv avrap eir'aKpi^Aijcre i^pr<T£iov KaXov Z,vyov^ tv St XtiraSvaKan fHaXt, \pvatt'' veto 6t ^vyov rjyaytv Upt]'iTTTTovg wKVTToSag, [iiixavi tpiSog kui avrrjc."Where the poet mentions the kvkXq, wheels, with eight spokes ; theaKo>v, axle ; the irvg, wooden fellies of the wheel ; the tTTKjffojrpa, metalhoops ; the irXtjiivr], its box or nave ; the avTvyeg, sides or frameworkof the car ; pv/iog, the pole, sometimes nine cubits, or 13| ft. in length,(II. (i>, 270.), with the H^vyov, yoke, fastened at its extremity; and theXtTraSva, or Straps over the horse's breast. In another place (II. w, 268.)he describes the mode of fixing the yoke to the pole, by a ring passingover a peg at its extremity, and by a strap nine cubits in length, lashedthrice backwards and forwards across a prominent boss in the centre ofthe yoke, the end of the strap being tied in a knot below : —ZuyovofKpaXofv .E/c S' t<ptpov i^vyodtafiov asia ^vy(^ tvvtain]x^'Kai TO fiiv (V KOTtOrjKav tv'it<JT<f> tm pvficfi,Jlt^y iTTi Priory, tire dt KpiKOv karopi f3aXXov'Tptg 5' tKartpOfv iStjrrav nr' ofKpaXov' avrap tTrtira'E^tiTjg KartSrjaav, into yXwxiva 5' tyvafi\pav'"but as this refers to a moveable yoke, taken off the pole when theanimals were released, it bears less resemblance to that of the Egyptianchariot than of the plough or cart, as I shall have occasion to remarkhereafter, when comparing it with an ox-yoke found by Signor d'Anas-easy in a tomb at Thebes.It may not be uninteresting, while examining the subject, to noticethe Roman carriages. Besides litters or palanquins, and other modes ofconveyance, they had carriages called unarotnm, with one wheel, drawnVOL. I. A ATHE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. III.nearly with that used by the Egyptians. In orderto render this more intelligible, I shall introducea pair of horses yoked to a chariot according tobyslaves; the Inrotiim, and the qtintrbndiiim, with two, and four wheels.The high-wixa a car with two horses; the trin, with tlircc ; and theCHAP. III. HOUSINGS, ETC. 355the rules of European drawing, derived from acomparison of the numerous representations in thesculptures, omitting only their housings and headdress,which may be readily understood in an Egyptianpicture.On grand occasions the Egyptian horses weredecked* with fancy ornaments : a rich striped orcheckered housing t, trimmed with a broad borderand large pendent tassels, covered the whole body,and two or more feathers t inserted in lions* heads,or some other device of gold, formed a crest uponthe summit of the head-stall. But this display wasconfined to the chariots of the monarch, or themilitary chiefs ; and it was thought sufficient, inquadriga with four : we even read of six horses yoked abreast ; and Neroonce drove a chariot with ten horses at the Olympic games. The two-wheeledquadriga was most generally used, and preferred for the circus ;the big was commonly employed in war ; it had also two wheels, andcontained a warrior and the driver. The plenum was a carriage principallyintended for matrons, when going to the games; it had fourwheels, like the rhoda, a large travelling coach, and the petorritum, anopen town carriage. The essedum was a light swift car, driven in the city,and adopted from the Gauls ; and the plaustrum, properly a cart, withtwo, and occasionally four, wheels, was intended for heavy burdens,though less cumbrous than the four-wheeled carus, or waggon. Theparts of the chariot were the wheels (rote), the body (capsum or ploxe-mum), the pole (nemo), and the yoke (jugum). The nave (modiolus),the fellies (apsides), the spokes (radii), and the metal hoop (canthus),were the parts of the wheel. The yoke was usually of wood, extendingover the back of the two horses, of a crooked shape to fit the neck ; andit was tied to the pole with leathern thongs, frequently with a pin orring, as in the Greek and Egyptian cars. Vide Hope's Costumes,plate 271.Conf. Virgg. ^n. vii. 275. : —Instratos ostro alipedes pictisque tapers,Aurea pectoris demise monilia pendent."And Hom. II. w, 230.■j- Vide plate 1.j Probably peacock's feathers.A A ^2356 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.the harness of other cars, and of the town curricle,to adorn the bridles with rosettes, which resemble,and cannot fail to call to mind, those used in Englandat the present day.*Blinkers t were deemed unnecessary, as in manycountries of modern Europe; but a severe bitappears to have been employed by the Egyptians tas by other ancient people § ; though, from theirmode of representing it, we should rather feel disposedto consider it a sort of snaffle than a curb.The head and upper part of the neck were frequentlyenveloped in a rich covering similar to thehousing, trimmed with a leather fringe ; and thebridle, consisting of two cheek pieces, a throatlash,head-stall, and the forehead and nose straps, thoughsimple, was not unornamental.No instance occurs of Egyptian chariots withmore than two horses, nor of any carriage furnishedwith shafts and drawn by one horse ; theytherefore resembled those in general use amongthe early Greeks, as described by Homer ||; thoughthe poet occasionally mentions the four-horsedcar, answering to the quadriga of the Latins, soVide wood-cut. No. 57.+ In one or two instances we find something projecting above andat the side of the eyes, which may be intended to represent blinkers.J This I conclude from the appearance of their nioutiis ; and asimple bit may be made very severe.Conf. Hor. il). i. Od. 8. : —(gallic nee lunaticTemporal ora frenis."II Tom. II. f, 195.: —Papa Si (T(j)iv tKutrrf^ uCvyiQ iiriroiLike the big of the Romans.CHAP. III.CARS OF OTHER PEOPLE.frequently represented in sculpture and on ancientcoins. Those used by contemporary eastern nations,with whom the Egyptians were at war, were notdissimilar in their general form or in the mode ofyoking the horses, even if they differed in the numberof persons they contained, having usually threeinstead of the two in Egyptian and Greek cars : asmay be seen from an examination of those representedin the paintings of Thebes *, particularlythat which is brought with its two unyoked horses,as a present to the Egyptian monarch, by the conqueredpeople of Rot-ii-not, and one actually foundin Egypt, and now preserved in the museum atFlorence, supposed by some to have been takenNo. 58. Car and bow, in the collection at Florence (from the great work of ProfessorRosellini).from the Scythianss by the Egyptian victors. Theharness of the Persian chariots figured at PersepolisVide wood-cut. f Pede wood-cut. No. 53. b. and plate 4.A A 3THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.is equally simple ; and as it is interesting to comparethe customs of different ancient nations, itmay not be irrelevant to the subject to introducea copy of one taken from the work of Sir R. ErPorter. *No. 59,Persian car (from Sir R. Er Porter).The Egyptian chariot corps, like the infantry,were divided into light and heavy troops, botharmed with bows : the former chiefly employed inharassing the enemy with missiles, and in evolutionsrequiring rapidity of movement ; the lattercalled upon to break through opposing masses ofinfantry, after having galled them during theiradvance with a heavy shower of arrows ; and inorder to enable them to charge vvitli greater securitythey were furnished with a shield, which was notrequired for the other mounted archers, and a longspear was substituted on these occasions for the• It may be seen in the British Museum. fide also vvoocl-cut>No. 56.CHAP. III. SIEGES. 3d9missiles they had previously employed. The light-armedchariot corps were also supplied with weaponsadapted to close combat, as the sword, club,and javelin ; but they had neither the spear norshield ; and indeed this last was confined to certaincorps, even of infantry, as the spearmen andothers, already mentioned. But the heavy foot,and light troops employed in the assault of fortifiedtowns, were all provided with shields, under coverof which they made approaches to the place ; andso closely was the idea of a siege connected withthis arm*, that a figure of the king, who is sometimesintroduced in the sculptures, as the representativeof the whole army, advancing with hisshield before him, is intended to show that theplace was taken by assault.SIEGES.In attacking a fortified town, they advancedunder cover of the arrows of the bowmen ; andeither instantly applied the scaling ladder to theramparts, or undertook the routine of a regularsiege : in which case, having advanced to the walls,they posted themselves under cover of testudo,and shook and dislodged the stones of the parapetwith a species of battering rant, directed andimpelled by a body of men expressly chosenfor this service ; but when the place held outagainst these attacks, and neither a coup de maiuyConf. 2 Kings, xix. 32. " Nor come before it (the city) withshield, nor cast a bank against it." Isaiah, xxxvii. 33.f See wood-cut. No. 60.A A 4CHAP. III. USE OF THE TESTUDO. 361the ladder, nor the ram, were found to succeed, theyprobably used the testudo for concealing and protectingthe sappers, while they mined the place* ;and certainly, of all people, the Egyptians were themost likely to have recourse to this stratagem ofwar, from the great practice they had in undergroundexcavations, and in directing shafts throughthe solid rock.The testudo was of frame-work, sometimes supportedby poles having a forked summit, andcovered, in all probability, with hides ; it was sufficientlylarge to contain several men, and so placedthat the light troops might mount upon the outside,and thus obtain a footing on more elevatedground, apply the ladders with greater precision, orobtain some other important advantage ; and eachparty was commanded by an officer of skill, andfrequently by those of the first rankestThe TfiUTravov or pike of the testudo arietaria ofthe Greeks and Romans, and the covering or vinewhich protected the men while they worked thebattering-ram, were nearly on the same principle,and the Greeks most probably borrowed theirsoriginally from Egypt.They also endeavoured to force open the gatesof the town, or hew them down with axes ; andwhen the fort was built upon a rock, they escaladedthe precipitous part by means of the testudo, or byThe testudo ad faciendum of Vitruvius, which, he says, theGreeks call opv'i., opvyig. Lib. x. c. 21. There was another, quae adcongestion fossa ruin paratus. Lib. x. c. 20. Fide Egypt and Thebes,p. 235. note f , and supra, p. 67.-|- Wood-cut, No. 6 L Four of the king's sons command the fourtestudo, a, h, c, d,VOL. I. * A A 5)62THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II r.12 3 4No. 61. Assault of a fort. The testudo and scaling ladder. Thcbra.short spikes of metal, which they forced into thecrevices of the stone*, and then applied the ladderto the ranij)arts.Vide wood-cut, No. C)\.Jl^. .'J.CHAP. III. WARLIKE ENGINES. 363It is reasonable to conclude that several otherengines were employed in sieges with which thesculptures * have not made us acquainted j and thebulwarks used by the Jews, on their march tothe promised land, were doubtless borrowed fromthose of Egypt, where they had lived until theybecame a nation, and from whence they derivedthe greater part of their knowledge upon every subject.These bulwarks being only constructed inthe case of a siege, appear to have been similar tosome of the mounds or towers employed by theGreeks in later times : they were of wood, andmade on the spot during the siege, the trees ofthe neighbouring country being cut down for thepurpose : but the Jews deemed it unlawful tofell a fruit tree for the construction of warlikeengines, nor were they permitted to use any otherthan those which grew wild, or in an uncultivatedspot, tBesides bulwarks or moveable towers, we mayalso suppose the Egyptians adopted destructivemissiles, for burning the houses and works ofthe besieged, like the fire-balls, 7ru§ojQoXo< Xi^oi, ofthe Greeks, or the o-^uraXaia, wooden staves, armedwith an iron point, and carrying with them lightedfire-brands ; and the same mode of protecting theirown works, from the assaults of the besieged, wasprobably resorted to by the Egyptians as by thatpeople.The scaling ladder is most frequently represented, and seems tohave been very generally used,t Deut. XX. 20.% " For the tree of the field is man's life." Deut. xx. 1 9.364f THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.The northern and eastern tribes, against whomthe Egyptians fought, were armed in many stanceswith the same weapons as the disciplined troops ofthe Pharaohs, as bows and spears ; they had besideslong swords, rude massive clubs, and knives ; andtheir coats of mail, helmets, and shields, varied inform,according to the custom of each nation. Theyalso used stones, which were thrown with the hand,while defending the walls of a besieged town ; butit does not appear that either the Egyptians or theirenemies threw them on any other occasions, exceptwith a sling. Indeed we seldom find any peoplearmed with stones, except those who have not yetadvanced beyond their infancy in the art of war*;and the same remark applies to the Greeks, duringthe siege of Troy, some of whom are introduced byHomer, fighting with these rude weapons, — an era,when Grecian manners, and military tactics, wereonly beginning to emerge from a state of primitivesimplicity.THE ENEMIES WITH WHOM THEY FOUGHT.The most distinguishing peculiarities of some ofthe nations at war with the Egyptians, were the• Horace says, Sat. i. 3. 101. : —Unfiuibiis, et pugnis, dein fustibusPiiUiiabant ; "and Lucretius munitions the lands, nails, teeth, stones, and l)rani'hes oftrees, as the earliest weapons : —Arma antiqiia, nianiis, ungues, dent<s(|ue furent,Et lapide, et item s}lvaruni fraginina rami.I'osterius ferri vis est, icrisqwe report,Sed prior aris coat quant ferri cognitus usus." Lib. v. vcr. 1283.CHAP. III. ENEMIES OF THE EGYPTIANS.forms of the head-dress and shield. One of these,the Shairetana, a people inhabiting a maritime366 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.country of Asia*, wore a helmet ornamented withhorns, projecting from its circular summit, andfrequently surmounted by a crest, consisting of aball raised upon a small shaft, which, as I havebefore observed t, is remarkable, from being theearliest instance of a crest, and bears testimony tothe accuracy of Herodotus in ascribing to it anAsiatic origin. He mentions it as an invention ofthe Carians, from whom it was borrowed by theGreeks, together with the custom of introducing certainfigures upon the exterior, and of fixing handlesto the interior, of the shield ; " for previously thosewho were in the habit of using shields carried themwithout handles, supporting them by means ofleather thongs, which passed over the neck andthe left shoulder." tThe Shairetana were also distinguished by around shield §, and the use of long spears andjavelins, with a pointed sword ; they were clad inashort dress, and frequently had a coat of mail, orrather a cuirass, composed of broad metal platesoverlaying each other, adapted to the form of thebody, and secured at the waist by a girdle. Someallowed their beards to grow ; and they very generallyadopted a custom, common to most earlynations, of wearing large ear-rings. ||Or a country situated near some larj^c |)iecc of water, as a lake :those who lived near a river had not the same distinction, as the Sheta.+ Vi(/r supra, p. 3.'31.X Vide Herod, i. 171.^ The (ircc;ks hud usually round shields ; this kind was called amen:,the clypeus of the Romans. They also used the Amazonian buckler,or IT tXr If. the Tlui)an buckler: and an obloui; concave shield, ^ii()K)f,the scutum of the Romans.II Vitic wood-cut, No. {J2.fig. 1. a, h.CHAP. III. ASIATIC NATIONS. 367Their features were usually large, the noseprominent and aquiline ; and in their complexionas well as their hair, they were of a far lighter huethan the Egyptians. At one time they were theenemies, at another the allies*, of the Pharaohs;and the duration of their friendship and subsequentrupture with the Egyptians, I have already alludedto t, and shall have occasion again to notice.The Tokkari wore a helmet in form and appearancevery similar to those represented in the sculpturesof Persepolis, some of which have beenNo. 63. Persian head-dress (from Sir R. Er Port).brought to England, and are now in the BritishMuseum, t It appears to have been made of a kindof cloth, marked with coloured stripes § ; the rimadorned with a row of large beads or other ornamentaldevices, and it was secured by a thongor riband tied below the chin. They had also around shield and short dress, frequently with aVide wood-cut, No. 61. figs. 5. and 6.+ Pages 68. and 84J Vide wood-cuts, No. 63. and 64., axid^gs. 1 . and 7.§ Vide wood-cut. No. 62. ^g. 2. a, b.CHAP. in. ASIATIC NATIONS. THE TOKKAUI. 309coat of armour similar to that of their neighbours,the Shairetana ; and their offensive weapons consistedprincipally of a spear, and a large pointedknife, or straight sword. They sometimes, thoughrarely, had a beard, which was still more unusualwith the chiefs : their features were regular, thenose slightly aquiline ; and whenever the Egyptianartists have represented them on a large scale,their face presents a more pleasing outline thanthe generality of these Asiatic people. Theyfought, like the Egyptians, in chariots ; and hadcarts or waggons, with two solid wheels similar tothe tympana of the Romans, drawn by a pair ofoxen, which appear to have been placed in theNo. 65,Carts of the Tokkari, at the time of their defeat.Thebes.rear, as in the Scythian and Tartar armies. Thiscircumstance, and that of their women carryingoff the children in these carts at the moment of adefeat, might lead us to infer them to have been aroving people, who did not live in towns ; whichis still farther argued by their taking refuge, whenrouted by RemesesIII., in the ships of their neighbours,the Shairetana, above mentioned ; but theirVOL. I. B D370 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.civilised appearance argues against this opinion.They were also at one time allies of the Pharaohs*and assisted them in their long wars against theReboo.Another people, whose name is lost *, were distinguishedby a costume of a very oriental character,consisting of a high fur cap, not unlikeone worn by the ancient Persians, and that of themodern Tartars and Delle Turks ; a tight dress,with the usual girdle ; and a short kelt, common tomany Asiatic nations, which, apparently divided,and folding over in front, was tied at the bottomwith strings. Round their neck, and falling uponthe breast, was a large round amulet, very similarto those of agate worn by the dervishes of the east,in which they resembled the Assyrian captives of'J'irhakah, represented on the walls of MedeenetIlaboo. t Their features were remarkable; andthough in the sculptures they occasionally vary inappearance, from the presence or the absence of abeard, the strongly defined contour of the face andthe high bridge of their ]prominent nose sufficientlydistinguish them from other j)e()j)le, and show thatthe artist has intended to convey a notion of thesepeculiar characteristics.Their arms consisted of two javelins, a club, andfalchion, and a shield like that of the Egyptians,with a round summit. They were on terms of friendshipwith the third Rameses, and assisted him inIt lu'j^iiis with till; letters 8li;i /'/V/r wood-cut. No. (i'^./zX'- -^-(■ fide wood-cut, No. (>:i Jiij,. .'*. a.I Viilc wood-cut, No. (j(i.//V;. 1.CHAP. in. THE Reb, A POWERFUL PEOPLE. Selhis wars against the Reboo; and though they occuramong the foreigners who had been conquered bythe arms of Egypt, the same feeling of inveterateenmity, resulting from a repeated succession of conflicts,did not exist towards them as towards manyother Asiatic tribes. The same remark apples toanother people, represented at Medeenet Habeasallies of the Egyptians, whose name has beenunfortunately lost : they were clad in a short tightdress, and carried a shield, like the former, with abow and a heavy club ; but of their features wehave little or no knowledge, owing to the imperfectstate of the sculptures.One of the most formidable Asiatic enemies encounteredby the Egyptians were the Rebut, — afact attested by the frequent representations ofsevere contests ; the large masses of troops theybrought into the field ; the great duration of a warwhich, commencing at a very remote era, continuedlong after the accession of the nineteenthdynasty ; and by their having been selected inthe Egyptian paintings t as the type of Asia, orthe representation, par excellence, of the nationsof the East.One of the principal military events in theglorious reign of the great Remeses was his successagainst these powerful enemies ; and threevictories over the Reboo, won with great slaughter,by Remeses III. about a century later, added afarFide the allies, in wood-cut, No. 1 1-^^'. 3.-|- Fide wood-cut, No. 62. fig. i.j As in the procession of figures — emblematic of the four quarters oi'the world, north, east, south, and west — in Belong's toniii.B B ^^372 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. 111.hriffhter lustre to his name, than the numerousdefeats of other Asiatic people, though they enrichedhim with immense booty, and considerablyincreased the extent of the Egyptian conquests.In these encounters several thousand of the enemywere killed, as reported in the Egyptian returns ;and the obstinacy of the fight, and the firm resistancethey opposed to the highly disciplined andnumerous forces of their antagonists, distinctlyprove them to have been a nation both powerfuland skilled in the art of war. They were defeated,but not conquered ; nor would any portion ofthem submit to become allies of the Egyptians:and from the long duration of the war, the repeatedattempts made by the Pharaohs to subjugate theircountry, their marked hatred of them, and theireagerness to commemorate each victory, we mayconclude the Egyptians had also suffered duringthese campaigns ; and though, as might be expected,the sculptured history in the Therein templesmerely relates the victories of the Pharaohs,the Ilebo themselves had probably reason to recordtheir own successful resistance, and sometimes eventhe defeat of the invaders.From the style of their costume, and the lightnessof their complexion, it is evident they inhabited anorthern* as well as an Asiatic country, very dis-besidesc<)lf)iir, wc have always a <listiii<^iii.sliin<5 mark in the tcrniiii-action of tliel)aiul,s tliatsc'ciiretlic prison is ; wliicli have anciitiro criedflower, sii|)|)()se(l to he the |)a)))iiis, to denote those nations Hvinj^ to thenoitli o('I'.f;>|)t, and the tinge-leaved (h)wer of another water plant, to(point out the African or soiitliern tries, as may he seiii in the woodcut,No. (in. /7i,'. f). of the Asmaor, and//i,'. 10. of a thick captive fromCHAP. III. DRESS OF THE RE130. 673tant from Egypt, and of a far more temperateclimate. Their dress consisted of an under garment,with the usual short kelt, and a long outerrobe, highly coloured, and frequently ornamentedwith fancy devices, or a broad rich border, whichdescended to the ankles, and was fastened atthe neck with a large bow, or by a strap overthe shoulder, the lower part being open in front.It was not bound by a girdle : this was wornbeneath it; though the Egyptian artists occasionallyrepresent it as if worn above, or seen throughthe transparent robe : but the substance of thelatter was generally too thick to admit of this, beingsometimes of bulls* hide or leather, and sometimesof a woollen stuff. Their girdle was highly ornamented,and the extremity falling down in frontterminated in a large tassel*; and so fond werethey of decorating their persons, that besides earrings,necklaces, and trinkets, common to Asiaticand other tribes, the chiefs decked their headswith feathers, and some painted or tattooed theirarms and legs.If the costumes of several foreign nations metwith in the Egyptian sculptures call to mind thoseof Persia and Parthia, none perhaps resemble themmore than that of the Reboo, or of the Rot-h-no,whom I shall presently describe. The hair of theReboo was not less singular than their dress : it wasAfrica. These two plants, in like manner, are chosen as emblems ofthe lower or northern, and upper or southern, divisions of Egypt.Very like that of a Persepolitan figure in wood-cut. No. 64. Jig. 3.B B 3374 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.divided into separate parts, one of which fell inringlets over the forehead, and the other over theback of the head ; and a plaited lock of greatlength, passing nearly over the ear, descended tothe breast, and terminated in a curled point. Infeature they were as remarkable as in costume ;and the Egyptians have not failed to indicate theirmost striking peculiarities, as blue eyes, aquilinenose, and small red beards. Their arms consistedprincipally of the bow, and a long straight swordwith an exceedingly sharp point ; and it is probablethat to their skill in the use of the former we mayattribute their effectual resistance to the repeatedinvasions of the Egyptians.Another Eastern nation, with whom the Egyptianswere already at war in the remote age ofAmun-m-gori Ii*, or about iGSO years before ourera, was the Pountt ; who were subsequently compelledto pay tribute to Egypt in the reign of thethird Thothmes. Proud of their liberty, theyneglected no opportunity to throw off the yoke,and the records of the repeated invasion of theircountry by successive Pharaohs prove their independentspirit, and their courage in expelling theinvaders.Their features were less marked than those ofmany Oriental people represented in the sculptures: they shaved their beards, and wore theirhair enveloped in a large cap, bound with a fillet,Mentioned on a stone found by Mr. Hntron in the desert of" thelied Sea; where I met with the small temple and station of Wailed(Jasoos, mentioned in my I'^j^ypt and Thebes, p. 'MH.f Or, I'onont. r/f/f wood-exit, No. ()2.//ir. .5.CHAP. HI. THE rOUNT AND Shall. S'^5like many of the tribes of the interior, and theSyrians who bordered upon Egypt. Their dressconsisted chiefly of a short kelt, secured with theusual girdle : and though of a lighter hue than theEgyptians, they appear to have inhabited a regionlying more to the south than the Rot-h-no or theKoofa, who were also tributary at the same periodto Thothmes III. Among the presents broughtby them to the Egyptian monarch were the ibex,leopard*, baboon, ape, ostrich eggs and feathers,dried fruits and skins ; and exotic shrubs, withebony and ivory, seem to prove that they lived in acultivated country as well as a warm climateThe Sharit were another Eastern or Northernpeople, against whom the Egyptians waged a successfulwar, principally in the reigns of Osirei andhis son, the great Remeses ; and I am inclined tothink them either an Assyrian tribe, or the inhabitantsof some part of Arabia. The former appearsmore probable, though the fact of the ArabianGulf having been called by the Egyptians the Seaof Shari may argue in favour of the latter. Theirfeatures were marked by a prominent aquiline noseand high cheek bones : they had a large beard ;and their head-dress consisted either of a capbound, like that of the Fount, with a fillet, or askull-cap fitting loosely to the head, secured by aVery like the hunting leopard of India, or felix jiibata.+ Vide upper line ot" figures in plate 4.if M. Champollion was mistaken in supposing them the Bishari, whoinhabit the deserts of Nubia, as I have already observed in my Egyptand Thebes, p. 484. I mention this again, because the respectablename of a person like M. Champollion is likely to perpetuate an errorwhich can only have been accidental.B B 4376 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.band, and terminating at the end, which fell downbehind, in a ball or tassel.* Their dress consistedof a long loose robe reaching to the ankles,and fastened at the waist by a girdle, the upperpart furnished with ample sleeves. The girdle wassometimes highly ornamented : men as well aswomen wore ear-rings ; and they frequently had asmall cross suspended to a necklace, or to thecollar of their dress. The adoption of this lastwas not peculiar to them ; it was also appended to,or figured upon, the robes of the Rot-h-no ; andtraces of it may be seen in the fancy ornaments ofthe Reboo, showing that it was already in use asearly as the 15th century before the Christian era.Their principal arms were the bow, spear, twojavelins, and a sword or club ; and their countrywas defended by several strongly fortified towns.But no want of courage prevented their resistingthe Egyptian invaders in the open field ; and it wasonly after severe struggles that they retired to thosestrong-holds, which were bravely, though unsuccessfully,defended. Some wore a sort of doublebelt, crossing the body and passing over eachshoulder, and this, together with the pointed cap,so much resembling the dress of Tirhaka*s captives!,cannot fail to remind us of the Syrians orAssyrians, whose name bears a strong analogy tothe one before us.The Rot-h-no t, supposed by M. Champlain toJldr wood-cut, No. 02. //,:,'. (i. r.f Vide wood-nit, No. (Ki. The .saiiu' iiiiiy he olj^irvcd in (hi; Persianfigures of flic heanlilul tesselated convenient lately discovered atI'oinpcii.{ /'<f/t' W(i()<I-eiil, No. ()•?.//;,'. 7.CHAP. III. THE llOT-N-NO. THEIR COSTUME. ^377No. 66.1 2Prisoners of Tirhaka.be Lydian*, were a nation with whom the Egyptianswaged a long war, commencing at least asearly as, and perhaps prior to, the reign of the thirdThothmes. Their white complexion, tight dresses,and long gloves t, decide them to have been nativesof a much colder climate than Egypt or Syria ; andthe productions of their country, which they bringas a tribute to the victorious Pharaoh, pronouncethem to have lived in the East. These consist ofhorses, and even chariots, with four spoked wheels t,It is difficult to decide upon the real names of these people,unacquainted as we are with the ancient geography of Asia; and theindiscriminate use of L for R and D for T, and other letters, in hieroglyphics,increases the uncertainty. Until I can fix the name fromtheir position, or any other reason, I repeat the one I had previouslyadopted.f Vice plate -i. There are other instances of gloves in Egyptiansculptures; but they are very rare. The expression shoe, in" Ruth,iv. 7., is in the Targuni " right-hand glove."X Vide sitprii, wood-cut. No. 53. b. The Egyptian town curricle hadfour spokes ; the war-car six.378 THE ancient Egyptians. chap. hi.very similar to the Egyptian curricle, rare woods,ivory, elephants and bears, a profusion of elegantgold and silver vases, with rings of the same preciousmetals, porcelain, and jars filled with choicegums and resins used for making incense, of whicha greater quantity was derived from their countrythan from any other tributary to Egypt. Their featureswere regular, without the very prominent nosethat characterises some Eastern people representedin the sculptures ; and they were of a very lightcolour, with brown or red hair, and blue eyes.Their long dress, usually furnished with tightsleeves *, and fastened by strings round the neck,either closed or folded over in front, and was sometimessecured by a girdle. Beneath the outerrobe they wore a kelt : and an ample cloak, probablywoollen like the modern hera, or blanket,of the coast of Barbary, was thrown over the wholedress t : the head being generally covered with aclose cap, or a fuller one bound with a fillet.The women wore a long garment secured with agirdle, and trimmed in the lower part with threerows of flounces; the sleeves sometimes large andopen, sometimes fastened tight round the wrist :and the hair was either covered vvith a cap, to whicha long tassel was appended, or descending in ringletswas encircled with a simple band. XThe Toersha §, a maritime people, are also mentionedamong the enemies of Egy})t; and their closeA dress with sleeves is seen in wood-cut. No. {^V.Jiti,. (i.•f- Vide wood-tit, No. 12., and No. ()2. Ji^,. ''I'.d.I Vide wood-cut, No. 72., ;nid No. d'^./i^^. 7. r.§ fide wood-cut, No.()7. /;^'. I.CHAP. III.THE MASHOASH AND Tufa.37<Jcap, from whose pointed summit a crest of hairfalls to the back of the neck, readily distinguishesthem from other Eastern tribes. Their featuresoffer no peculiarity ; and we have not sufficientdata from the sculptures to form any opinion respectingtheir wars with the Egyptians, thoughthey are introduced among the tribes conqueredby the third Remeses. The same applies to theMashoash*, another Asiatic nation : who resemblethe former in th^nr general features, and theshape of their beards ; but their head-dress islow, and rather more like that of Tirhaka's prisoners,already mentioned t, descending in twopoints at the side and back of the head, and boundwith a fillet.No, 67.Other enemies of the Egyptians.The people of Kufa appear to have inhabited apart of Asia lying considerably north of the latitudeof Palestine ; and their long hair, rich dresses, andsandals of the most varied form and colour, renderthem remarkable among the nations represented inEgyptian sculpture, t In complexion they weremuch darker than the Rot-h-no, but far more fairVide wootl-ciit, No. 67. Jig. 2.f Vide wood-cut, No. 66.^ Vide plate 4., second line from the top).So THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.than the Egyptians ; and to judge from the tributethey brought to the Pharaohs, they were a richpeople, and, Uke the Rot-n-no, far advanced in thearts and customs of civilised Use. This tribute,which is shown to have been paid to the Egyptiansas early as the reign of Tiiothmes III., consistedalmost entirely of gold and silver, in rings and bars,and vases of the same metals. Many of the latterwere silver, inlaid with gold, tastefully ornamented,of elegant form, and similar to many already in useamong the Egyptians ; and from the almost exclusiveintroduction of the precious metals, andthe absence of animals, woods, and such productionsas were brought to Egypt by other people,we may suppose the artist intended to convey anotion of the great mineral riches of their country:and they are occasionally represented carrying-knivesor daggers, beads, a small quantity of ivory,leathern bottles, and a few bronze and porcelaincups. Their dress was a simple kelt, richly workedand of varied colour, folding over in front, anilfastened M'ith a girdle ; and their sandals, which,being closed like boots, differed entirely from thoseof the Egyptians, appear to have been of cloth orleather, highly ornamented, and reaching considerablyabove the ankle. Their long hair hung looselyin tresses, reaching more than half way down theback ; and from the top of the head projected threeor four curls, either of real or artificial hair.The Kheta or Sheta* were a warlike peopleKliL'tii, Slicta, (iota, or SLrctlKC (mcvOai), Stytliians, are thesame iiaiiie. Kh and Isle were scrutinies vised s3n()iiymoiisly by theEgyptians.CHAP. III. THE Sheba. 381of Asia, who had made considerable progress inmilitary tactics, both with regard to manoeuvres inthe field, and the art of fortifying towns, some ofwhich they surrounded with a double fosse. It isworthy of remark, that in these cases the approachto the place led over a bridge ; and the sculpturesacquainting us with the fact are highly interesting,as they offer the earliest indication of its use, havingbeen executed in the reign of the great Rameses,about 1350 years before our era. But whether thebridges were supported on arches, or simply ofwooden rafters resting on piers of the samematerials, we are unable to decide, since the viewis given as seen from above, and is therefore confinedto the level upper surface.* Their troopsappear to have been disciplined ; and the closearray of their phalanxes of infantry, the style oftheir chariots, and the arms they used, indicatea great superiority in military tactics, comparedwith other Eastern nations of that early period.The wars waged against the Sheta by the Egyptians,and the victories obtained over them by thegreat Remeses, are pictured on the walls of hispalace at Thebes t, and are again alluded to in thesculptures of Remeses III., at Medeenet Haboo,where this people occurs in the list of nationsconquered by the Pharaohs. Their arms werethe bow, sword, and spear ; and their principaldefence was a wicker shield, either rectangular orWood-cut, No. 68. figs. 2 and 3.f Usually called the Memnonium.382 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. Ill,No. OS. Phalanx of the Sheta, drawn up as a corps do reserve, with the fortified town, surroundedby double ditches, over which arc bridges (figs. 2 and £). Tliibcs.concave at the sides, and convex at each end, approachingin form the Thehan buckler.Their dress consisted of a long robe, reachingto the ankles, with short sleeves, open, or folding-overin front, and secured by a girdle round thewaist ; but though frequently made of a very thickstuff, and pcMhnps qww quilled, it was by no meanstCHAP. 111. THE Sheba. THEIR ARMY. 383an effectual substitute for armour, nor could itresist the spear or the metal-pointed arrow. Theyeither wore a close or a full cap ; and their armswere occasionally decked with bracelets, as theirdresses with brilliant colours. Their cars weredrawn by two horses, like those of Egypt, butthey each contained three men, and some hadwheels with four instead of six spokes ; in bothwhich respects they differed from those of theiropponents. They had some cavalry : but largemasses of infantry, with a formidable body ofchariots, constituted the principal force of theirnumerous and well appointed army ; and if, fromthe manner in which they posted their corps dereserve we may infer them to have been a peopleskilled in war, some idea may also be formed of thestrength of their army from the numbers composingthat division, which amounted to 24,000 men *,drawn up in three close phalanxes, consisting eachof 8000.The nation of Sheta seems to have been composedof two distinct tribes t, both comprehended underthe same name, uniting in one common cause, andprobably subject to the same government. Theydiffered in their costume and general appearance ;one having a large cap, and the long loose robe,with open sleeves or capes covering the shoulders,worn by many Asiatic people already mentioned,a square or oblong shield t, and sometimes aAt the Memnoniuin. Vide my Egypt and Thebes, p. 19.f J^ide wood-cut, No. 69. ^g.s. 2, 3, 4, and 5.% The Persian shield was square or oblong, or of the form of a di.;-nioiid, calleth yiopov by the Greeks. Strabo, xv.3S4f THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.laisse beard ; the other the dress and shield beforedescribed, and no beard. They both foughtin cars and used the same weapons; and we evenfind they Heed together, or garrisoned the sametowns.Whether or no they were Scythianss, or a nationinhabiting the banks of the Euphrates, I do not yetpretend to decide : the name strongly argues infavour of the former opinion, which is that of themuch regretted Champollion ; and if any confirmationcan be obtained from the sculptures of theaccounts given by Herodotus, Diodorus, Tacitus,and other historians, relating to the march of Ses-osirisor Raises *, it is certainly to be lookedfor in those of the second and third Remeses ; andthe possibility of such extended conquests is notinconsistent with the known power and resourcesof ancient Egypt.Several other nations and tribes, who inhabitedparts of Asia, are shown by the monuments f tohave been invaded and reduced to subjection bythe arms of the Pharaohs ; and in the names ofsome we recognise towns or districts of Syria,as in Maori, Lemanon §, Kanana, and Salon.Vide my Egypt and Tliebcs, p. 22., and thu; Introduction. Tacitussays, the Egyptians "over-ran all Libya and Ethiopia, and .suhdiiedthe Impedes and Persians, the Bactriansns and Scythianss, with the extensivevisions inhabited by the Syrians, the Armenians, and the ('a|)pado-clans ; and by this conquest a tract of country, extending from 15itli\niaon the Pontic Sea, to the coast ofLyciaon the Mediterranean, wasreduced to siiltjection." Ann. ii. (iO.+ J'it/c wood-cut. No. ()!). opposite page.I Vidr wood-cut. No. (tO.Jii^x. 0, 7, and 8.9 I have noticed the frequent use ol M for \^ in Coptic and otherlanguages. J'idc I'^gypt and Thebes, p. \'J2. note '{.VOL. I.^\U]c c386 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.The inhabitants of the two first are figured with around full head-dress, bound with a fillet: andthose of Kanana are distinguished by a coat of mailand helmet, and the use of spears, javelins, anda battle-axe similar to that of Egypt.*Thus we find that the Theban sculptors intentionallymaintained a marked difference in thearms and costume peculiar to many of these people,though the same attention was not always extendedto their faces. They were frequently conventional; a certain general style being adopted forEastern nations t, another for those of the North, athird for the Ethiopians, and a fourth for theBlacks of the interior of Africa ; and accuracy inportraying the features was dispensed with, exceptin the larger and more detailed sculptures, or whenany remarkable difference was observable, as in theprominent nose of one of their allies, tSome are clad in loose, others in tight dresses,some have shields of a square, others of an oblong,round, or other form, which are merely held by asingle handle in the centre, like those now used bythe Ababdeh and modern Ethiopians.The country of Lemanon is shown by the artistto have been mountainous, inaccessible to chariots,and abounding in lofty trees, which the affrightedmountaineers are engaged in felling, in order to impedethe advance of the invading army. Havingtaken by assault the fortified towns on the frontier,Wood-cut, No. 69. J?i;'. 8. In losliiia, xvii. Hi. The Canaanitesare said to " have chariots of iron."f They arc sometimes represented tattooed or branded. TheAssyrians had this custom.J F?V/f' wood-cut, No. 1 1 . fig. -2., and wood-cut. No. Ci. fig. .'J.CHAP. III. BLACK NATIONS THEY SUBDUED. 387the Egyptian monarch advances with the light infantryin pursuit of the fugitives, who had escaped,and taken refuge in the woods ; and sending aherald to offer terms on condition of their surrender,the chiefs are induced to trust to hisclemency, and return to their allegiance ; as arethose of Kanana, whose strong-holds yield in likemanner to the arms of the conqueror.That these two names point out the inhabitantsof Mount Lebanon and Canaan is highly probable,since the campaign is said to have taken place inthe first year, or soon after the accession, of Osirei,the father of the great Remeses ; and the eventswhich previously occurred in Egypt, during thereign of Amunoph III., and the warlike characterof his two successors, may have given an opportunityto these people, though so near Egypt,to rebel, and assert their independence.Many black nations were also conquered bythe early monarchs of the 18th and 19th dynasties,as the Trees, the Tareao, and another whosename is lost*, as well as the Cush, or Ethiopians.These last were long at war with the Egyptians ;and part of their country, which was reduced at avery remote period by the arms of the Pharaohs,was obliged to pay an annual tribute to the conquerors: but whether the name of Cush was appliedmerely to the lower districts of Ethiopia, orcomprehended the whole of the southern portionof that country, I am unable to determine.rife wood-cut, No. 69. /g. 12.•j- It is the scriptural as well as the hieroglyphical name. Woodcut,No. 69. Jig. 13. a, bec, and d.C C ^Z388 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.The Blacks, like the Ethiopians, wore shortaprons of bulls' hides, or the skins of wild beasts,frequently drawn by the Egyptian artists with thetail projecting from the girdle, for the purposeof adding to their grotesque appearance by thisequivocal addition : the chiefs, decked with ostrichand other feathers, had large circular goldear-rings, collars, and bracelets ; and many of theEthiopian grandees were clad in garments of finelinen, with leathern girdles highly ornamented, aleopard skin being occasionally thrown over theshoulder. * It is reasonable to suppose that the linenwas purchased from the Egyptians, whose conquestsin the country would naturally lead to its introductionamong them ; and this is rendered moreprobable, from its transparent fineness being representedin the same manner as in the dresses ofthe Egyptians, and from its being confined to thechiefs as an article of value, indicative of their rank.The Ethiopian tribute consisted of gold andsilver, precious stones, ostrich feathers, skins,ebony, ivory, apes, oxen of the long-horned breedstill found in Abyssinia, lions, oryxes, leopards,giraffes, and hounds ; and they were obliged tosupply the victors with slaves, which the Egyptianssometimes exacted even from the conquered countriesof Asia. Their chief arms were the bow,spear, and club : they fought mostly on foot, andthe tactics of a disciplined army appear to havebeen unknown to them.rill( wood-cut, No. C>9. /if^. Hi. c, d.CHAP. III. NATIONS IN ALLIANCE WITH EGYPT. 389The names of foreign nations who acted asauxiliaries of the Egyptians I have ah-lady noticed.The first unequivocal mention of thesealliances* are in the sculptures of the great remotest,where the Shairetana unite with him inan expedition against the Sheta. They had beenpreviously conquered by the Pharaohs, with whomthey entered into a treaty, agreeing to furnishtroops and to assist them in their future wars : andfirm to their engagements, they continued to maintaina friendly intercourse with the Egyptians foraconsiderable length of time, and joined the armyof the third Remeses, when, about a century later,he marched into Asia, to attack the Tokkari andthe Reboooo. In the war against the Reboooo, Rednesswas assisted by another body of auxiliaries, whosehigh fur cap sufficiently denotes their Orientalorigin 1^; and a third tribe, whose name is likewiselost, aided the Egyptians in the same campaign.It is evident that the Tokkari also united withthe invaders against the Reboo, and contributedto the successes of the third Remeses ; but eithera portion of their tribe still remained hostile to theEgyptians, or some cause of complaint alienatedtheir friendship, and we find that they were soonafterwards engaged in war with that monarch.Being joined by many of the Shairetana, to whosecountry they fled for refuge after their first defeat;Perhaps we may' also trace them in the time of Osirtasen I,f At the Memnonium and Aboosimbel. Tz'^e wood-cut, No. 61.^gs. 5. and 6.% Vide wood-cut, No. 1 1 . /g. 2., the same as Jig. 3. in wood-cutNo. 62.c c 3390 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.and relying on the protection promised them bythe fleet of that maritime people, they offeredbattle to the Egyptians : but their combined effortswere ineffectual ; they were again reduced to subjection; and Remeses, loaded with booty and aconsiderable number of captives, returned to Egypt,accompanied by the auxiliary legions of those ofthe Shairetana, Tokkari, and the other allies, whohad remained faithful to him.MARCH OF THE EGYPTIAN ARMY.When an expedition was resolved upon againsta foreign nation, the necessary preparations weremade throughout the country, each province furnishingits quorum of men ; and the members ofthe military class were summoned to muster inwhatever numbers the monarch deemed it necessaryto require. The troops were generallycommanded by the king in person ; but in someinstances a general was appointed to that post,and intrusted with the sole conduct of the war.*A place of rendezvous was fixed, in early timesgenerally at Thebes, Memphis, or Pelusiinn ; andthe troops having assembled in the vicinity, remainedencamped there, awaiting the leader of theexpedition. As soon as he arrived, the necessarypreparations were made ; and orders havingbeen issued for their march, a signal was given bysound of trumpet ; the troops fell in, and with aThis was the case when the army was sent by Apries aijaiiist thepyrenean. Herod, ii. l()l.CHAP. III.MARCH OF THE ARMY.profound bow each soldier in the ranks waitedthe royal general, and acknowledged his readinessto receive his orders, and to follow him tothe field. The march then commenced * ; thechariots led the van; and the king, mounted inhis car of war, and attended by his chief officers tcarrying flabella, took his post in the centre, precededand followed by bodies of infantry armedwith bows, spears, or other weapons, according totheir respective corps.On commencing the attack in the open field,a signal was again made by sound of trumpet. Thearchers drawn up in line first discharged a showerNo. 70.A body oi archers.It is represented at Medeenet Haboo. If the whole of theback part of that temple were cleared, much more might be obtainedfrom those interesting sculptures.■f" If he had sons, they held this office, which was considered a veryhonourable post.C C i392 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.of arrows on the enemy's front, and a considerablemass of chariots advanced to the charge ; the heavyinfantry, armed with spears or clubs, and coveredwith their shields, moved forwards at the same timein close array, flanked by chariots and cavalry*,and pressed upon the centre and wings of theenemy, the archers still galling the hostile columnswith their arrows, and endeavouring to createdisorder in their ranks, tPRISONERS, BOOTY, AND ENCAMPMENTS.Their mode of warfare was not like that of nationsin their infancy, or in a state of barbarism ;and it is evident, from the number of prisonersthey took, that they spared the prostrate whoasked for quarter : and the representations of personsslaughtered by the Egyptians who haveovertaken them, are intended to allude to whathappened in the heat of action, and not to anywanton cruelty on the part of the victors. Indeedin the naval fight of Remeses III. t, the Egyptians,both in the ships and on the shore, are seen rescuingthe enemy, whose galley has been sunk, froma watery grave ; and the humanity of that peopleis strongly argued, whose artists deem it a virtue,worthy of being recorded among the glorious actionsof tiicir countrymen.The chariots arc represented in this position, the cavalry I siig-fest from probability, though not inihcaletl in the .scriptures.+ At Medeenet Jlal)oo, in Thebes.I At Medecnet Ilaboo.CHAP. III. THEIR CONDUCT IN WAR. 303Those who sued for mercy and laid down theirarms, were spared and sent bound from the field ;and, as I have already observed, the hands of theslain being cut off, and placed in heaps beforethe king, immediately after the action, were countedby the military secretaries in his presence, whothus ascertained and reported to him the amountof the enemy's slain. Sometimes their tongues,and occasionally other members, were laid beforehim in the same manner ; in all instances beingintended as authentic returns of the loss of thefoe : for which the soldiers received a proportionatereward, divided among the whole army : the captureof prisoners probably claiming a higher premium,exclusively enjoyed by the captor.The arms, horses, chariots, and booty, taken inthe field, or in the camp, were also collected, and thesame officers wrote an account of them, and presentedit to the monarch. The booty was sometimescollected in an open space, surrounded by atemporary wall, indicated in the sculptures bythe representation of shields placed erect, with awicker gate *, on the inner and outer face of whicha strong guard was posted, the sentries walking toand fro with drawn swords. The subject, fromwhich this is taken t, may serve to show their modeof encamping ; for though, after they had beenvictorious, and no longer feared an attack, thestrongly fortified camp was unnecessary, its generalVkfe wood-cut. No. 7 1 ., next page.f On the N. E. tower of the Memnonium, at Thebes.THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. III.form maybe hence inferred; and the only differencebetween this and a permanent station, or/' <• bA guard at the gates of an encampment.regular encampment, (the castra station of theRomans) probably consisted in the latter beingconstructed with greater attention to the principlesof defence, and furnished with ditches and a strongefficient rampart. Judging from those of El Rab,Hieracon, and other fortified places in the valleyof the Nile, distinct from the towns themselves,their fixed stations were surrounded by a massiveand lofty wall of brick, whose broad rampart,having a wide staircase, or inclined way, was furnishedwith a parapet wall, for the protection ofthe soldiers ; and though, from the nature of theground, or other accidental causes, they were notCHAP. III. MODE OF ENCAMPING. 395strictly confined to the figure of a square, thequadrangular form was always preferred, and noinstance occurs of a round camp like that of theLacedaemonians.It was forbidden to the Spartan soldier, when onguard, to have his shield, in order that, being deprivedof this defence, he might be more cautiousnot to fall asleep ; and the same custom appears tohave been common also to the Egyptians, since wefind the watch on duty at the camp gates are onlyarmed with swords and maces, though belonging tothe heavy-armed corps, who, on other occasions,were in the habit of carrying a shield. *The field encampment was either a square oraparallelogram, with a principal entrance in oneof the faces ; and near the centre were the generalstent, and those of the principal officers. In form,it resembled a Roman camp ; but the position ofthe general's tent agreed with the Greek custommentioned by Homer t, and differed from that ofthe Romans, who placed the praetorium on theside most distant, or least exposed to attack, fromthe enemy. The general's tent was sometimessurrounded by a double rampart or fosse, enclosingVide wood-cut, No. 71.f Horn. II. e, 222. : —dry S' en' OSvffarjo^ fteyaKTirt'i vrai fiiKaivyH p' iv fie(7ffar<^ tart, ytyu)Vf.jxiv aiJ.(poTtp(ijae"'• High on the midmost bark the king appear'd :There, from Ulysses' deck, his voice was heard."Pope, viii. 270.J Or general's tent.396 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.two distinct areas, the outer one containing threetents, probably of the next in command, or of theofficers on the staff; and the guards, like theRoman excubige, slept or watched in the openair. Other tents were pitched without these enclosures; and near the external circuit, a spacewas set apart for feeding horses and beasts ofburthen, and another for ranging the chariots andbaggage. It was probably near the general's tent,and within the same area, that the altars of thegods, or whatever related to religious matters, thestandards, and the military chest, were kept ; andwe find an instance of persons kneeling before certainsacred emblems beneath a canopy, within anenclosure similar to that where the tent stood.To judge from the mode of binding their prisoners,we might suppose they treated them withunnecessary harshness and even cruelty, at themoment of their capture, and during their marchwith the army ; and the contempt with whichthey looked upon all foreigners, whom they stigmatisedby the name of impure gentiles, didprobably lead many of the soldiers to commit actsof brutal severity. They tied their hands behindtheir backs, or over their heads, in the moststrained positions, and a rope passing round theirneck fastened them to each other ; and some hadtheir hands enclosed in an elongated fetter ofwood*, made of two opposite segments, nailed wooil-ciit, No. U2. at the eml of ('liap. IV.CHAP. III. TREATMENT OF THE CONQUERED. 397gather at each end ; such as are still used forsecuring prisoners in Egypt, at the present day.In the capture of a town some were beaten withsticks*, in order to force from them the secret ofthe booty that had been concealed ; many werecompelled to labour for the benefit of the victors ;and others were insulted by the wanton soldiery,who pulled their beards and derided their appearance.But when we remember how frequentlyinstances of harsh treatment have occurred, evenamong civilised Europeans, at an epoch whichdeemed itself much more enlightened than thefourteenth century before our era, we are disposedto excuse the occasional insolence of anEgyptian soldier ; and the unfavourable impressionsconveyed by such scenes are more than counterbalancedby the proofs of Egyptian humanity, asin the sea-fight above mentioned. Indeed, I aminclined to think the captives bound beneath thechariot of the conqueror in his triumph t a licenceof the sculptors, who, as Gibbon t observes, " inevery age have felt the truth of a system, whichderives the sublime from the principle of terror."The custom of dragging behind a chariot themurderers of a friend was usual among the thessalonians; and the early Greeks insulted the dead onthe field of battle, and mutilated their bodies toThis is the usual mode in the East of eliciting the truth at the presentclay.-f- At Medeenet Haboo and Karnak,:j: Gibbon, vol. ii. 64. note.C^98 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.satiate their revenge. But this shameful practicewas afterwards abandoned ; and though the Persianshad treated the body of Leonidas in a barbarousmanner, the Spartans refused to retaliatethe insult on a subsequent occasion, when antoniuswas defeated and slain at Plataea. And ifAlexander imitated the ungenerous conduct ofAchilles, and dragged the body of Dessus behindhis chariot, it was a singular instance : and, generallyspeaking, none but barbarous nations wereguilty of similar enormities. I cannot thereforesuppose that the Egyptians, who surpassed allothers in the practices of civilised life, were in thehabit of indulging in wanton cruelty, and muchless do I believe that the captives represented onthe facade of their temples, bound at the feet ofthe king, who holds them by the hair of the head,and with an uplifted arm appears about to immolatethem in the presence of the deity, were intendedto refer to a human sacrifice * : but rather that thesubject was a religious allegory, purporting to beanacknowledgment of the victory he had obtainedby the assistance of the Deity, — in short, an emblematicrecord of his successes over the enemiesof Egypt ; and this is strongly confirmed by thefact of our finding the same subject on monumentserected by the Polemics and Caesarea• Herodotus justly blames the Greeks for their ignorance of theEj,7ptian character, in taking literally their allegorical tales of humansacrifices, ii. 45.t At E'Dayr, near E'sne, at Tender, and other places.CHAP. HI. TRIUMPHAL RETURN OF THE ARMY. 399RETURN, AND TRIUMPH.On returning from war, the troops marched accordingto the post assigned to each regiment,observing the same order and regularity as duringtheir advance through the enemy's country : andthe ales who came with them occupied a positiontowards the rear of the army, and were followedby a strong corps of Egyptians. Rewards wereafterwards distributed to the soldiers, and thetriumphant procession of the conqueror was gracedby the presence of the captives, who were conductedin bonds beside his chariot.On traversing countries tributary to, or in alliancewith, Egypt, the monarch received thehomage of the friendly inhabitants, who, greetinghis arrival with joyful acclamations and richpresents, complimented him on the victory hehad obtained ; and the army, as it passed throughEgypt, was met at each of the principal cities bya concourse of people, who, headed by the priests,and chief men of the place bearing bouquets offlowers, green boughs, and palm branches, receivedthem with loud acclamations, and welcomed theirreturn. * Then addressing themselves to the king,the priests celebrated his praises ; and, enumeratingthe many benefits he had conferred on EgyptVide Mr. Burton's Excerpt, plate 36.400 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.by the conquest of foreign nations, the enemiesof his country, they affirmed that his power wasexalted in the world like the sun in the heavens,and his beneficence only equalled by that of thedeities themselves.*Having reached the capital, preparations commencedfor a general thanksgiving in the principaltemple : and suitable offerings were made to thepresiding deity, the guardian of the city, by whosespecial favour and intercession the victory wassupposed to have been obtained. The prisonerswere presented to him, as well as the spoils takenfrom the enemy, and the monarch acknowledgedthe manifest power of his all-protecting hand, andhis own gratitude for so distinguished a proof ofheavenly favour to him and to the nation. Andthese subjects, represented on the walls of thetemples, not only served as a record of the victory,but tended to impress the people with a religiousveneration for the Deity, towards whom their sovereignset them so marked an example of respect.The troops were also required to attend duringthe performance of the prescribed ceremonies, andto return thanks for the victories they had obtained,as well as for their personal preservation ;and a priest offered incense, meat-offerings, andlibations, in their presence, t Each soldier carriedin his hand a twig of some tree, probably ohvc,Conf. Roscttii Stoiio, wlicro Kin,' Ptolemy is (•()i(i|)aicd to Horns,the son of Isis and Osiris, and is called a hiMuficcnt dirty.f socii is the subject of a procession I met with at the smalltcmi)le in the Assaseef, at Thebes.CHAP. III. RETURNING THANKS TO THE GODS. 401with the arms of his peculiar corps ; and beingsummoned by sound of trumpet, they marchedforwards to the temple, to the beat of drum.Not only the light infantry, but even the heavyarmed troops, presented themselves on this occasionwithout shields ; and we may infer from their absence,and the substitution of a green branch, emblematiceither of peace or victory, that the artistintended to convey an idea of the security they felt,under the protecting influence of the Deity, towhose presence they were summoned. It is difficultto decide whether this was a twig of olive, or whatpeculiar tree among the Egyptians was symbolic ofpeace or of victory ; and if the bay tree was cultivatedin Egypt, there is no reason to suppose itbore the same emblematic force as in Greece.*A judicious remark has been made respectingthe choice of the olive as the emblem of peace.After the devastation of a country by hostile invasion,and the consequent neglect of its culture,no plantation requires a longer period to restoreits previously flourishing condition than the olivegrove ; and this tree may therefore have been appropriatelyselected as the representative of peace. tThere is, however, reason to suppose that its emblematiccharacter did not originate in Greece jI have seen garlands from Thebes apparently of ba)' leaves ; butthough cultivated there, the tree is not indigenous to Egypt.+ By Mr. Banks.4; " Paciferseque manu ramus pretended oliver." Virgg. Mn. viii.116.VOL. I. D D402 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III.but that it dated from a far more remote period ;and the tranqiiiihty and habitable state of theearth * were announced to the ark through thesame token.It was not customary for the Egyptian soldierto wear arms except on service, when on garrisonduty, or in attendance upon the king : nor didthe private citizen at any time carry offensiveweapons about his person, either in the house orinthe street; and this circumstance, as I havealready observed, goes far to prove the advancedstate of civilisation in that country, at a time whenthe rest of the world was immersed in barbarism.In Greece, the Athenians were the first to adoptthe custom of going out unarmed; but many yearselapsed before they were induced to welcome theinnovation generally ; and it was only finally establishedas an universal custom by the laws ofSolon, six hundred years before our era.CAPTIVES.The captives, being brought to Egy})t, wereemployed in the service of the monarch, in buildsTin; Arabs liavc an amusing legend respecting the dove, or pigeon.The first time, it returned with the olive branch, but without any indicationof the state of" the earth itself; but on its secours visit to theark, the red appearance of its feet proved that the red mud, on whichit had walked, was already freed from the waters ; and to record theevent, Noah prayed that the feet of those i)irds might for ever continueof that colour, which marks them to the present day. The similarityof tour Hebrew words ailoom (onN), red, admeli (no-^N), earth, andAdm (C1N), Adam, is remarkable. A " iiuin" i.s .still called " Allan"ill Turkish.CHAP. III.CAPTIVES.ing temples *, cutting canals, raising dykes andembankments, and other public works : and some,who were purchased by the grandees, were employedin the same capacity as the Memlooks ofthe present day. Women slaves were also engagedin the service of families, like the Greeksand Circassians in modern Egypt, and other partsof the Turkish empire ; and from finding themrepresented in the sculptures of Thebes, accompanyingmen of their own nation, who bear tributeto the Egyptian monarch, we may conclude thata certain number were annually sent to Egyptfrom the conquered provinces of the North andNo. 72.3 4 5 6 7 8Women of the Rot-n-no sent to Egypt.East, as well as from Ethiopia. It is evident thatboth white and black slaves were employed as ser-herodotusand Diodorus state that the prisoners of Sesostri.swere condemned to perform all the laborious part of the works he undertookon his return to Egypt. Herod, li. 108. Diod. i. 56. Diodorushere mentions some Babylonian captives.D D '2THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. III.No. 73.3 4 5Black slaves, with their women and children.wants : they attended on the guests when invitedto the house of their master ; and from theirbeing in the families of priests, as well as of themilitary chiefs, we may infer that they were purchasedwith money, and that the right of possessingslaves was not confined to those who hadtaken them in war. The traffic in slaves wastolerated by the Egyptians ; and it is reasonable tosuppose that many persons were engaged, as atpresent, in bringing them to Egypt for public sale,independent of those who were sent as part of thetribute, and who were probably at first the propertyof the monarch: nor did any difficulty occur to theIshmaelites* in the purchase of Joscpli from hisbrethren, nor in his subsequent sale to Potipharon arriving in Egypt.MILITARY LAWS AND PUNISHMENTS.According to Diodorus, the Egyptians were not(ivn. xxxvii. 28. Comic. also (Jen. .xliv, 9.CHAP. III. MILITARY PUNISHMENTS. 405actuated in the administration of punishments byany spirit of vengeance ; but solely by the hope ofreclaiming an offender, and of preventing for thefuture the commission of a similar crime. Impressedwith this feeling, they were averse tomaking desertion and insubordination capital offences: the soldier was degraded, and condemnedpublicly to wear some conspicuous mark of ignominy,which rendered him an object of reproachto his comrades ; and, without fixing any timefor his release, he was doomed to bear it *, tillhis contrition and subsequent good conduct hadretrieved his character, and obtained for him theforgiveness of his superiors. " For," says thehistorian f, " by rendering the stigma a moreodious disgrace than death itself, the legislatorhoped to make it the most severe of punishments,at the same time that it had a great advantagein not depriving the state of the services of theoffender ; and deeming it natural to every one,who had been degraded from his post, to desireto regain the station and character he had lost,they cherished the hope that he might eventuallyreform, and become a worthy member of the societyto which he belonged." For minor offences, itmay be presumed, they inflicted the bastinado t,which was commonly employed for punishingservants and other people ; but the soldier whoMany officers regret the discontinuance of similar punishments inour army.t Diodor. i. 78.% The Greeks flogged their sailors with cords ; and deserters had boththeir hands cut off.THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. III.treacherously held communication with the enemywas sentenced to the excision of his tongue. *The ancient practice of punishing the offending member.'■> " W // 7No. 73. (I. Egyptian arms. Cntlcclions of S. 1)' Atltdiuisi and Mr. Salt : and from Tliclics.FiR. 1. a, hatchet, 1 foots inches in IciiKtli.Fig. .3. dagger l.'ii inches in length.Figs. 4 and 5. slings, from the sculptures.Fig. n. is transferred to wood. cut, No. !)2.Fig. 7. dagger lOJ inches long.Fig. 8. head of dart, ;5 inches.Fig. (). javelin licul II inches long.END OF THE First Volume.London : — Printed by A. Spottiswoodk, New-streets Square.