MANNERS AND CUSTOMSOFTHE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.INCLUDINGTHEIR PRIVATE LIFE,GOVERNMENT, LAWS, ARTS, MANUFACTURES,RELIGION, AND EARLY HISTORY ;DERIVED FROJI A Comparison OPTHE PAINTINGS, SCULPTURES, AND MONUMENTS STILL EXISTINGWITH THE ACCOUNTS OF ANCIENT AUTHORS.3fnu0ttatetJ bg a^ratnincs of tfjoee Subjects*By J. G. WILKINSON, F.R.S. M.R.S.L. &c.AUTHOR OF "a GENERAL VIEW OF EGYPT, ANDTOPOGRAPHY OP THEBES," &C.IN THREE VOLUMES.VOL. in.LONDON:JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET.MDCCCXXXVII.London :Printed by A. Spottiswoode,New Street Square.MGETT/CENMCONTENTSOFThe THIRD VOLUME.CHAPTER VIII.PageThe Hyaena caught in a Trap. The Chase - - 2Huntsmen, The Chasseur and his Attendants - - 3Provisions and other Requisites carried by them. A largeSpace in the Desert, enclosed by Nets. The Sportsmanin his Chariot - - - . . 4,Nets of different Kinds, for various Purposes - - 6Dresses of Huntsmen. Preserves for Game. Gamekeepers 7Wild Animals kept, and brought up in the Preserves ; notmarked like Cattle - - - - - 8Early Custom of Hunting throughout the East. TheMedes and Persians - - - - - IICoursing in the open Plains. Mode of starting the Dogs 12The Game when caught, how carried home - - 13They often divided into Parties. The use of the Noose, orLasso - - - - - - 14They trained Lions for Hunting - - - 16No Appearance of the Leopard being used for this Purpose.Mode of drawing the Bow in the Chase. The Animalsthey hunted - - - 17Some killed for their Skins. The Ostrich; its Eggs andPlumes - . - - - 20A 2IV CONTENTS.Animals often drawn with great Spirit. The wild Boarnot represented. Fanciful Animals - - - 21The Sphinx ; always Male - - - - 23Various Kinds of Sphinxes. The Animals still found inEgypt. The Oryx, and other Antelopes - - 24?The Wild Ox : Stag : Ibex - - - - 25The Kebsh or wild Sheep. Porcupine. Bear unknown inEgypt as well as the Otter - - - - 26The Wolf small, generally found singly. M. Conning'sError respecting the Wolf. Wolf Mummies at E'Sioot,the ancient Lycopolis - - - - 27The Hare. A Remark of Demon. The Jabber or Hyrax 28The Hyaena and Wolf seldom found in the Interior of theDesert. The Lion not in Egypt - - - 29The Ichneumon ; its Hostility to Serpents. Thence venerated.Story of its recovering from the Bite of poisonousSnakes - - - - - 30Easily tamed. Kept as a Cat. Its Food. The Wild Cat,or Felix claus. The Jerboa. The Giraffe - - 31Various Breeds of Dogs. A Sort of Bitch not unlike ourTurnspit ; a Favourite in the House. The Fox Dog of ancientand modern Egypt. Pigs. Cattle of different Kinds 33Horses and Asses - - - - - 34-The Camel not represented; nor Fowls and Pigeons. ArtificialMode of rearing Poultry. Birds caught in Netsand Traps by Fowlers - - - - 35Fowling. Traps for catching Birds - - - 36The Throw-stick. Bows and Slings not used for killingBirds - - - - - 38They went in Boats with a Party of Friends to the Jungleswhich were the Resort of numerous Wild Fowl. A DecoyBird . - - 40A Cat accompanied them, and was trained to catch theBirds. Prejudice in favour of Cats and Dogs - 42Dogs not favoured by the modern Egyptians. Cats welltreated - - - - - 44The Clap Net, how placed. The Watcher - - 45Sign to indicate Silence, not by the Finger to the Mouth 46CONTENTS. VPageMode of catching Ducks in Ponds. Birds chiefly caughtby them. Geese - - - - 47Birds salted. Eggs taken to stock the Poultry Yard. VariousBirds represented - - - - 49List of the Birds most easily recognised in the Paintings - 51Others not readily ascertained. Locusts, Butterflies, andBeetles - - - - - 52Fishing. Fish-ponds. Angling and spearing Fish - 53Gentlemen fishing with the Line for Amusement. TheRod. Poor People used the Line and Hook. Ground-bait- - - - - - - 54A Sort of Landing-net. The Drag-net ; pulled to theShore ; the Fish sent off to Market, or salted and dried 55Mode of carrying large Fish. Salted and fresh Fish. Theformer eaten by every one, except the Priests, on the9th of Thoth - - - - - - 57The Fish particularly esteemed for the Table. The Oxy-inches, Phaedrus or Eel, and Lepidus, sacred - 58Sacred Animals not equally honoured in different Parts ofEgypt (vide also Juv. Sat. 15.) The Multi a favouriteFish for the Table - - - - - 59The Use ofjhe Bident Spear - - - - 60Attendants strung the Fish, when caught, on the Stalk ofa Rush. The name Papyrus used for several Species ofthe Cyperus - - - - - 61The Abundance of Fish. The Lake Moeris --63The Revenue arising from the Fisheries of that Lake givento the Queens - - - - 64The Lake Mceris confounded with the Canal. Level of theLake - - - - - - 65The Bathe of Danville. The Fish of the Lake stillfarmed - - - - --66Extract from El Maris relative to the Fisheries - 67Great Consumption of Fish in Egypt. Sluices and Ponds.Chase of the Hippopotamus. Rare in Egypt, thoughformerly said to frequent the Delta - - - 68Use of its Hide. Corbag Whips ; used in former Times.Mode of attacking the Hippopotamus - - 69A 3VI Contents.PageDiodorus's Account of the Hippopotamus Chase. TheSpear they used - - - - - 72A Reel. Fish cured and sent to Market. Fish formerlyin the Nile - - - - - 73Some Animals, once common in Egypt, now confined toEthiopia. The accidental Visits of Hippopotami in Egypt 74Hippopotamus and Crocodile not eaten. The latter killedby the Apollinopolites. Sacred Animals of various Partsof Egypt - - - - - 75Crocodiles kept and fed at a great Expense. Embalmed.Grottoes of Maabdeh. The Skill and Boldness of theTentyrites in catching them - - - 76The Crocodile timid. Its Mode of Attack. Its Sightunder Water - - - - 78Two Varieties of the Crocodile in Egypt. The Trochilus 79The Ichneumon. Probable Origin of the Story of the Trochilus.Mode of catching the Crocodile - - 80Serious Disputes of Towns, friendly and hostile to theCrocodile - - - - - 81CHAP. IX.Fall of Egyptian Art. The Persian Invasion - - 83Style of the Monuments of different Eras. The Scalesmaller at an early Period, and afterwards increased.They possessed great mechanical Skill even at a veryremote Time - 85Rules of Art prescribed, from veneration of Antiquity. ThisLove of early Custom probably extended to their Styleof writing religious Works, as in other Nations - 87Resemblance to Greek Taste in some ornamental Objects.Glass an early Invention in Egypt - - - 88Glass Bead bearing the Name of a Monarch who lived1500 B.C. - - - - - - 90The Use of Glass among the Ancients till lately disbelieved;and many still continued to limit its Invention to theAugustan Era - - - - 91Use of Glass for Windows not suited to a hot Climate.Glass Ware of Egypt famous - - - - 92CONTENTS. VUPageA Quality of Glass, the Manufacture of which is unknownto European Workmen. Mentioned also by Winkelmann.Extracts from his Work - - - - 93A Specimen of this Glass belonging to Captain Hervey,Ren., described . - . - 96The Manner in which the Parts of this Glass were puttogether. Opinion of Paw, Goguet, and others, on theAntiquity of Glass - - - - 97Certain reputed Emeralds supposed to be Glass. Winklethinks the Ancients used Glass more frequentlythan the Moderns - - - - - 98The Portland Vase. False Stones made by the Egyptians,and much used. Pliny's Account of them - - 99Difficulty in distinguishing false from real Stones. Manyordinary Materials coated with a vitrified Composition,and sold at a cheap Rate - - - - 100An additional Proof of Refinement. Glass Beads andBugles, arranged like our Bead Purses, an Amusement ofthe Egyptian Ladies. Principal Uses of Glass - 101Glass Coffin. Granite Sarcophagi covered with a vitrifiedComposition. Glass for Mosaic Work. Brilliancy of theColours, particularly the Blues and Reds - - 102The Beauty of the Colours in Egyptian porcelain Cups. ASort of Glass-porcelain. The Colours penetrated intothe Ground, sometimes quite through - 103In some Instances a Colour was put on afterwards. TheHandles and other Parts added. Many Glass Vasesbroken in applying them. Knowledge of Chemistry, andthe use of metallic Oxides, as well as the Effect of Acidson Colour . . jq^.Glass-cutting. The Diamond used for cutting Gems. Inancient Times (as at the present day) it was thought apity to spoil a valuable Gem by engraving it - - 105Use of Emery Powder. Glass Bottles inclosed in Wickerworkand Papyrus Stalks, like the modern damages andFlorence Oil Flasks. Chinese Bottles found at Thebes 106Not valued by the Egyptians for their quality, which wasvery inferior, but for their Contents, and afterwards 4Vlll CONTENTS.Pageplied to ordinary Purposes. Enamelling on Gold andSilver - - - - - 109Encaustic Painting. Bottles of Glass, Porcelain, Alabaster,and other Materials - - --110Exported from Egypt. Morphine Vases, supposed to havebeen of Fluor Spar - - - - 111False Morphine made at Thebes and Memphis. No Lampsor Lanterns represented in the Egyptian Paintings.Fete of burning Lamps at Sais - - - 112Supposed Indication of a Lantern. Manufacture of Linen 113Exported. Woollen Stuffs. Panopolis famed for itsWoollen Manufactures. Use of Woollen Garments.Quantity of Linen manufactured - - - 114*Question respecting the Mummy Cloths being Linen, nowdecided by the Microscope - - - 115Some Difficulty regarding the Byssus of Herodotus, and theSlash of the Hebrews. Cotton Cloth manufactured inEgypt, and used by the Priests, and sacred Robes of theGods - - - - - 116Much Cotton used for Household Purposes. The EgyptianLooms, apparently rude. The simple Means employedby Eastern Nations for the most delicate Work - - 118Quality of the Egyptian fine Linen. Its Praise merited, asproved by a Specimen in my Possession. The MummyCloths. Mr. Thompson's Account of them - - 119The Threads. Disparity of the Number in the Warp andthe Woof - " - - - - 121Compared to the Muslin of India. Fringed Cloths. Sel-wages- - - - --122Use of Indigo. Piece of Cloth from Thebes with broadblue Border •■ - - - - 124The Threads coloured before the Cloth was made. BlueBorders of the Nubian Cloths at the present Day. Pieceof Linen from Thebes - - - - 125The Carthamus Victories * used for dyeing. The NumberIt is an opinion, among some persons in Egypt, that this plant was introducedfrom India: there is, however, evidence of its having been grownin Egypt at an ancient period, and seeds of it have been found with a mummybrought from ThebesCONTENTS. IXPageof Threads in a Piece of fine Linen, which is also coveredwith Figures, beautifully drawn in Ink. Four Qualitiesof Linen particularly noticed by Pliny. Exported - 126Fineness of Egyptian Nets. Plin3''s Account of them, andof the Corslet of Amasis - - - 127Stuffs coloured in the Loom, besides those dyed and printed.Embroidered Work. The Gold Thread they used,supposed to have been beaten out with the Hammer - 128Coloured Dresses. Silver Thread. Wire Drawing - 129Pliny's Account of the Use of Mordants in dyeing - 131Knowledge of Chemistry. Spinning - - - 133Men and Women used the Spindle. The Mode of weaving 134The Process of preparing the Flax and its Uses - - 137Pliny's Description of the Process. Combs for cleansingthe Flax. Borders and Fringes of Cloth - - 139Smoothing and cantering Cloth. Carpets - - 141Rope-making, and twisting Thongs of Leather - - 143Nets. Netting-needles. Sieves - - - 145The Papyrus. Various Kinds of Cyperus, included by ancientWriters under the name of Papyrus. Vide supra,p. 61.62. - - - - - - 146Paper made of it. Different Qualities ; some which arefound are more dried than others - - - 147Mode of making Papyri. Some made as Specimens at Syracusein Sicily, where the Plant still grows - - 148Pliny's Account of their Manufacture - - 149Different Kinds. Pliny's Error in supposing Papyri notmade before the Time of Alexander - - - 150Papyrus superseded by Parchment. Monopoly of the Papyrusrendered it expensive . 151Other cheaper Materials used for it. Use of various Substancesto write upon, in early Times - - 152The Arabs used Shoulder-bones of Sheep and PapyrusPaper. They afterwards made fine Parchment. Cottonand linen Paper, when invented. The Chinese longused Linen Paper - - - - - 153This Kind of Paper, when introduced into Europe. Whenfirst made in England - - - - 154X CONTENTS.PageTanners and Leather-Cutters. Embossed Leather - 155Use of Leather for various Purposes. Skins for holdingWater and Wine. Curing the Skins. Juice of a Plantused by the modern Arabs - - - - 156The Manner in which it is applied. Stretching and bendingLeather. The use of the semicircular Knife for cuttingLeather - - - - --157Their Tools very simple. Shops in an Egyptian Town - 158Question if they put the Name of the Person and his Tradeover the Shop. Skins imported from other Countries,owing to the great Consumption of Leather - - 161Pods of the Acacia used for Tanning. Fullers - - 162Potters. Clay kneaded with the Feet. The Wheel verysimple. iv'Ianufacture of Jars and Vases - - 163Modern porous Vases of Qeneh. Invention of the Potter'sWheel - - - - - 165Errors of the Greeks in claiming the Credit of variousInventions. Taste of the Egyptians in some Vases - 166Their Taste not so good, or so general, as among the Greeks.These last improved on what they borrowed from Egypt.Carpenters and Cabinet-makers. Little Wood in Egypt.Use of Sycomore Wood - - 167Sycomore and Persia, sacred Trees. The Tamarisk. Sontor Acacia Nilotica. Other Acacia Trees - - 168Employment of foreign and rare Woods for OrnamentalPurposes. Painted Imitations of rare Woods. UsualTools of the Carpenter •■ - --169Furniture of their Rooms. Dovetailing. Mode of applyingtwo Planks of Wood - - - - 170Use of the Saw and Adze. Those found in the Tombs - 171The Drill. The Chisel. The Hatchet. Mode of sawingTimber - - - - 172Early Invention of Glue - - - 173Boxes of various Forms. Veneered and painted - - 1 75Wheelwrights ; Coffin-Makers and Coopers. Subdivisionof Labour. The Plaustrum, or travelling Car. One Instanceof it at Thebes - - - - 178An Ethiopian Princess coming to Thebes in a Plaustrum 180CONTENTS. XIPagePalanquins, and Canopies of Wood. Public Pounders,as now in Cairo - - - - - 180Barrels and wooden Measures for Grain - - 182Makers of Coffins. The Embarrass and others connectedwith the funeral Ceremonies. Boat Builders - - 184Boats of Rushes and Osiers. Boats at the Cataracts. PapyrusBoats mentioned by ancient Writers - - 1 85Pitched. The Papyrus Rush used for making small Boatsand other Purposes - - - - 186Other Kinds of Boats. Boats on the Euphrates. Boats ofBurden on the Nile, mentioned by Herodotus - - 187These Boats of Burden far better built than Herodotuswould lead us to suppose - - - - 189Ships of War fitted out by Sesostris ; probably used beforeto protect the Trade of the Red Sea. Pliny supposesShips first built by Danaus. Shown to have been usedby the Egyptians long before - - - 190The Obligations we owe to M. Champollion - - 192Various Boats on the Nile. Some with large Cabins, withand without Masts - - - - - 195The Sail used in ascending the River, and taken down ondescending - - - - - 196Large Boats. Error respecting a Boat represented atEilethyas - - - - - 197Rudders ; how acting. Oars. Man at the Head of theBoat with a Pole - - - - - 198Very little Keel in the Nile Boats, in order to avoid theSandbanks. Sails - - - - - 199Cabins. Boats painted. An Eye on the Rudder, and atthe Prow - - - - 200Flag and Standard. Resemblance to the Boats ofIndia - - - - - - - 201No Beaks to Ships of War. Forecastle at the Head forthe Archers. Ships of War. Wooden Bulwark alongthe Gunnel to protect the Rowers . 202Advancing to attack an Enemy's Vessel. The Sail raisedby Ropes - - - - - 203Having cleared for Action the Rowers pulled, and endearCONTENTS.Pagepoured to strike the Enemy on the Side. A Lion's Headon the Prow . 204A large Boat on the Nile with forty-four Oars, of peculiarConstruction - . . . 205Braces for turning the Yard. Mode of Steering. Arrangementof the Oars. One Mast and one Sail - 206Model of a Boat at Berlin, showing the Position of theRowers ; the different Parts and Arrangement of theBoat. Large Cabins in Boats of Burden. Cleanliness oftheir Boats . . . 207The Mast probably of Firewood. Ribs of Acacia or Sont.Mode of fixing the Mast - - --208In Ships of War the Sail had only an upper Yard. In NileBoats a lower one also. Much Trouble to loosen theSail. Pulleys. Yards large . . 209Sails painted. The Phoenix and other Devices - - 210Fancy Devices. The Phoenix very appropriate. Edgesof the Sail. Some Vessels very large - - - 211Origin of Navigation. Ships of Burden originallyRafts - . . . - 212Sailed round Africa. Foundation of Alexandria, and intercoursewith India by the Red Sea - - - Sl-iThe Use of Tin at a very early Period - - - 215Taken by the Phoenicians from Britain, and previously fromother Countries - - - - 216Productions of India found in Egypt of a very early Period.First mention of Tin - . 217The Islands of the Cassiterides. Care of the Phoeniciansto conceal the Place whence they obtained Tin - - 218Tin where found. Spain to the Phoenicians what Americawas to the Spaniards - - - 219Goguet's Opinion respecting the burning of the GoldenCalf. Use of Gold - - - - 221Hieroglyphic of Gold. The Mode of working Gold. Crucibles- - - - - - 224Early Manufacture of gold Ornaments. Shield of Achillesmentioned by Homer. The precious Metals wrought inEgypt at a very early Time - . - 225CONTENTS. XlllPageGold Mines of Egypt. Their Position ascertained, andlately visited . - 227Diodorus's Account of the Mode of working the Mines, andthe Cruelty exercised towards those condemned to thatLabour - - - - - 231Gilding. Gold Leaf at first thick. Some thick Leaf continuedto be used long after a thinner Kind was made - 231'Gilding known at a very early Time. Mode of beatingthe Leaf. The Invention of a Method by the Germansin the 17th Century - - - . 235Monuments, as well as small Objects, gilded by the Egyptians.Use of Gold and Silver used for Money - 237Value of Money ascertained by Weight. Polemics coinedMoney. Grandes, Governor of Egypt under Cambysesand Darius, the first who coined Money there. Money,when first stamped - 238Weights and Measures long known in Egypt. The Balancefor weighing Gold - - - . 239Principle of the large Egyptian Scales. No Steel-yard - 240The Plummet. Use of Copper and Bronze. Known beforeIron. Iron, when supposed to have been first employed * 241Argument of its Use from Homer. Iron Rings of lateDate - . 242Iron in little Estimation in the Days of Lycurgus, 884 b. c.The Jews had two Kinds of Iron. Mentioned as earlyas the Time of Job and Moses. Arguments against itsearly Use . 243Bronze preferred long after Iron was commonly known.An Argument to show Bronze to have been known inGreece before Iron - - - . 245Still uncertain. No Proof derived from Iron not beingfound, or from the Use of Bronze Tools by the Egyptians.Iron Mine discovered in Egypt - - 246Representation of Iron in the Tombs of Thebes. SomeColonel Howard Vise has discovered a piece of iron in the midst of themasonry of the Great Pyramid, which he thinks could only have been placedthere when that monument was erected.XIV CONTENTS.PageImplements of Husbandry of Wood. Wooden Hoesfound - - - - - - - 24-7Mode of sculpturing Granite. Question respecting it andthe Use of Steel - - - - - 249Difficulty now experienced in cutting Granite. ErroneousNotion respecting Granite having been softer whensculptured by the Egyptians - - - - 250Stunning the Stone, a Method of which we may also availourselves at present, but not found sufficient to accountfor the Facility they appear to have had. Possibility oftheir having used Emery Powder in sculpturing or engravingGranite - - - - - 251This could not be used for cutting the Stone itself. BronzeChisel found at Thebes - - - - 252Skill in compounding Metals. Elasticity of BronzeBlades - - - - - - 253Bronze Statues, when first cast. The Process not represented. - - - . 254Pausanias thinks the Art of casting Metal a late Discovery- - - - - - - 255Bronze Statues in Etruria. Gold smelted in Egypt at avery early Period. Damaskeening . 256Soldering Metals - - - - - 258Stone Knives and Tools used in early Times - - 259Stone-tipped Arrows. Vide Vol. I. p. 309, 310. PrivateCitizens unarmed . - . 260The short Time elapsed between the Deluge and the buildingof the Pyramids. Ethiopia Stone sometimes signifiedFlint - - 261Stone Knives found . . . . 262CHAP. X.Style of Art. Bas-relief - - - - 264Deficiency of Style. No Expression given to the Features.Drapery . . „ - - 265Every Part of a Picture conceived by itself. ConventionalStyle - - - - - - - 266CONTENTS. XVPageNo Change in Character after the Roman Conquest ; merelya Style deteriorated. Principal Figure in an EgyptianPainting. Greater Licence in Paintings of the Tombs.The Battle Scenes - - - - - 267The Figure mechanically formed ; the Position of theParts alone altered to give it Action. Animals - 268Simple Mode of representing Figures in profile •• - 269Bas-relief earliest Style of Sculpture, Progress of Art - 270rpa(po), to write, draw, engrave, and describe. Want ofLetters. Funereal Pillars. Poetry and Songs - 271Sculpture dates before Architecture as an Art - - 272Statues originally rough Pillars. Arms and Legs united atfirst - - - - - - - 273No Life in Egyptian Statues. Certain Postures. TheFeet - - - - - - - 274Reverence for ancient Forms. Anxious made to conformto the Egyptian Style . . 275Changes in Style at different Epochs, but not of Character- - - - - - - 276Sculptures and Paintings at Beni Hassan and other Places 277Suphis, and other early Kings, whose Names occur - 278Contemporary Kings of Upper and Lower Egypt. Menessole Monarch of the Country - - - 283The nomen and prcenomen, Papi and Apappus - - 284Style of ancient Epochs, in the Time of Suphis, Osirtasen,and the 18th Dynasty - - - - . 285The third Remeses ; the Encouragement of Art in hisReign - - - . 286The Profusion of painted Sculpture on an Egyptian Temple.Processions represented at Medeenet Haboo - - 287Coronation Ceremony - . - - 289Historical Subjects. Battle Scenes. Prisoners : and Handsof the killed cut off - - - - - 291Return, and Triumph of the King. Sculptures outside theBuilding - - 292March of the Army. The King accompanied by a Lion.Attack of the Reboo. Their Defeat - - - 293Returns of the Enemy's killed, and Account of the ArmsXVI CONTENTS.Pagetaken from them. Advance of the Army continued.Attack another Enemy - - 294Defeat them. Their Plaustra, or Carts. The King, passingthrough a Morass, is attacked by Lions. The Armyand its Allies . - . - 295The Attack of a Fleet on a Lake, or Sea. Offerings tothe Gods - - - - - - 296Siege and Capture of fortified Towns. All the Subjectscoloured . 297Coloured Architecture. Colour found also on Greek Monuments.- 298Columns, even in Egyptian Buildings, frequently white.The Stone covered with a thin Coat of Stucco, to receivethe Paint. Egyptian Paint mixed with water. TheColours they used. Analysis of the Green, Blue, Red,Black, Yellow, and White - - - - 301Sculptures in Relief and Intaglio. Epochs when thetwo Styles were [ adopted. Relieved Intaglio of RemesesIII. - - - - - S04«Fresh Impulse given to Art by the Kings of the 26thDynasty. Error of Winkelmann respecting the date ofthe Isiac Table . . . . SocFall of Egyptian Art. Sculptures of the Ptolemaic Era - 307The Style of the Grottoes at Beni Hassan - - - 309Origin of the Doric Column 310Painting on Board. Egyptian Pictures - - - 311Earliest Paintings . - . . 312Style of Egyptian Drawing. The Walls ruled in Squares.Conventional Method . 313No Perspective. Pencils and Brushes for Colouring - 314-Painters and Scribes. Their writing Implements - 315Architecture. Bricks and Antiquity of the Arch - - 316Brick Pyramids with vaulted Chambers. Question respectingthe Era of Asychis and Any sis - - - 317Stone Arch at Saqqara. Crude Brick Arches at Thebes 319False Arches at Abydus and Thebes . 320Stones hewn from Quarries. Limestone first employed forBuilding - -. 322CONTENTS. XVllPageSandstone of Silsilis afterwards used and preferred.Extent of the Quarries. Mode of opening a new - 323Quarry - -Mode of transporting Blocks of Stone. Large Stonesdragged by Men - - - - - 324Large Colossus, on a Sledge, at El Bersheh - - - 325The Colossus, how fastened. Large long Shafts of Stone,at Fateereh. Small Blocks sent by Water down theRiver - - - - - - 327Obelisks. — Large ponderous Masses of Stone, transportedfrom the Cataracts to Thebes - - - 329Statue of Remeses at the Memnonium. Monolith of Sais - 330Monoliths at Tel-et-mai (properly Tel e'Tmai), and atButoo. Skill of the Egyptians in raising as well as dragginggreat Weights - - - - 331Obelisk remaining in a Quarry at E'Sooan. Obelisks mentionedby Pliny - - - - - 332Their Removal to Rome, prompted by Vanity. Obeliskof " Raises," according to Pliny - - - 333Pliny's Description of a Method of transporting Obelisksfrom a Quarry. No Insight given by the Sculptures intotheir mechanical Knowledge - - - - 334Diodorus's erroneous Notion respecting the Invention andUse of Machines - - - . - 335Sculpturing and polishing large Colossi, surrounded byScaffolding. Large Blocks, how cut from the Quarries - 337The Invention of Bellows - - - - 338Siphons long used in Egypt - - - - 340Origin of Geometry - - - . . 342The Sundial, and Division of the Day into twelve Hours.Few Inventions indicated. Objects Buried with theDead ; some valuable, some very inferior - - 343Their Costume not well defined. Dresses of the People 344Fringes. Woollen Cloak. Shirts. Dresses of Priests andPersons of Rank - - . . . 347Costume of Princes. Princes considered Infants. Leopard's-skin worn by Priests - - - - 350VOL. III. aXvi CONTENTS.PageThe King's Dress. A peculiar Apron. His Head-dressand Crown - - - - 351Crown worn in Battle and in the Temple. Wigs, not ill-suitedto a hot Climate - 353Wigs, how made. Found at Thebes, and preserved in theBritish and Berlin Museums - . . 355Shaving the Beard and Head - . 357The Priests particular in their Habits of Cleanliness. Abhorrenceof Foreigners - - . . „ 358Barbers. When introduced at Rome. Fondness of theGreeks for long hair. Retained to the present Day - 359Heads of Egyptian Children shaved. Hardness of theirSkulls - - - - - - - 360Vows for Children. Caps. Women wore their own Hair.A Kind of Wig used by the Romans - - 361False Beards. Beards appropriated to Individuals of Rank,to the Kings, and the Gods. Dresses of Children - 362A Bulla, or Charm. The Roman bulla. Ladies paidgreat Attention to their Sandals - - - 364'Various Kinds of Sandals . - . - 366Shoes, or low Boots. Dresses of Women - - 367Slaves and Servants did not wear the same Dress as Ladies.Ladies' Hair plaited - - - - 369Short Hair at the Side of the Face. Earrings - - 370Various Forms of Earrings. Rings. The Ring-Finger.The Left Hand peculiarly privileged - - - 371Worn also on the Thumb. Simple and OrnamentedRings. Silver Rings. Rare Bronze and Iron Rings - 372Porcelain Rings. Scaraboei. Signets. Devices on Rings.Gold Anklets, or Bangles, and Bracelets - - - 373Bracelet of Thothmes III. Rich Necklaces - - 375Gold Chains. A sort of Torques. Various Patterns. Deviceson Scarabaeus, and Rings. Various Stones set - 376The Toilet. Kohl, or Collyrium, for the Eyes. Ointments 378Custom of Anointing the Hair among the Ethiopians.Combs. Staining the Eyelids with Kohl. - - 380The Jews and Romans had the same Custom. Kohl Bottlesfound - - - - - - 382CONTENTS. XIXPagePins and Needles - - - - 383Bronze Needles. Metal Mirrors. - - - 384Walkingsticks . - - 386Baths. A Lady represented in a Bath - - - 388Doctors for various Complaints. Paid by Government.Punished for improper Treatment of Patients - - 390Attended without Fees on a Journey, and on Military Service.Attention of the Egyptians to Health. The Useof Preventives. Many Drugs used by them - - 391Their numerous Medicines mentioned by Jeremiah, and inHomer. Number of Physicians in Egypt. Bodies examinedafter Death . - - - - 392Magic and Dreams. Exvotos for their Recovery. Curatorsof the Sacred Animals travelled through the Countryin Quest of Alms, a Custom still retained by theServants of the Shekh's Tombs - - - - 394,Models of the restored Part, dedicated in a Temple.Travellers who passed by a Temple wrote a Prosku-nemo, or Adoration - . . . 395Its complete Formula. Contained sometimes a good Wishfor the Reader. Early Study of Medicine in Egypt - 396The Embalmers probably Members of the Medical Profession. . . . . 397a "tLIST AND EXPLANATIONOF THEPLATES, WOOD-CUTS, AND VIGNETTES OF VOL. III.Frontispiece, or Plate 17. Capitals of columns, and piece ofglass belonging to Captain Henvey, Ren., described inp. 96.CHAP. VIII.Page1. Vignette G. The palace-temple of Remeses the Great,generally called the Memnonium at Thebes, takenduring the inundation. In the centre, near the frontcolumns of the area, lies the colossal statue of Remeses;and above the water's surface, to the right of a smallbush, appear parts of the fallen statues of Amunoph III.2. Wood-cut, No. 318. Hyaena caught in a trap, and carriedupon a pole by two men.8. No. 319. Men bringing young animals to stock the preserves.9. No. 320. Gazelles and other animals belonging to thepreserves. Fig. 2. Gazelle with its young.10. No. 321. Men heating irons to mark cattle.13. No. 322. A huntsman carrying home an oryx, with hiscoupled dogs. Reduced from a cast which I have ofthe subject.14. No. 323. Bringing home the live game.LIST AND EXPLANATION OF PLATES, ETC. XXI15. Wood-cut, No. 324. Catching a gazelle with the noose, orlasso.No. 325. Catching a wild ox with the noose.16. No. 326. Hunting with a lion.18. No. 327. A chasseur shooting with his dog.19. No. 328. Animals from the sculptures.22. No. 329. A chase in the desert.23. No. 330. Monsters, or fanciful animals, from the paintings.32. No. 331. Various kinds of dogs. Fig. 1. A dog oftenrepresented accompanying the master of a villa, or hissteward. Fig. 3. From Beni Hassan, which frequentlyoccurs in the time of Osirtasen. Vide also some houndsin wood-cuts, Nos. 322. and 329.34. No. 332. Pigs, which are rarely seen in the sculptures.37. No. 333. Fishing and fowling. Vide references in woodcut.38. No. 334. Bird traps.39. No. 335. A sportsman using the throw-stick.41. No. 336. Fowling scene and spearing fish with the bi-dent.Vide references in wood-cut.42. No. 337. The use of the throw-stick.46. No. 338. Clap nets.48. No. 339. Some of the birds of Egypt.50. No. 340. Other birds.52. No. 341 . An Egyptian gentleman fishing.53. No. 342. Fishing with ground bait.55. No. 343. A sort of landing net.56. No. 344. Bringing fish, and opening them, preparatoryto their being salted.57. No. 345. Another mode of carrying large fish.70. No. 346. Attendant carrying a whip, or corbag, made ofthe hippopotamus's hide.71. Plate 15. Chase of the hippopotamus. Various birds in thejungle, and fish in the river.72. No. 347. Spear used in the chase of the hippopotamus.73. No. 348. A reel held by an attendant.XXll LIST AND ExplanationCHAP. IX.Page82. Vignette H. Wooden boats of the Nile. A whirlwind ofsand in the distance.89. Wood-cut, No. 349. Glass blowers.90. No. 34'9«. Glass bottles, and a bead with the name ofan ancient monarch.107. No. 350. Glass bottles covered with wicker-work, andpapyrus, and a piece of cloth with a blue border.108. No. 351. Chinese bottles found at Thebes.113. No. 352. A guard apparently carrying a lantern.134. No. 353. Men engaged in spinning and weaving.135. No. 354. A piece of cloth on a frame, and a loom.136. No. 355. Spindles found in Egypt.138. No. 356. Process of preparing the flax, and making itinto twine and cloth.140. No. 357. A wooden comb found with some tow.No. 358. Netting needle and wooden plane.144. No. 359. Cutting and twisting thongs of leather, andcarpenters.159. No. 360. Currier holding a strap of leather with his toeswhile cutting it.160. No. 361. Shoemakers, and men polishing a column.162. No. 362. Fullers.164. No. 363. Potters making earthenware vases.174. No. 364. Veneering, and the use of glue.176. No. 365. Different boxes.179. No. 366. An Ethiopian princess travelling in a plaustrum.181. No. 367. Pounding various substances in stone mortars.183. No. 368. Bandaging mummies, and making the cases.195. No. 369. Boats for carrying cattle and goods on the Nile.196. No. 370. A boat with the mast taken down, while descendingthe stream.203. No. 371. War galley: the sail being pulled up duringaction.205. No. 372. Large boat, with a peculiar sail and mast.208. No. 373. Boat of the Nile : showing how the sail wasfastened to the yards, and the nature of the rigging.OF THE PLATES, ETC. XXUlPage211. Plate 16. Boats with painted sails, from the tomb ofRemeses III.222. Wood-cut, No. S?^. Goldsmiths, at Beni Hassan.223. No. 374 a. Goldsmiths, at Thebes.224. No. 375. Blowpipe, and small fireplace with cheeks toreflect the heat.226. No. 376. Golden baskets, represented in the tomb ofRemeses III.248. No. 377. Wooden hoes.258. No. 378. Vases ornamented with plates of metal.262. No. 379. Flint knives.CHAP. X.263. Vignette I. Tomb of Saqqara, erected with stone, of thetime of Psamaticus II.278. Wood-cut, No. 380. Name of Shofo, Suphis, or Cheops ;and of the city of Memphis.280. No. 381. Names of other ancient kings.282. No. 382. Figures of kings wearing the crowns of Upperand Lower Egypt ; either two distinct persons, or thesame king, with his prcenomen and nomen.309. No. 383. Section of one of the southern grottoes of BeniHassan.310. No. 384. Section of one of the northern grottoes of BeniHassan, and origin of the Doric capital.311. No. 385. Artists painting on board, and colouring afigure.315. No. 386. A Scribe writing on a tablet, with his case forholding writing materials.321. No. 387. A scribe with his pen behind his ear.No. 388. Vaulted rooms and arched doorway of crudebrick, at Thebes. Imitations of arches, and commencementof a quarry.324. No. 389. Removal of a stone, represented at the quarriesof El Maasara.328. No. 390. Mode of transporting a large colossus.335. No. 391. Masons levelling and squaring a stone.XXIV LIST AND EXPLANATION OF PLATES, ETC.Page336. Wood-cut, No. 392. Large granite colossus, which menare sculpturing, polishing, and painting.339. No. 393. The use of bellows.34.1. No. 394. Siphons.345. No. 395. Men's dresses.348. No. 396. Dresses of priests.349. No. 397. Princess and children.352. No. 398. Dress of the king.354. No. 399. Head-dresses of kings and individuals.355. No. 400. Front and back of an Egyptian wig in the BritishMuseum.356. No. 401. An Egyptian wig, in the Berlin Museum.363. No. 402. Women carrying their children.365. No. 403. Shoes, or low boots, and sandals.366. No. 404. Sandals.368. No. 405. Dresses of women.369. No. 406. Head-dress of a lady, from a mummy-case.372. No. 407. Hands of a wooden figure, showing how ringswere worn by women.374. No. 408. Rings, signets, bracelets, and earrings, discoveredin Egypt.377. No. 409. Necklaces, principally in the Leyden Museum.381. No. 410. Wooden combs found at Thebes.383. No. 411. Boxes, or bottles, for holding kohl, used instaining the eyelids.384. No. 412. Needles, pins, and earrings.385. No. 413. Metal Mirrors.386. No. 414. Other Metal Mirrors.No. 415. Another, with the head of a Typhonianmonster.No. 416. Walking-sticks. [sticks.387. No. 417. Priests and other persons of rank walking with389. No. 417 a. A lady in the bath.393. No. 418. Doctors and patient's. 1. andjf?^. 4. administeringmedicine to patients.395. No. 419. Exvotos. Models of a hand and ears dedicatedto a deity.398. Topographical Plan of the Pyramids of Geese.ERRATA IN VOL. IH,Page 62, note 1. for "grown there, which is evidently," read "grown there,which (however erroneous) is evidently."C8. note § for "Fans" read "Fares. "104. line 5. from the bottom, for " same process," read "same means,"237. note 5, for "torn. i. 1. i. c. 1." read " tom. i. 1. ii. c. 4."238, one line from bottom, after "tlieirnso" unit inverted commas,2G4, line I.-^, for " Duty," lead " Plato. "IN THE WOOD-cutis.263, Vignette. The stones forming the arch arc made too thin.XXIV LIST AND EXPLANATION OF PLATES, ETC.Page336. Wood-cut, No. 392. Large granite colossus, which menare sculpturing, polishing, and painting.339. No. 393. The use of bellows.34.1. No. 394. Siphons.345. No. 395. Men's dresses.348. No. 396. Dresses of priests.349. No. 397. Princess and children.352. No. 398. Dress of the king.354. No. 399. Head-dresses of kings and individuals.355. No. 400. Front and back of an Ep-vntian vvio- in the Britishmonster.No. 416. Walking-sticks. [sticks.387. No. 417. Priests and other persons of rank walking with389. No. 417 o. A lady in the bath.393. No. 418. Doctors and patients, yy^/. 1. and Tiff. 4. administeringmedicine to patients.395. No. 419. Exvotos. Models of a hand and ears dedicatedto a deity.398. Topographical Plan of the Pyramids of Geese.MANNERS AND CUSTOMSOF THEANCIENT EGYPTIANSVignette G. The palace-temple of Remesesthe Great, generally called the Memiionium,at Thebes, during the inundation.CHAPTER ViiThe Chase. — Animals. — Dogs. — Fowlers — Fishermen, —Hippopotamus. — Crocodile. — The Tentyrites.All classes of the Egyptians delighted in thesports of the field, and the peasants deemed it aduty as well as an amusement, to hunt and destroythe hyaena, and those animals which were enemiesof the fields or flocks, and they shot them with thebow, caught them in traps, or by whatever meanstheir dexterity and ingenuity could suggest. Forthough the hyaena is a carnivorous animal, it is notVOL. HI. 15THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. VIII.Hyaena caught in a trap.Thebes.less hostile to the crops than to the flocks, whenpressed with hunger*, and the ravages they areknown to commit in the fields among the Indiancorn and other produce, make the peasants ofmodern Egypt as anxious as their predecessors todestroy them, whenever they have an opportunity,or the courage to attack them.CHASE.Plato t reckons the huntsmen as one of thecastes of the Egyptians ; and though, as I havealready observed, persons who followed this occupationmay have constituted a particular body, or aminor subdivision of one of the castes, we are notto suppose, that the sports of the field were confinedto those who gained their livelihood by thechase ; or that the wealthy classes of Egyptianswere averse to an amusement so generally welcomedin all countries. Indeed, the sculptures ofI have already noticed this in Egypt and Thebes, p. 243, note,-j- Plato in Timaeo, near the beginning.CHAP. Vir. HUNTSMEN. ,iThebes, Beni Hassan, and other prices, assure us,that they took particular delight in chasing thewild animals, kept in their preserves for this purpose,and even in the more laborious task of followingthem in the extensive tracts of the widedesert, which stretch to the east and west of thevalley of the Nile. On these occasions they wereattended by several huntsmen, whom they kept intheir service, to attend upon the hounds, to directthe hunt, to assist in catching the larger animalswith a noose, to carry darts and hunting poles*,to arrange the nest, and, in short, to manage allmatters connected with the chase.When the chasseur was a person of consequence,numerous attendants accompanied him, not merelyin the capacity of beaters, to rouse and turn thegame, or to carry it when killed, but for variouspurposes connected with his immediate wants orcomforts while in the field ; some brought withthem a fresh supply of arrows, a spare bow, orother requisites for remedying accidents; and somecarried a stock of provisions for his use. These wereborne upon the usual yoke, across the shoulders,and consisted of a skin of water, and jars placedThe Roman venabula were of the thickness of a spear, armedwith a sharp iron point, of moderate length, and used as a defensiveweapon against the attack of a wild beast, being held in a shining directionto receive it. J. Pollux, v. 4.t Virgg. hen. iv. 131.:Retia rara, plague, late venabula ferro,Massylique runt equites, et odors manum vis."And Hor. 1 Ep. vi. 58. : —Pjagas, venabula, servos."This person was called by the Greeks, SiKTvaywyog. J. Pollux, v. 4.B 24> THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. VIII.in wicker baskets, probably containing bread,meats, or other provisions. The skins used forcarrying water were precisely the same as those ofthe present day, being of a goat, or a gazelle,stripped from the body by a longitudinal openingat the throat ; the legs serving as handles, to whichropes for slinging them were attached ; and asoft pendent tube of leather sewed to the throat,in the place of the head, formed the mouth ofthe water-skin, which was secured by a thongfastened round it.Sometimes a space of ground, of considerableextent, was enclosed with nets, into which theanimals were driven by beaters ; and as this isfrequently shown by the sculptures to have beenin a hilly country, it is evident that the scenes ofthose amusements were in the desert, where theyprobably extended nets across the narrow vallies,or torrent beds, which lie between the rocky hills,difficult of ascent to animals closely pressed bydogs. This is indeed the only way in which a person,mounted on horseback * or in a chariot, couldfollow, or get within reach of them with the bow ;and that some animals, particularly antelopes, whenclosely pressed, fear to take a steep ascent, is afact well known to the Arabs ; and I have myself,As in Virgil, Ten. iv. 151. : —Postquam altos venting in montes, atque india lustra ;Ecce ferae, saxe dejected service, capraeDemurrer juris : alia de parte patentesTransmitting cursu cantos, atque agmina serviPulverulenta fuga glomerant, grotesque delinquent.At puer Ascanius victims in vallies acreGaudet quo : namque los cursu, jam praeter ills.'CHAP. VIII. MODE OF HUNTING. Owhen following them with dromedaries in the samevalleys, observed that gazelles preferred doubling,and swiftly passing between their pursuers, to therisk of slowly ascending the eminence to whichthey had been driven.The spots thus enclosed were usually in thevicinity of the water brooks,' to which they werein the habit of repairing in the morning andevening : and having awaited the time when theywent to drink, and ascertained it by their recenttracks on the accustomed path, the hunters disposedthe nets, occupied proper positions for observingthem unseen t, and gradually closed inupon them. Such are the scenes partially portrayedin the Egyptian paintings, where long netsare represented surrounding the space, whereinthe chasseur and his attendants pursue the game,either on foot or mounted in a chariot : and thepresence of hyaenas, jackals, and various wildbeasts unconnected with the sport, is intendedto show that they have been accidentally enclosedwithin the line of nets, which, from embracing anextensive tract, necessarily included within its rangethe resort of these, as well as of the antelopes andother animals, of which they were in quest." As the hart panted after the water brooks," Ps. xlii. i. TheHebrew name is '''N Ail, evidently the same as the Egyptian QjcyAand the Arabic \j\, which I believe to be the Oryx.•j- My long sojourn with the Arabs in the desert, and my frequentvisits to the springs for the same purpose, have explained to me themethods adopted by the ancient Egyptian chasseurs.J The person whose business it was to watch the nets, was calledby the Greeks Xn'o-rr/yf, o Tot fjUTrinrorra {TriTKoti/u t'of. J. Pollux, v. 4.B 36 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. VIII.The same custom of surrounding a spot, whichthey intended to beat, seems to have been adoptedby the Romans; and Virgil* represents .eneas andDido repairing to a wood at break of day, after theattendants had surrounded it with a temporaryfence, to enclose the game. This is further confirmedby the description, given by Julius Pollux,of the various contrivances employed in hunting ;and he makes an evident distinction between thenets for enclosing a large space, and those for stoppinggaps or openings, and other purposes.The long net, called ^ixrvg^ was furnished withseveral ropes, and was supported on forked poles,varying in length, to correspond with the inequalitiesof the ground over which it extended, and thiswas so contrived as to enclose any space, by crossinghills, valleys, or streams, and encircling woods,or whatever might present itself; a descriptionfully applicable to those exhibited in the Egyptianpaintings t ; smaller nets, called svo(na, for stopping-gaps,are also described by the same author ; anda circular snare TroSay^a, set round with wooden andiron nails, and attached by a rope to a log of wood,which was used for catching deer, so nearly resemblesone still made by the Arabs, and supposedto be an old Egyptian invention, that we" Centum aeneas, unique miser rima Dido,In nemus ire parant, ubi primos castings artusExtulerit Titan, radiisqiie retexcrit orhem.His ego nigrantem commit granting nimbuni,Din trepidant alae, sa/tiisque indngine cingrtnf,Desupcr infundam." Virgg, Mn. iv. 1 17.f Vide J. Poll. Onom. v. +.CHAP. Vin. PRESERVES FOR GAME. Jmay conclude it was common to several ancientpeople.In many instances, the dresses of the attendantsand huntsmen were, as Julius Pollux recommends,not white, nor of a brilliant hue, lest they shouldbe seen at a distance by the animals," but of asuppressed colour, and reaching only a short waydown the thigh * ; being shorter even than those hementions, which extended to the knee ; and thehorses of the chariots were divested of the feathersand showy ornaments used on other occasions.Besides the portions of the open desert and thevallies, above alluded to, which were enclosedby the Egyptians, during their hunting excursions,the parks and preserves on their own domains in thevalley of the Nile, though of comparatively limiteddimensions, offered ample space and opportunityfor indulging in the amusement of the chase ; andthere, as in the theriotrophia of the Romans, aquantity of game was kept, among which may beenumerated the wild goat, oryx, and gazelle.They had also fishponds and spacious vivaria setapart for keeping geese and other wild fowl, whichthey fattened for the table.It was the duty of the huntsmen or the gamekeepersthey employed, to superintend the preserves ;and at proper periods of the year, when the younganimals could be obtained, they sought them, andadded to the stock, which continued also to increase,Vide woodcut, No. 319. It was customary with the Egyptians, onordinary occasions, to wear a kit reaching to the knee.B 4THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. VIII.No. 319. Bringing young animals to stock the preserves. To7nb near the Pyramids.independent of those occasional additions, throughthe care taken in encouraging their propagation, bya judicious regard to their habits. And this is confirmedby the numerous flocks of gazelles and otherwild animals, represented in the tombs, among thepossessions of the deceased, of which the scribesare seen writing an account, at the command of thesteward, who waits to present it, with an annualcensus of his property, to the owner of the estate.Being fed within pastures enclosed with fences,they were not marked in any particular way likethe cattle, which, being let loose, in open meadows,and frequently allowed to mix with the herds ofthe neighbours, required some distinguishing signby which they might be recognised ; and were,therefore, branded on the shoulder with a hot iron,probably engraved with the owner's name. This isdistinctly shown in the paintings of Thebes, wherethe cattle are represented lying on the ground withtheir feet tied, while one person heats an iron onCHAP. VIII.PRESERVES FOR GAME.the fire, and another applies it to the shoulder ofthe prostrate animal.THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. VIII.In primitive ages, the chase was not an amusement,but a necessary occupation among thosepeople, who did not follow agricultural pursuits, or^'^w§ = s3-c olead a pastoral life, and who depended for theirsubsistence upon the sports of the field : and insome instances the shepherd was obliged to huntCHAP. Vir. REFLECTIONS ON THE CHASE. ] 1and destroy the wild beasts, for the security of hisflocks and herds : and sometimes even for hisown safety.* In after times, when population increased,and each community began to adopt thehabits of civilised life, the injuries apprehendedfrom them decreased ; and the fear of man havingcompelled them to remove their haunts to a greaterdistance, their pursuit was no longer required ; andthose who hunted followed the occupation as anamusement, to supply the table, or in the employ ofother persons : as among the Egyptians, Babylonians,Persians, and Medes.In the East, indeed, it was always lookedupon as a manly exercise, requiring courage anddexterity, and tending to invigorate the body, andto instil into the mind a taste for active pursuits ;it was held in such repute, that the founders ofempires were represented in the character of renownedhunters ; and the Babylonians were sofond of the chase, that the walls of their rooms presenteda repetition of subjects connected with itt;and they even ornamented their dresses and thefurniture of their houses with the animals theyhunted. t The Medes and Persians were equallynoted for their love of field sports ; and, like theEgyptians, they had spacious preserves § wherethe game was enclosed ; the grounds of the royalpalaces containing antelopes and other animals,Whence in Exodus xxiii. 29. : " I will not drive them out frombefore thee in one year, lest the land become desolate, and the beastof the field multiply against thee."f Ammian. Marcel. lib. xxvi. c. 6. Diod. 2. J Athen. lib. xii. 9.§ Xenoph. Cyr. lib. i. " ti' TrapaPtiffoig." Dio. Chrysostom. in Orate. 3.12 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. VIII.pheasants, peacocks, and abundance of birds, aswell as lions, tigers, and wild boars.*The Egyptians frequently coursed with dogs inthe open plains, the chasseur following in hischariot, and the huntsmen on foot. Sometimes heonly drove to cover in his car, and having alighted,shared in the toil of searching for the game, hisattendants keeping the dogs in slips, ready to startthem as soon as it appeared. The more usualcustom, when the dogs threw off in a level plain ofgreat extent, was for him to remain in his chariot,and, urging his horses to their full speed, endeavourto turn or intercept them as they doubled,discharging a well directed arrow whenever theycame within its range.The dogs were taken to the ground by personsexpressly employed for that purpose, and forall the duties connected with the kennel, thexvvaywyoi f of the Greeks, and were eitherstarted one by one, or in pairs, in the narrowvallies or open plains : and when coursing onfoot, the chasseur and his attendant huntsmen,acquainted with the direction and sinuosities ofthe torrent beds, shortened the road, as theyfollowed across the intervening hills, and soughta favourable opportunity for using the bow : ormarked with a watchful eye the progress of thecourse in the level space before theist For notonly was the chasseur provided with a bow, but manyCurtis, lib. 7 and 8. Xenoph. Crop. lib. i.■f J. Pollux, iv. 5.j As the Arabs of the present day, in the same districts.CHAP. VIII.CATCHING THE GAME.of those also who accompanied him ; and the numberof head brought home was naturally lookedupon as the criterion of Its good day's sport.Having with eager haste pursued on foot, andarrived at the spot where the dogs had caughttheir prey, the huntsman, if alone, took up thegame, tied its legs together, and hanging it overhis shoulders, once more led by his hand thecoupled dogs, precisely in the same manner as theArabs are wont to do at the present day; this,however, was generally the office of persons whofollowed expressly for the purpose, carrying cagesand baskets on the usual wooden yoke, and whoNo. 322.A huntsman carrying home the game, with his coupled dogs.took charge of the game as soon as it was caught;the number of these substitutes for our game cartdepending of course on the proposed range of theTHE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. VIII-chase,and the abundance they expected to find.Sometimes an ibex*, oryx, or wild ox, being closelypressed by the hounds, and driven to an eminenceof difficult ascent, faced round and kept them atbay, with its formidable horns t, and the spear ofNo. 323. Bringing home the game: a gazelle, porcupines, and hare. Beni Hassan.the huntsman, as he came up, was required to decidethe success of the chase.It frequently happened, when the chasseur hadmany attendants, and the district to be hunted wasextensive, that they divided into parties, eachtaking one or more dogs, and starting them onwhatever animal broke cover ; sometimes theywent without hounds, merely having a small dogfor searching the bushes, or laid in wait for thelarger and more formidable animals, and attackedthem with the lance.The noose was also employed to catch the wildThe wild goat of the desert, the beddan, or taytal, of the Arabs,which are still common in the desert between the Nile and Red Sea.f I have occasionally witnessed instances of this in the desert.CHAP. VIII.THE NOOSE OR LASSO.OX, the antelope, and other animals ; and as they arealways represented on foot, when throwing it, weCatching a gazelle with the noose.Beni Hassan.may suppose they lay in ambush for this purpose, andthat it was principally adopted when they wishedto secure them alive : since we find they frequentlyNo. 325.Catching a wild ox with the noose or lasso.Belli Hassan.chased the same animals with dogs, and with thebow. The noose was very similar to the lasso ofSouth America, but it does not appear that theEgyptians had the custom of riding on horsebackwhen they used it ; and from the introductionof a bush immediately behind the man who hasTHE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. VIII.thrown it, we may suppose the artist intended toconvey the notion of his previous concealment.Besides the bow, the hounds, and the noose, theyhunted with lions, which were trained expresslyfor the chase, like the cheeta or hunting leopard of3 aCHAP. Vir. THE CHASE. ijIndia: but there is no appearance of the leopard*or the panther having been employed for this purpose; and the lion was always the animal theypreferred. It was frequently brought up in a tamestate t, and many Egyptian monarchs are said tohave been accompanied in battle by a favouritelion, — as we learn from the sculptures of Thebesand other places, and from the authority of Diodorus.tThe bow used for the chase was very similar tothat employed in war ; the arrows were frequentlythe same, with metal heads, but some were tippedwith stone, which are represented in the huntingscenes of Beni Hassan, and in many of those atThebes. The mode of drawing the bow was alsothe same, though, as I have already observed, thechasseurs sometimes pulled the string only to thebreast, instead of the more perfect and more usualmethod of raising it, and bringing the arrow tothe ear ; and occasionally, one or more sparearrows were held in the hand, to give greaterfacility in discharging them with rapidity on theswift antelopes and wild oxen.ANIMALS.The animals they chiefly hunted, were thegazelle, wild goat or ibex, the oryx, wild ox,Bagajet I. (Blazed) had 12,000 officers and servants of the chase.Besides hounds of various breeds, he had leopards, whose collars wereset with jewels. Gibbon, xi. Gi.f I have seen two or three tame lions in Cairo. Animals are moreeasily tamed in those climates than in Europe.J Diod. i. 48. And the sculptures of Dayrr, Medeenet HabooKalabshi, &c.§ Vide wood-cut, No. 327. ; and No. 30., in Vol. I.VOL. III. C18 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. VIII.Stag*, kebsh or wild sheep, hare, and porcupine t;of all of which the meat was highly esteemed amongProbably the same as the Corvus barbarous.f I have not found this animal in Egypt. It is eaten in Italy, andsold in the markets of Rome and other places.CHAP. viri.The CHASE.c 2'20 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. VI 1 1.the delicacies of the table. Others, as the fox,jackal, wolf, hyaena, and leopard, were chased asan amusement, for the sake of their skins, or asenemies of the farm-yard j and the ostrich heldout a great temptation to the hunter from thevalue of its plumes. These were in great requestamong the Egyptians for ornamental purposes ;a religious veneration for them, as the symbol oftruth, enhanced their value; and the members of thecourt on grand occasions failed not to deck themselveswith the feathers of the ostrich. The labourendured during the chase of this swift-footed birdwas amply repaid ; even its eggs were required forsome ornamental or religious use, and these, withthe plumes, formed part of the tribute imposedby the Egyptians on the conquered countrieswhere it abounded. The purposes to which theeggs were applied are unknown ; but we mayinfer, from a religious prejudice in their favouramong the Christians of Egypt, that some superstitionwas connected with them, and that theywere suspended in the temples of the ancientEgyptians, as they still are in the churches of theCopts. *The subjects of the chase in the sculptures arefrequently represented with great spirit. Thecharacter of the animals is maintained with wonderfultruth, and, though time and the hand ofman have done much to injure them, sufficient re-theyconsider them the emblems of watchfulness. Sometimesthey use them with a different view : the rope of their lamps is passedthrough the egg, in order to prevent the rats coming down and drinkingthe oil, as we were assured by the monks of Dayrr Antonio.CHAP. VIII. FANCIFUL ANIMALS. 21mains to evince the skill of the Egyptian draughtsmen.Distance and locality are not so well defined,and the archer, like all Egyptian figures, offendsagainst every rule of drawing and perspective ; butthe action of the dogs and of the flying antelopesis spirited, and shows how successfully the effectwas given by simple outline.It is singular that the wild boar is never representedamong the animals of Egypt, since it is anative of the country ; — and is even eaten at the presentday, in spite of the religious prejudices of theMoslems*, by many of the inhabitants of the districtswhere it lives : — nor can I suggest any reason forthis omission, except from its not frequenting thoseparts where the scenes of the chase are laid, beingconfined to the low marshy spots about the northof the Delta, and the banks of the Lake Moeris. Inthe Thebaid it was unknown ; the sculptures orpaintings of Diospolis relate principally to the vicinityof Upper Egypt, and the monuments of theDelta and the lower country are too few to enableus to say if it was omitted there. Nor is thewild ass met with in the paintings, either ofUpper or Lower Egypt, though it is common inthe deserts of the Thebaid.Many other animals are introduced in thesculptures, besides those already noticed, some ofwhich are purely the offspring of disordered imagination: and the winged quadrupeds, sphinxes,or lions, with the head of a hawk, or of a snake,That is, followers of Islam. Need I add, tlicy never call themselvesMahometan, wliicii is an European misnomer ?c 3THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAr. Vlll.No. 329. A chase in the desert oftlieThebaid. Thebes.To the left of A was the chasseur in his chariot shooting with the bow, now defaced.Fits 1 , 9, 15, 18. Gazelles. 2, 1 1. Hares. X Female h yxiia, with its young. 4, 1 >. i oxus.5 Porcupine, fi. Hva-na arrived at the top of a hill and looking towards thechasseur. 7. The ibex. 8, 14. Hounds, 12. Ostriches (defaced). 16. The oryx.HI. Wild oxen.CHAP. VIII.THE SPHINX.and some others equally fanciful and unnatural, canonly be compared to the creations of heraldry*, orserve as companions to the monsters of Pliny, tThe Egyptian sphinx was usually an emblematicfigure, representative of the king, and may beconsidered, when with the head of a man and thebody of a lion, as the union of intellect and phys330.Monsters, in the paintings of Beni Hassan and Thebes.sical force : it is therefore scarcely necessary toAn Austrian nobleman asked an English ambassador at Vienna,whose arms presented a griffin and other monsters, " in what forestthey were met with ? " " In the same," said the ambassador, " whereyou find eagles with two heads."t Plin. viii. 21.c 4^4 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. VIII.observe that they are never female, as those ofthe Greeks. Besides the ordinary sphinx, compoundedof a lion and a man, and denominatedandrosphinx, were the criosphinx, with the headof a ram, and the hieracosphinx, with the hawk'shead and lion's body, — all which are representativesof the king : but the asp-headed and thehawk-headed sphinx with wings, do not appearto have been adopted as the same symbol.Those of the above mentioned animals which arestill found in Egypt, either in the Valley of theNile, or in the desert, are the gazelle *, ibex, kehshyhare, fox, jackal, wolf, and hyaena.The orj/a^i is a native of Ethiopia, as is thespotted hyaena or marafeen ; which last is oncerepresented in the Egyptian sculptures. Theoryx Is long annulated horns, tapering to a sharppoint, and nearly straight, with a slight curve orinclination backwards. It frequently occurs inthe sculptures, being among the animals tamedby the Egyptians, and kept in great numbers inthe preserves of their villas.The beisa^ is very like the oryx, except in theblack marks upon its face, and a few other points ;and the addaxW, another antelope, inhabiting UpperEthiopia, differs principally from the oryx in itshorns, which have a waving or spiral form : butthese do not appear in the sculptures, unless theEgyptian artists, by an imperfect representation ofWood-cut, No. 328.fg. 6, and No. 329. fgs. 1. 9, 10. 15. 18.+ The antilopeleucoryx.F. wood-cut, No. 328./^. 2. &No.3-<^9./,o'. 16.4; The canis crocuses, which appears to be the claus of Pliny, or, assome editions have it, chavia : "cffigiehipi,pardorum macklin." Lib.viii.l9.^ AiUilopebeisa. || Antelope addax.CHAP. Vir. VARIOUS WILD ANIMALS. 2'5them, and an inattention to their distinguishing peculiarities,have confounded them * with the oryxor the wild ox.This last, which is also of the genus anfilope-fythe defassa of modern zoologists, though not a nativeof Egypt, is found in the African desert, and Ibelieve in Eastern Ethiopia ; it is of a reddish sandyand grey colour, with a black tuft terminating itstail, and stands about four feet high at the shoulder.Though made too much to resemble a common oxin some of the paintings, it is sufficiently evidentthat the Egyptians had in view the defassa^ in theirrepresentations of this animal : and the Thebansculptors t, who had a better opportunity ofbecoming acquainted with it, have succeeded ingiving its character far more satisfactorily than thepainters of Beni Hassan.The stag with branching horns ||, figured at BeniHassan, is also unknown in the Valley of the Nile ;but I have been assured that it is still seen in thevicinity of the Natron Lakes, though not a nativeof the desert between the river and the Red Sea.The ibex%y which is common in the Easterndesert, as far north as the range of the Qalalla andGebel Aboo-Durrag, or latitude 29° 30', is verysimilar to the bouquetin of the Alps, and is calledin Arabic Beddan or Total. The former appellationis exclusively applied to the male, which isreadily distinguished by a beard and large knottedhorns, curving backwards over its body, the femaleFig. 7 of wood-cut, No. 328. appears to be the addax.+ Antilope defassa. J Vide wood-cut, No. 329. Jig. 19.§ Vide wool-cut, No. 327. fgs. i. & .'i.■|| Wood-cut, No. 328./^'. 9.' 1[ Wood-cut, No. 328./i,'. I.26 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. VIII.having short erect horns, scarcely larger than thoseof the gazelle, and being of a much smaller andlighter structure.The kebsh, or wild sheep, is found in the Easterndesert, principally in the ranges of primitive mountains,which, commencing about latitude 28° 40', atthe back of the limestone hills of the Valley of theNile, extend thence into Ethiopia and Abyssinia.The female kebsh is between two and three feethigh at the shoulder, and its total length from thetail to the end of the nose is a little more than fourfeet: but the male is larger, and is provided withstronger horns, which are about five inches indiameter at the roots, and are curved down towardsthe neck. The whole body is covered with hair,like many of the Ethiopian sheep, and the throatand thighs of the fore legs are furnished with along pendent mane ; a peculiarity not omitted inthe sculptures, and which suffices to prove theidentity of the kebsh*, wherever its figure is represented.The porcupine is not a native of Egypt ; nor isthe leopard met with on this side of Upper Ethiopia.Bears are altogether unknown, and if theyoccur twice in the paintings of the Theban tombs,the manner in which they are introduced sufficientlyproves them not to have been among theanimals of Egypt, since they are brought byforeigners, together with the productions of theircountry, which were deemed rare and curious tothe Egyptians. Herodotus is therefore in errorWood-cut, No. 328. Jig. 10.CHAP. VIII. THE WOLF. ^7respecting the bear* as well as the otter tj but theGreek name of this last is so ambiguous, that itmay apply to any " animal inhabiting the water,"which is the signification of the word svu^ig.With regard to the Egyptian wolf, which hesayst is small, and " scarcely larger than a fox,"his statement is fully borne out by fact, and Pliny'sremark §, that " those of Egypt and Africa aresmall and inactive," is equally just. But it is stillmore remarkable that in Egypt their habits differ,in one of the principal characteristics of the species,from those of other countries, being so little gregarious; for, though so often in pursuit of them,I never met with more than two together, and generallyfound them prowling singly over the plain.M. Conning's conclusions, respecting the existenceof the wolf in Egypt, are hasty and erroneous ;and he has perverted the meaning of Herodotus,when he says that the sacred animal of Lycopoliswas not the wolf, for there are none in Egypt, butthe jackal, which seems clearly shown by Herodotus,when he says the wolves in that country are scarcelylarger than foxes." The tombs in the mountain aboveLycopolis, the modern E'SiootH, contain the mummiesof wolves, many of which I have examined, andascertained to be of the sacred animals of the place ;Herod, ii. 67. " Bears being rare."•j- Herod, ii. 72. " Tn-'oj'T-rtt cs kui ei/vSquq ev rot Troraixii), rac «p«crjyrjvrcu nvai.'' May he mean the " Woiran of the river," the largelacerta Nilotica ?X Herod, ii. 07.§ Plin. 8. 22. " Incites los Hupos) parvosque Africa et Egyptusgignmit." Aribtot. Hist. An. 1.8. c. xxviii.II I have shown that Aboolfeda, and others, were wrong in writingtills name Shoot, in my Egypt and Thebes, p. .389.28 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. Titheancient sculptures represent them as natives ofthe country in the earliest times ; and the coins ofthe Lycopolite nome bear a wolf on their reverse,with the word loco (7^uxo), signifying " a wolf." Itis, therefore, evident, that M. Conning is in error, asto their not having been natives of Egypt in the timeof Herodotus; and since we find them on both sidesof the Nile, those now met with there are shown tobe indigenous in the country, and not derivedfrom any which may have accidentally strayed fromthe borders of Syria.The Egyptian hare is a native of the Valley ofthe Nile as well as the two deserts. It is remarkablefor the length of its ears, which the Egyptianshave not failed to indicate in their sculptures ; butit is much smaller than those of Europe.The intelligent Demon has made a just remarkon the comparative size of animals common toEgypt and Europe, that the former are alwayssmaller than our own species; and this is exemplifiedby none more strongly than the hare and wolfThe waller* or hyraa:, though a native of the easterndesert of Egypt, is not represented in the sculptures; but this is probably owing to its habits, andto their hunting principally in the vallies of thesecondary mountains ; the jabber only venturinga short distance from its burrow in the evening, andliving in the primitive ranges, where the sedley oracacia grows. It was probably the samian of theBy a singular inadvertency, this has been called a gazelle, in M.Leon Elaborate's Petra. Vide the translation, p. lOG, 107.f The acacia, or mimosa seal.CHAP. Veni. THE LION. 29Bible, as Bruce has remarked, and that enterprisingtraveller is perfectly correct in placing itamong ruminating animals.In enumerating the wild beasts of the desert, itmay not be irrelevant to observe that the hyaena andwolf are seldom met with in unfrequented districts,or any great distance from the Nile, where theywould suffer from want of food, and are thereforeprincipally confined to the mountains lying at mosta few miles from the edge of the cultivated land.Once only I have met with the wolf on the coastof the Red Sea ; and few even of the wateringplaces of the interior of the desert are infested byit, or the hyaena.The lion is now unknown to the north ofUpper Ethiopia : there, however, it is common,as well as the leopard, the aboomungdr*, andother carnivorous beasts ; and the abundance ofsheep in those districts amply supplies themwith food, and has the happy tendency of renderingthem less dangerous to man. In ancienttimes, however, the lion inhabited the desertsof Egypt, and Theseus mentions one killed bythe emperor Adrian, while hunting near AlexandriaThey are even said, in former times, tohave been found in Syria X, and in Greece.The aboomungar is said to be in the Egyptian deserts as wellas the shecb. I have not been able to discover what these two animalsreally are; the former was described to me by the Arabs with a pointednose, like a wolf, with the power of springing like a leopard, or ratherlike a dog, and attacking cattle : the latter was said to have a roundheadand shaggy neck.+ Athen. lib. xv. c. G.J Sam. xvii. 34. 2 Sam. xxiii. 20. 1 Kings, xiii. 24.30 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. VIII.Among the animals confined to the Valley of theNile, and its immediate vicinity, may be mentionedthe ichneumon *, which lives principally in LowerEgypt and the Fyoom, and which, from its enmityto serpents, was looked upon by the Egyptianswith great respect. Its dexterity in attacking thesnake is truly surprising. It seizes the enemy at theback of the neck, as soon as it perceives it rising tothe attack, one firm bite sufficing to destroy it ; andwhen wounded by the venomous fangs of its opponent,it is said by the Arabs to have recourse tosome herb, which checks the effect of the deadlypoison.Of the truth, however, of this commonly creditedassertion t, I can say nothing; an Arab assuredme he had witnessed a fight between a largevenomous snake and an ichneumon, which last,whenever it received a bite, ran to a small plant,of which it eat a part, rubbing the wound againstthe leaves, and then returned to renew the combat; and in order to ascertain the reality of itseffect, he plucked up and removed the plant, andhaving waited to see the wounded animal returnin vain to seek it, he became convinced, by itsdeath, that the herb alone had previously saved itslife. The Arabs, however, frequently consult theirimagination more than their love of truth, and,like many authors of amusing tales, they tell theirstories till they believe them true.In Arabic, " nimis," or " got Pharaoh," Pharaoh's cat. It is thevivere ichneumon.-|- They have the same notion in India.CHAP. VIII. THE ICHNEUMON. GIRAFFE. 31The ichneumon* is easily tamed, and is sometimesseen in the houses of Cairo, where, in itshostility to rats, it performs all the duties of a cat ;but, from its indiscriminate fondness for eggs, poultry,and many other requisites for the kitchen, itis generally reckoned troublesome, and I haveoften found reason to complain of those I kept.Eggs are its favourite food, and it is said to havebeen greatly venerated by those who held thecrocodile in abhorrence, in consequence of itsdestroying the eggs of that hateful animal t: butit is now rarely met with in places where thecrocodile abounds ; and we may conclude that atall periods its principal recommendation was itshostility to serpents. It is frequently seen in thepaintings, where its habits are distinctly alludedto by the Egyptian artists, who represent it insearch of eggs, among the bushes, and the usualresorts of the feathered tribe.The wild cat, the felix claus of Linnaeus, iscommon in the vicinity of the pyramids and Heliopolis,but it does not occur among the picturedanimals of ancient Egypt. Nor is the jerboa X, sofrequently met with both in the upper and lowercountry, represented in the sculptures.The giraffe § was not a native of Egypt, but ofIt is often introduced in the sculptures. Vide wood-cut, No. 328.fig. 20. ; and in wood-cut No. 336. it is represented carrying away ayoun<5 bird from the nest.t Diod. i. 35.j Dips paulus. It is eaten by the Arabs of Africa. Bruce withgreat reason supposes it to be the mouse mentioned in Isaiah, Lxvi. 17.§ Vide plate 4.THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. VIII.Ethiopia, and is only introduced in subjects whichrelate to that country, where it is brought withapes, rare woods, and other native productions,as part of the tribute annually paid to the Pharaohs.The Egyptians had several breeds of dogs*,No. 331. Various kinds of dogs, from the sculptures.some solely used for the chase, others admittedVide also plate 4., at end of Vol. I.CHAP. VIII. DOGS. PIGS. 33into the parlour, or selected as the companions oftheir walks ; and some, as at the present day, selectedfor their peculiar ugliness. All were lookedupon with veneration, and the death of a dog was notonly lamented as a misfortune, but was mourned byevery member of the house in which it occurred.*The most common kinds were a sort of foxdog, and a hound ; they had also a short-leggeddog, not unlike our turnspit, which was a greatfavourite in the house, especially, it appears, inthe time of Osirtasen ; and it is possible that,as in later days, the choice of a monarch ledthe taste, or fashion, of the time, to fix upon aparticular breed. Of the fox dog, I have foundseveral mummies in Upper Egypt, and it is reasonableto conclude that this was the parent stockof the modern red wild dog of Egypt, which is socommon at Cairo, and other towns of the lowercountry.Herds of cattle, and flocks of sheep t and goatswere numerous ; and pigs, though unclean t, andan abomination to the Egyptians, frequently formedpart of the stock of the farm-yard ; but they aremore rarely represented in the sculptures thanother animals. Their cattle were of differentkinds, of which three principal distinctions aremost deserving of notice, the short, the long hornedcattle, and the Indian, or humped ox : and the twoVide infra, p. 42.■j- I have already observed, on the authority of Diodorus, that sheepin Egypt were twice shorn, and twice brought forth lan)bs in the year;as at the present day. Homer says those of Libra had lambs thricein a year. Od. iv. 86. J Herod, ii. 47.VOL. III. D3-iTHE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. VIII.last, though no longer natives of Egypt, are commonto this day in Abyssinia and Upper Ethiopia.Horses and asses were abundant in Egypt, ands4Pigs ; rarely seen in the sculptures.1. Sows with young pigs. 2. Young pigs. 3. Boars,a is a whip, knotted lilies horae of our own. b a gay, or nocso.Thebes.the latter were employed as beasts of burden, fortreading out corn, particularly in Lower Egypt,and for many other purposes. Like those of thepresent day, it is probable that they were small,active, and capable of bearing great fatigue ; and,considering the trifling expense at which thesehardy animals were maintained, we are not surprisedto find that they w ere kept in great numbersin the agricultural districts, or that one individualhad as many as seven hundred and sixty employedin different parts of his estate.Egyptian horses were greatly esteemed ; theywere even exported to the neighbouring countVIII. THE CAMEL POULTRY. 35tries, and Solomon bought them at a hundred andfifty sheets of silver*, from the merchants whotraded with Egypt by the Syrian desert.It is remarkable that the camel, though knownto have been used in, and probably a native of,Egypt, as early at least as the time of Abraham(the Bible distinctly stating it to have been amongthe presents given by Pharaoh to the patriarch),has never yet been met with in the paintings orhieroglyphics. We cannot however infer, fromour finding no representation, or notice of itt,that it was rare in any part of the country,since the same would apply to poultry, which,it is scarcely necessary to observe, was alwaysabundant in Egypt : for no instance occurs inthe sculptures of fowls or pigeons, among thestock of the farm-yard, though geese are repeatedlyintroduced, and numbered in the presence ofthe stewards.The mode of rearing poultry, and the artificialprocess of hatching the eggs of fowls and geese, Ihave already mentioned in a former work, whereI have shown the method adopted by the Copts,from their predecessors. ||Many birds, which frequented the interior andskirts of the desert, and were highly prized for thetable, were caught in nets and traps, by the fowlers,1 Kings, X. 28, 29.■j- Gen. xii. IG. The name in Hebrew is the same by which the animalis known in Arabic, Semel, gemelli), " D'baJ." ^■"^^ n's Exod. ix. 3.J I have a stone seal found in Nubia, on which two camels arerudely engraved, but it is of uncertain date.§ Egypt and Thebes, p. 2+.5, 2-iC.II Diod. i. s. 74. Pliny, x. c. 54.D 236 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. VIII.as the partridge, gutta bustard t, and quail t;and waterfowl of different descriptions, whichabounded in the Valley of the Nile, affordedendless diversion to the sportsman, and profit tothose who gained a livelihood by their sale.FOWLING.Fowling was a favourite amusement of all classes;and the fowlers and fishermen, as I have alreadyobserved, were subdivisions of one of the castes.They either caught the birds in large clap-nets §,or in traps ; and they sometimes shot them witharrows, or felled them with a throw-stick, as theyflew in the thickets.The trap II was generally made of network,strained over a frame. It consisted of two semicircularsides or flaps, of equal sizes, one or bothmoving on the common bar, or axis, upon whichthey rested. When the trap was set, the two flapswere kept open by means of strings, probably ofcatgut, which, the moment the bait that stood inthe centre of the bar was touched, slipped aside,and allowed the two flaps to collapse, and thus securedthe bird.Another kind, which was square, appears tohave closed in the same manner ; but its constructionwas different, the framework running acrossthe centre, and not, as in the others, round theedges of the trap.• The Pericles melanogaster. Vide Egypt and Thebes, p. 245,f The Otis hebara.X Herod, ii. 77. : Diod. i. 60, ; and the sculptures.§ F, wood-cut, No. 333. part ii. || V. wood-cut, No. 333.CHAP. Vii. FOWLING THE CLAP-NET.D 3THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. VIII.If their skill in making traps is not proved inthose used by the fowlers, it may at least be into.33 kBeni Hassan.Bird traps.Fig. 1. Trap closed and the bird caught in it ; the net work of it has been effaced, as alsoin fig. 3. The other traps are open.ferret from that in which the robber was caughtin the treasury of Rhampsinitus * ; since the powerof the spring, or the mechanism of the catch, wasso great that his brother was unable to open it orrelease him.They do not seem to have used the bow verygenerally to shoot birds, nor was the sling adopted,except by gardeners and peasants to frightenthem from the vineyards t and fields. The use ofthe throw-stick X was very general, every amateurchasseur priding himself on the dexterity hedisplayed with this missile : and being made ofheavy wood, flat, and offering little surface to theVide Vol. 1. p. 123. f V. woodcut. No. 136. Vol. II. p. 149.X The Irish frequently use it for the same purpose.CHAP. VIII.THROW-STICKS.air in the direction of its flight, the distance towhich an expert arm could throw it was considered.335. A sportsman using the throw-stick. Thebes.Figs. 2. and 3. his sister and daughter. 4. A decoy bird. 5. 5. Birds struck with the stick.able; though they always endeavoured to approachthe birds as near as possible, under the coverof the bushes or reeds. It was from one footand a quarter to two feet in length, and aboutone inch and a half in breadth, slightly curved atthe upper end ; and its general form may be inferredfrom one found at Thebes by Mr. Burton, from thoseof the Berlin Museum, and from the sculptures.On their fowling excursions, they usually prod440 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. VIII.needed with a party of friends and attendants, sometimesaccompanied by the members of their family,and even their young children, to the jungles orthickets of the marsh lands, or to the lakes of theirowngroundsjformedby the waters of the overflowingNile, at the period of the inundation, when wild fowlwas more abundant than at any other season of theyear ; and seated in punts made of the papyrus *, orrushes of various kinds, they passed without disturbingthe birds, amidst the lofty reeds which grew inthe water, and masked their approach. This sort ofboat was either towed, pushed by a pole, or propelledby paddles; and a religious prejudice inducedthe Egyptians to believe that persons whoused it were secure from the attacks of crocodilest ; a story which can be more readily believedand explained, when we remember that they principallyused these boats in the lakes and inlandcanals, where crocodiles were seldom seen.The attendants collected the game as it fell, andone of them was always ready to present a freshstick to the chasseur, as soon as he had thrown.They frequently took with them a decoy bird,which was posted in a convenient place ; and inorder more effectually to prevent its quitting thepost assigned to it, a female was selected for thepurpose, whose nest, containing eggs, was broughtwith it and deposited in the boat.Conf. Lucan, iv. 136. : —Conservator fibula Memphitis cymba papyro." and Plin, xiii. 11.-|- Plut. de Is. s. 18. " Isis . . . made use of a boat constructed of thereed papyrus, in order to pass more easily through the fenny parts ofthe country, whence, they say, the crocodile never touches any personswho go in this sort of vessel."CHAP. VIII.FOWLING CATS.I. Ha, J,S,?icj ■"cR«,.sbcoc^?«^so«3«;oJ5S-1^S ep■S2Scx:2'cC3■5« Mla■c■^c3 ir.«c«oM^r,ii .(K»,xOTH^ffiS^a, to.£ « P>." <t:fc S -ao " u, .Q■■S'3 2 • Mo «£« Seg ^ ■«£0 •= *3 -S se.b: 3S 3 J £^ o ws y yC.2K-C <ur^ o4 CO «r^42 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. VIII.A favourite cat sometimes attended them onthese occasions, and from the readiness with whichNo. 037. Sportsman using the throw-stick. British Museum.Fig. 2. keeps the boat steady by holding trio stalks of a lotus. 4. A cat seizing the game inthe thicket. 5. A decoy bird.it is represented to have seized the game, theartist has intended to show that those animalsacted as retrieve, or were trained to catch thebirds ; being let out of the boat into the thicketswhich grew at the water's edge : though makingevery allowance for the great skill attributed tothe Egyptians in taming and training animals, itis difficult to persuade us that the cat cotdd beinduced, on any consideration, to take the water,in quest of a fallen bird.That cats, as well as dogs, were looked uponwith great esteem by the Egyptians, is evidentCHAP. VIII. CATS AND DOGS. 43from the care they took to preserve and embalmthem, and from the express statements of ancientwriters. Herodotus * mentions the concern theyfelt at their loss, and the general mourning thatensued in a house, even if they died a naturaldeath ; every inmate being obliged to shave hiseyebrows, in token of sorrow, for the loss of acat, and the head and whole body for the deathof a dog. When ill, they watched and attendedthem with the greatest solicitude ; and, if any personpurposely, or even involuntarily t, killed oneof these revered animals, it was deemed a capitaloffence ; nor could all the influence of the magistrates,nor even the dread of the Roman name preventthe people from sacrificing to their resentmentan incautious Roman who had killed a cat, thoughit was evident that he had done it unintentionally."So deeply rooted in their minds," says Diodorus,was the superstitious regard for the sacred animals,and so strongly were the passions of every one bentupon their honour, that, even at this time, whenPtolemy had not yet been called a king by theRomans, and the people were using every possibleeffort to flatter the Italians, who visited the countryas strangers, and studiously avoided any thingwhich could excite disputes, or lead to war, on accountof their dread of the consequences, they positivelyrefused to restrain their anger, or to sparethe offender."Some remains of this prejudice in favour of theHerod, ii. 66. f Diod. i. 83.44 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. VIII.cat * may still be traced among the modern Egyptians,who even allow it to eat from the same dish,and to be the constant companion of their children ;though the reputed reason of their predilectionfor this animal is its utility in watching and destroyingscorpions, and other reptiles, which infestthe houses.Dogs are not regarded by them with the samefeelings ; they are considered unclean, and areseldom admitted into the house, except by somepersons of the Malekee sect, who do not, likethe ShafFaees, and Hanefees, consider themselvesdefiled by their touch. But though they draw thismarked distinction between them, the charactergiven to the two animals appears to be in favour ofthe dog ; which they represent, in the true spirit oforiental fable, when asked hereafter respecting thetreatment it received from man, concealing all thenumerous injuries it has received, and magnifyingthe few benefits, while the cat is supposed todeny the obligations conferred upon it, and to endeavourto detract from the merits of its benefactor.Though the death of a cat is not attended withlamentations or funeral honours, it is looked uponby many of the modern Egyptians to be wrongto kill, or even to illtreat them : and some havecarried their humanity so far as to bequeath by willafund for their support, in compliance with whichThey are much more tractable and attached in Egypt than inEurope. The cat and dog are not there the eml)leiiis of discord.•j- This is a general custom with the Moslems.CHAP. VIII. MODE OF INDICATING SILENCE. 45these animals are daily fed in Cairo at the Cadi'scourt, and the hazdr of Khan Khaleel.The clap net was of different forms, though onthe same general principle as the traps alreadymentioned. It consisted of two sides or frames, overwhich the network was strained ; at one end wasa short rope, which they fastened to a bush, or acluster of reeds, and at the other was one of considerablelength, which, as soon as the birds wereseen feeding in the area within the net, waspulled by the fowlers, causing the instantaneouscollision of the two sides.* The Egyptian netswere very similar to those used in Europe at thepresent day, but probably larger, and requiring agreater number of persons to manage them thanour own ; this, however, may be attributed to animperfection in their contrivance for closing them.As soon as they had selected a convenient spotfor laying down the net, in a field or on the surfaceof a pond, the known resort of numerous wildfowl,they spread open the two sides or flaps, andsecured them in such a manner that they remainedflat upon the ground, until pulled by the rope. Aman, crouched behind some reeds, growing at aconvenient distance from the spot, from whichhe could observe the birds as they came down,watched the nett, and enjoining silence by placinghis hand over his mouth, beckoned to thoseholding the rope to keep themselves in readiness,till he saw them assembled in sufficient numbers,Vide wood-cut, No. 333. part 2.f He was styled \(vo7rr»;(,- by the Greeks. J. Pollux, v. i.THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. VIII.when a wave of his hand gave the signal for closingthe net.No. 338.Clap nets, from the sculptures.The sign adopted by the Egyptians to indicatesilence is evidently shown, from these scenes, tohave been given by placing the hand over themouth ; not, as generally supposed *, by approachingthe forefinger to the lips; and the Greekserroneously concluded, that the youthful Hippocrateswas the deity of silence, from his appearingin this attitude ; which, however humiliating to thecharacter of a deity, was only illustrative of hisextreme youth, and of a habit common to childrenin every country, whether of ancient or moderntimes.Some nets were of a single piece, stretchedover a frame ; others were furnished with addingby Plutarch, De Isid. s. 68,CHAP. Vin. BIRDS OF EGYPT. 47national sections of a diamond shape*, and in somethe interior portion was surrounded by an outer circuitof an oval form, to which the ring of the ropewas attached.It is probable that the ancient Egyptians adoptedthe same ingenious method of catching ducks, widgeons,and other water fowl, as the modern inhabitantsof Lower Egypt t ; who, when the inundationcovers the lands, creep unperceived to the water'sedge, and placing a gourd upon their head, with twoholes cut in front, through which they look, swimtowards the unsuspecting birds, and taking themone after the other by the legs, suddenly pull themunder the water, and tie them to their girdle; thus,in a short space of time, securing great numbers,without alarming the rest.The birds taken in nets were principally geese,ducks, quails, and some small kinds which theywere in the habit of salting, especially in LowerEgypt, where Herodotus t tells us they "atequails, ducks, and small birds undressed, havingmerely preserved them in salt, living at the sametime on all sorts of birds and fish, not reckonedsacred, which were eaten either roasted or boiled."For though geese constituted a very great portionof the food of the Egyptians, both in the upperand lower country, and are more frequently representedin the sculptures than any bird, it is notto be supposed that they were preferred to theThis calls to mind the nets mentioned by J. Pollux, v. 4., of whicha square part termed the /^fjoxof became poji^otiSfc, of a rhomboi'dalfigure, as soon as the net (apr-ni;) was stretched.f The same is done in India. X Hesiod. ii. 77.THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. Vii.No. 339. Ifi Somcof the birds of Egypt. 17 BcniHassan.CHAP. VIII. VARIOUS BIRDS. 49exclusion of others j and besides poultry andpigeons, which abounded in Egypt, many of thewading tribe, the curlew, the ardea and severalothers were esteemed for the table, and even introducedamong the choice offerings presented tothe gods. The practice of salting birds, in acountry like Egypt, may, perhaps, be consideredsingular ; but confirmation of the statement ofHerodotus is derived from the sculptures, wheresome poulterer appear to be in the act of preservingthem in this manner, and depositing themin jars.*Independent of the birds taken in nets, and byother means, the Egyptian poulterer supplied themarket with the eggs of those most in request;they also reared the young after the eggs werehatched, (which was frequently done, as alreadyobserved, by an artificial process,) and these weresold to supply the poultry-yards of the rich, whosestock of wild fowl was often numerous.The various birds represented in the Egyptiansculptures, cannot always be recognised with certainty,in consequence of the loss of the colours,or a want of skill in their artists, who, disregardingthe intermediate hues, adopted certain fixedcolours, in a conventional manner, as an approximation; and unless the character of the birds is somarked as to be readily distinguished by a simpleoutline, it is often difficult to identify them.In some, however, there is sufficient to guide uswithout the necessity of conjecture, and these TVide wood-cut, No. 80.VOL. 111. ETHE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. VIII.JL^^ jl •^.•o-«~^ ^,6 7 89,il Nec tlx- 'iVr''-■5'xm-'it^i^L^i^x ix"-i•30 21No. 340 Some of the birds of Egypt. Sent Hassan, and the Tombs near the Pyramttls.Figs. 18, 19, 20, Bats. 21, The locust. From Thebes.CHAP. VIII.BIRDS..51shall notice in their proper order, without distinguishingbetween such as were forbidden, or admittedat an Egyptian table.BIRDS OCCURRING IN THE SCULPTURES.1. Raptures.Vultur Dubious.Vultur percnopterus. >Aquila.Falco cinereo-ferrugineus. "1Fors. JFalco ?Falco tenunculoides.Bubo maximus.Strix slammed.Strix passerina.Assessors.Lanius excubitor ?Corvus coran.Corvus cornix.Turdus visitors.Alauda cristata.Alauda arenaria.Pupa pops.Hirundo rustica.Alcedo ispida.Fringilla; several species.Restores, or Gallinaceous.Columba turtur.Pericles melanogaster.Perdix coturnix.Otis Hebara ?Struthio camels.Grallatores, wading birds.Ardea gazette. >Ardea cinerea.Ardea laconia ;and some other species.Tantalus, or Niimenius, Ibis.Plataea.The large vulture of Egypt andNubia, which occurs frequentlyon the ceilings and sculpturesof the temples.The small white vulture, calledalso Pharaoh's hen.The eagle.The kite, or Miluus. Falco areaof Saving.The sacred hawk.The common brown hawk.Horned owl.White owl.Small owl.Great shrike, or butcher bird ?The raven.The Boston crow.Missel thrush.Crested lark.Sand-coloured-lark.Hoopoe.The swallow.Common king-fisher.Finches.Turtle-dove.The Gutta*The quail.Ruffed bustard ?The ostrich.Small white storkof Hasselquitz.Grey heron.White stork.The ibis.Spoonbill.the Ar. VicoThis name has been given it in Arabic from the noise it makeswhen alarmed and flying.E ^5^THE y\NCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. VIII.Charades aratus.Scolopax galling.Fulica aera ?5. Natatores, swimming birds.Answer ^gyptius ;and other species.Anas ; various species.Anas areca.Recurvirostra rosetta.Pelicans onocratulus.Spur-winged plover.Snipe.The common coot ?Egyptian goose.Ducks.Teal.Avoset.The pelican.Many other birds are figured in the sculptures ;but as it is difficult to determine the exact speciesto which they belong, I shall not hazard any conjectureupon their names, having noticed thosewhich most commonly occur. In the tombs ofThebes and Beni Hassan the Egyptians have notomitted to notice bats, and even some of the^>^^Ail Egyptian gciitUinan fi. !iiiiiinsects, which abound in the Valley of the Nile ;and the well known locust*, the butterfly t, and theVide wood .cut, No. 340. fig. 21.f Vide wood-cuts, Nos. 336, 337, and 341.CHAP. VIII. FISHING WITH GROUND BAIT.beetle are occasionally introduced in the fowlingscenes, and in sacred subjects.FISHING.Fishing was an amusement in which the Egyptiansparticularly delighted ; and not contentedwith the abundance afforded by the Nile, they constructedwithin their grounds spacious '* sluices orponds for fish * ," like the vivaria of the Romans,where they fed them for the table, and where theyamused themselves by angling t, and the dexteroususe of the indent.These favourite occupations were not confinedto young persons, nor thought unworthy of menof serious habits j and an Egyptian of consent.342.Fishing with ground bait.These fish are the Shiloh, or rather the Arabia.Bi:ni Hassan.quench is frequently represented in the sculptures,catching fish in a canal or lake with the line, orIsaiah, xix. 10.f Isaiah, xix. 8,E 354f THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. VIII.spearing them, as they glided past the bank. Sometimesthe angler posted himself in a shady spotat the water's edge, and having ordered his servantsto spread a mat upon the ground, he satupon it as he threw the line ; and some with highernotions of comfort used a chair for the same purpose.The rod was short, and apparently of one piece ;the line usually single, though instances occur ofa double line, each furnished with its own hook,which, judging from those I have found, was ofbronze.The fishermen, who, as I have observed, composedone of the subdivisions of the Egyptiancastes, and who gained their livelihood by fishing,generally used the net in preference to the line,but on some occasions they employed the latter,seated or standing on the bank. It is, however,probable, that these were people who could notafford the expence of nets ; and the use of the lineis generally confined, in like manner, at the presentday, to the poorer classes*, who depend upon skill,or good fortune, for their subsistence.In all cases they adopted a ground bait, as isstill the custom in Egypt, without any float ; andthough several winged insects are represented inthe paintings hovering over the water, it does notappear that they ever put them to the hook, andstill less that they had devised any method similarto our artificial fly-fishing ; which is still unknownto the Egyptians, though the fish of the Nile areoccasionally seen to rise to insects on the water'ssurface.Vide vignette D., at the head of chap. iv. Vol. II.CHAP VIII. DRYING AND SALTING FISH.The ordinary Egyptian net has been ah-ladymentioned*, as well as the mode of dragging it toA sort of landing net.Thebes.the shore ; but it sometimes happened that theyused a smaller kind, for catching fish in shallowwater, furnished with a pole on either side, towhich it was attached ; and the fisherman holdingone of the poles in either hand, thrust it below thesurface of the water, and awaited the momentwhen a shoal of fish passed over it; the samebeing probably used for landing those which hadbeen wounded with the spear, or entangled withthe hooksWhen they employed the drag-net, and even whenthey pulled it to the shore, a boat sometimes attended,in which the fish were deposited as soon asthey were caught ; those intended for immediateuse, to be eaten fresh, being sent off to marketwhen the day's sport was finished ; and the othersbeing opened, salted, and hung up to dry in thesun.Vol. II. p. 21.f Vide wood-cut, No. 343.E 4THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. Vii.Some were cut in half, and suspended on ropesfor this purpose, the passing current of air beingfound to accelerate the process ; sometimes thebody was simply laid open with a knife from thehead to the tail, the two sides being? divided asCHAP. VIII. SALTED AND FRESH FISH.far as the back bone ; and many were contentedwith taking out the intestines, and removing thehead, and tip of the tail, and exposing them, whensalted, to the sun.1 2Another mode of carrying large fish.Tomb near the PyramidsWhen caught, the small fish were generally putinto baskets, but those of a larger kind were suspendedto a pole, borne by two or more men overtheir shoulders ; or were carried singly in the hand,slung at their back, or under the arm ; all whichmethods I have seen adopted by the modern fishermen,at the Cataracts of E'Sooan, and in otherparts of Egypt.Salted, as well as fresh fish, were much eaten*in Egypt, both in the Thebaid and the lowercountry, as the sculptures and ancient authors informus ; and at a particular period of the year, onthe 9th day of the first month (Thoth)t, every• Conf. Herod, ii. 92. Diod. i. 36. Perhaps the rcunKt] XiyvnTta ofJulius Pollux, Onoin. vi. 9.\ The first of Thoth corresponded with the 29th of August.Vide Vol. 1. p. 275.58 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. VIII.person was obliged, by a religious ordinance, toeat a fried fish before the door of his house, withthe exception of the priests, who were contentedto burn it on that occasion.*Some fish were particularly prized for the table,and preferred as being more wholesome, as well assuperior in flavour to others ; among which we maymention the biiltif, the gilbert, the be7ini^i theshall the shiloh ^ and ardb7'aby the bi/ad * *, the ,and a few others ; but it was unlawful to touchthose which were sacred, as the oxyrinchus, the phaedrus,and the lepidus: and the inhabitants of thecity of Oxyrinchus objected even to eat any fishcaught by a hook, lest it should have been defiledby the blood of one they held so sacred, ttThe oxyrinchus, I have elsewhere observed,was probably the mizdehy a mormyrus remarkableamong the fish of the Nile for its pointed nose || ||, asthe word oxyrinchus implies ; and, the resemblanceof the Coptic name of that city, which was calledMge, to that of the fish, strongly savoir's this opinion.The phaedrus was the eel, and the reason of itssanctity, like that of the former, was probably owingto its unwholesome qualities ; the most effectualmethod of forbidding its use being to assign it aplace among the sacred animals of the country.The lepidus is still uncertain ; its name provesit to have been a scaly fish, but the variousPlut. De Is. s. 7. + Or booltccy Laurus Niloticus.J Percy Nilotica. $ Cyprus Beni.II Silurus Shall. f The Silurus Scribe Niloticus.** Silurus Bajad. +f Silurus Warmth.tX Plut. de Isid. s. 7. ^§ Egypt and Thebes, p. 366.nil V. wood-cut, No. 366. figs. 14. 20., and No. 81. fig. 1. p.20. Vol. II.CHAP. VIII. DIFFERENT FISH. 59conjectures of naturalists have led to nothingsatisfactory respecting it. Linnaeus believed it tobe a carp, the cyprus ruhescens Niloticufi ; Picardpreferred the henri, and others the hultiy or thefisher ; but if I may be pardoned for venturinga conjecture, there appears to be more reason tosuppose it the kelp el hahr*^ called the dogfish ofthe Nile ; which, though a wholesome fight, might,from its appearance, create a prejudice in theminds of a superstitious people, sufficient to forbidits introduction at table, and obtain for it a placeamong their sacred fish : nor do I know of aninstance of its introduction in the Egyptian sculptures.Like the sacred quadrupeds, they were not allregarded with the same reverence in different partsof the country X ; Plutarch even states that thesethree fish were generally held in aversion § by theEgyptians ; and the people of Cynopolis, accordingto the same author ||, were in the habit of eatingthe oxyrinchus, which, he adds, " was the originof a civil war between the two cities, till bothsides, after doing each other great mischief, wereseverely punished by the Romans."Of all fish the multi ^ was evidently preferred, andnot, indeed, without reason, being still consideredSalmon Dentex, which has very large scales.-{- The fish, in Egypt, are considered better after October than in thesummer months : they think that fish with scales are the only kindwholesome even in winter.J Another fish, the latus, was worshipped at Latopolis in theThebaid.§ Pint. De Isid. s. 18. || Plut. De Isid. s. 72."t It is represented in wood-cut, No. 341. figs. 1. & 5. No. 81. c. andg. No. 336. fig. 8., &c.60 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. Visit.inferior to none produced in the Nile. Manyothers, not readily ascertained from the mode ofrepresenting them, occur in the sculptures ofUpper and Lower Egypt, and we even find theeel and the mizdeh introduced among those atBeni Hassan and other places ; but the difficulty,which this at first sight appears to present, isreadily explained by the observation I have alreadymade, of their having been held sacred in some, andnot in other, cities, or districts of Egypt.The favourite mode of fishing, among those whotook a pleasure in it, and prided themselves ontheir skill, was with the bident spear. Theysometimes stood on the bank of a canal, but generallyused a punt, or boat made of papyrus*, inwhich they glided smoothly over the lakes, andcanals, within their own grounds, without disturbingthe fish as they lay beneath the broad leavesof the lotus plant. The custom of angling foramusement, and spearing with the bident, may beconsidered peculiar to the higher orders, andwhile the poorer classes employed the net andhook, as already stated, the use of the spear wasconfined to the sportsman.The bident was a spear with two barbed points,which was either thrust at the fish with one, or bothhands, as they passed by ; or was darted to a shortdistance, a long line fastened to it preventing itsbeing lost, and serving to secure the fish whenstruck. It was occasionally furnished with feathersat the upper extremity, like an arrow, to assistThe name of papyrus, or byblus, was applied to more than oneplant of the genus cyperus, as I shall have occasion to show.CHAP. VIII. THE PAPYRUS PLANT. 6\in its distent flight, and sometimes a commonspear was used for the purpose ; but in mostcases, it was provided with a line, whose end washeld by the left hand, or wound upon a reel. Thesame mode of fishing is still adopted by manypeople who live on the sea coasts ; and the fishspears of the South Sea islanders have two, three,and four points, and are used nearly in the samemanner, and with the same dexterity, as the bidentby the ancient Egyptians.On these occasions they were usually accompaniedby a friend, or some of their children, andby one or two attendants, who assisted in securingthe fish, and who, taking them off the barbedpoint of the spear, passed the stalk of a rush throughthe gills, and thus attached them together, in ordermore conveniently to carry them home. *I have frequently had occasion to mention boatsmade of the byblus or papyrus. It is evident thatthis plant, from its great value and from its exclusivecultivation in certain districts, where it wasa government monopoly, could not have beenapplied to the many purposes mentioned in ancientauthors ; we may therefore conclude, that severalplants of the genus cijperus were comprehendedunder the head of byblus or papyrus. This is notonly in accordance with probability, from theirgeneral resemblance, but is expressly stated byStrabott, who says, that '* much grows in the lowerpart of the Delta, where one kind is of an inferior,the other of a superior quality, and this last isVide wood-cut, No. 336. fig. 13.t Strabo, Jib. xvii. p. 550. ed. Cas.62 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. VIII.known by the distinctive appellation of HieraticByblus. That the profits arising from its sale maybeincreased, they have adopted the same planwhich was devised in Judea, regarding the datetree and balsam, permitting it to grow only incertainplaces ; so that its rarity increasing itsvalue, they benefit themselves at the expense of thecommunity'* And that under the name *' Papyrus" he includes other kinds of cyperus producedspontaneously in the marshy lands, is evident fromhis observing that, " the papyrus does not grow ingreat quantity about Alexandria, because it is notcultivated there:" and Pliny*, and other writers,show that the plant to which they frequentlyapplied this name was wild in many parts of Egypt.There is therefore reason to believe, that severalspecies were comprehended under the general appellationof byblus or papyrus ; the cyperus dives, whichgrows to the height of five or six feet, is still cultivatedin Egypt for many of the purposes to whichthe papyrus plant is said to have been applied ;and I have no doubt, that this was the species commonlyemployed in former times for making mats,baskets, parts of sandals, papyrus boats, and forother ordinary uses ; the cyperus papyrus, or papyrus(byblus) heretics of Strabo, being confinedto the manufacture of paper.The great abundance of fish t produced in the• Plin. xiii. 1 1. According to one reading Pliny says, " All the paperis grown in the Sebennytic nome ; " but another gives, " nothing butpaper is grown " there, which is evidently the sense required ; " nonnisi charta," for " omnis charta," as he afterwards mentions its beingfound in other parts of Egypt. V. infra on the manufacture of paper.t Strabo, xvii. p. 566. Diod. i. 36. 43. and 52.CHAP. Vir. THE LAKE MCERIS. 6-*^Nile was an invaluable provision of nature, in acountry which had neither extensive pasture lands,nor large herds of cattle, and where corn was theprincipal production. When the Nile inundatedthe country and filled the lakes and canals withits overflowing waters, these precious gifts wereextended to the most remote villages in the interiorof the Valley, and the plentiful supply offish,they then obtained, was an additional benefitconferred upon them at this season of the year.The quantity is said* to have been immense, asindeed it is at the present day t ; and the shoals ofsmall fish, which then appear in the canals andponds, call to mind, and confirm, a remark of Herodotus,respecting their numbers at the risingNile. His explanation of the cause of their apparentlysudden production is inadmissible andunnecessary, as the ponds were always filled byartificial or natural ducts ; and the same species ofyoung fry which are found there, appear at thesame time in the river ; nor are they of anyparticular kind, but the young of the various fishinhabiting the Nile.§Herodotus mentions a large sum annually producedby the fisheries of the lake Moeris. " Duringsix months," says the historian ||, '* the water ofHerodot. ii. 93. Strabo, loc. cit.f Richard says that the lakeMenzaleh now yields an annual revenueof 800 purses, (5,600/.). F. Correspond, de Orient. torn. vi. let. 156.J Vide De Say's Abd-al-latif, note ll., in lib. i. c. 4.§ I have caught a small net full of them, and on examination foundthem to be of the silures shall and other common species ; and no one whohas eaten them at table can have failed to observe that they are of differentkinds, from the greater or less quantity of bones they contain.II Herodot. ii. 49.04 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. VIII.the river flows into it, and during the remaininghalf of the year, it returns from the lake into theNile. At this time, while the water is retiring,the profits derived from the fisheries, and paiddaily into the royal treasury, amount to a talent ofsilver* (193/. 15^. English t); and during theother six months, when the water flows from theNile into the lake, they do not exceed twentyminuet" (about 64/. 12.s'.). Diodorus says, that whenMoeris, from whom the lake derived its name, andwho was supposed to have made the canal, had arrangedthe sluices for the introduction of the water,and established every thing connected with it, heassigned the sum annually derived from this sourceas a dowry to the queen, for the purchase ofjewels, ointments, and other objects connectedwith the toilet. The provision was certainly veryliberal, being a talent every day, or upwards of70,700/. a year; and when this formed only aportion of the pin-money of the Egyptian queens,to whom the revenues of the city of Anthylla,famous for its wines, were given for their dress ||,it is certain they had no reason to complain of theallowance they enjoyed.I have frequently had occasion to notice theReckoning the talent at 60 mine.-j- Some compute it to be 225/. J The mina was 3/. 45. Id.§ Diodor. i. 32. From till the fisheries of Egypt would have beenless improbable. The lake Moeris is now farmed for 30 purses (210/.)annually. Of 90 piastres, from the sale of the fish, 10 are paid for theboat, 40 to the fishermen, and 40 to the farmers of the fish. There areonly now six boats on the lake.II Herodot. (ii. 98.) says, " for their sandals j" Athenaeus (Deign.i. 25.) " for their dress ; " a privilege continued to the queens of Persia,after Egypt was conquered by Cambyses.H Vide Egypt and Thebes, p. 354; and svjml, Vol. I. p. 93.CHAP. VIII. FISHERIES. 65error of Herodotus, in confounding the lake Moeriswith the canal, and have proved from Pliny *, thatthe name was also applied to the canal which conductedthe water from the Nile, to what is nowcalled the Birket el Corn ; and in order to showthe impossibility of the return of the waters fromthe lake itself to the higher level of the Nile, andthat Herodotus did not judge from his own observation,but mistook the facts detailed to him byhis Egyptian informants, who had in view thecanal alone, when speaking of the return of thewater to the river, I shall repeat what I beforeremarked on this subject. tHerodotus's account of the water returning fromthe lake to the Nile, on the subsiding of the inundation,is totally inapplicable to the lake Moeris,the level of its surface being about 100, or 120feet lower than the bank of the Nile at Benisooef ;which, making every allowance for the rise of thebed of the river, and the proportionate elevationof its banks, could never have been on a level, evenin Herodotus's time, with the lake Moeris ; and consequentlyno return of the water could have takenplace from the lake to the Nile. From the canal,however, it could, as at the present day ; and thefish caught at the mouth of this and other canals,at that season, still afford a considerable revenue tothe government, and are farmed by certain villageson the banks. That the level of the lakeMoeris must be now about the same as formerly, isPlin. xxxvi. 12. " Ibi fuit Moeridis laches, hoc est fossa grandis."t Egypt and Thebes, p. 338,VOL. in. F66 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. VIII.evident from our finding ruins of baths on itsborders ; and the accidental and temporary rise ofits waters, which happened some years since, wasmerely owing to the bursting of the great dyke atTomeeh. As to the Bathe of the great geographerDanville, it is quite Utopian."The quantity offish now caught in the lake Moerisitself, or Birket el Corn, is very great, and suppliesthe markets of the Fyoom with abundance andvariety of the finest kind — superior, certainly, inflavour to those of the Nile, though of the samespecies ; but it is probable that the saline qualityof the water may effect the slight change observablein the lake fish. I do not believe it producesany species, or even varieties, differing from thoseof the Nile, from whence, doubtless, it derived itsoriginal stock ; and the twenty two kinds it produced,according to the information of Diodorus *,do not appear to have been at any time considereddifferent from those of the parent stream.Like that of the canals, the lake fishing is farmedby the government to some rich inhabitants of thedistrict t, who are usually Copt Christians ; and thefish, as in former times, are either taken fresh tothe market, or are dried and salted, as Diodorus observesin his notice of the lake ; though the numberof persons t engaged in this occupation bears a verysmall proportion to that of former times.Diod. i. 52. Vide Strabo, lib. xvii. p. 5G6., on the Nile fish.'^ The small village of" Agate, at Thebes, pays annually 1500 piastres,about 21/., to government for the fish of its canal.t Diod. loc. cit. " They say that 22 kinds of fish are found in it(the lake Moeris), and so large a number is caught, that the numerousalters who are constantly employed there, can with difficulty getthrough the work imposed upon them."CHAP. Vii. REVENUE FROM THE FISHERIES. 6?This custom of farming the fisheries was probablyderived by the Arab government from theirpredecessors ; it does not, however, seem to havebeen adopted by them at their first occupation ofthe country, but was introduced subsequently, sincethe Arab historian El Maris mentions it as a newidea. The method employed was doubtless similarto that of ancient times, which continues to thepresent day ; and the passage is so curious, that Ishall introduce it from the translation given bythe learned M. Silvester de Say.*Quant a la peche, c'est-audire, aux aliens queDieu procure aux hommes par la peche du fleuve,le premier administrator qui en a fait un objetde revenu pour le fisc, c'est encore Ebn-Modabbir:il tablet un bureau express pour cela ; mais nevoulant pas donner a ce bureau la denominationde bureau des peaches, qui lui paroissoit ignoble, illecomma le bureau pour la plantation des pieux,et Establishment des filets. Cette nouvelle inventionfiscal se soutint. On deputoit pour la receivede ce droit un inspecteur, des notices, et uncatch, en divers cantons de I'Egypte, tels que lecanal alexandria, le lac alexandria, celui deNestarawa, Damietta, les cataracts d'Oswan, etplusieurs autres etangs et lacs. Ces commissairespatient pour leur mission, au moment ou le Nilcoinmen9oit a decroitre, elles eaux a se retirer de-dessusles terres quelle avoient couvertes, pourrentrer dans le lit du fleuve. Anterieurement acela, on avoit ferme les ouvertures pratique dansIn his Relation clc I'Egypte of Abd-al-latif, p. 283. note.F 268 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. VIII.les chaussees, et les arches des ponts, au momentou le Nil avoit cesse de croire, afin d'empecherles eaux de se retirer dans le fleuve, et de lesforcer a s'accumuler du cote voisin des terres.Alors on plait des filets, et on laissoit Peaiiprendre son coheirs ; le poisson, entrain par lecourant de I'eau, arrivoit aiix filets, qui Pem-pechoient dealer plus loin, et de redescendre avecI'eau ; il s'amassoit done dans les filets. On lethroat ensuite a terre, on le deposit sur des tapis,on le saloit, et on le detroit dans des vases ; et,lorsqu*il etoit sufficient fait, on le vendor sous lenom de salaisons, et de sir. On ne preparoit ainsique le poisson qui etoit de la taille du doit et au-dessus.Cette meme espece, quand elle est franche,se nomme alsatia ; on la mange rote et frite."The great consumption of fish in ancient Egyptis not only attested by Herodotus and other writers,but by the sculptures of the upper and lowercountry ; and the Bible makes allusion to the*' fishers"* of the Nile, " the sluices and ponds "twhere they were preserved, and the regret withwhich the Israelites remembered the fish they ateso "freely" in Egypt. tThe chase of the hippopotamus §, was a favouriteamusement of the sportsman, in those parts of theupper country where it was found. It was probablyalways rare in Lower Egypt II, though Pliny ^F saysIsaiah, xix, 8. f Ibid. xix. 10.\ Exod. xi. 5. " We remember the fish which we did eat in Egyptfreely."§ In Arabia it has the same name, Fa as el bahr, " river horse "(mare) ; and in the language of Ethiopia, Yasimt.[| It is not met with in Upper Egypt, or, indeed, on this side thesecond cataract, at the present day. If Pliny, xxviii. 8.CHAP. VIII. THE HIPPOPOTAMUS. 69it abounded in the Spite nome : but in UpperEthiopia this amphibious animal was common in theNile, as at the present day. Though not sohostile to man as the voracious crocodile, it waslooked upon as an enemy, which they willinglydestroyed, since the ravages it committed at nightin the fields occasioned heavy losses to the farmer * ;and an additional inducement to kill it was thevalue attached to its hide, of which they madeshields, whips t, javelins t, and helmets. § To thetwo former purposes it is still applied ; and as Plinyobserves, it retains its hardness perfectly, if preservedfrom moisture.The whips are known by the name of corbag(corbaj), and are in very general use in Egypt andEthiopia, for riding the dromedary, or for chastisingthe delinquent peasants ; and it is probablethat it was also applied to the latter purpose by theancient Egyptians, since we find an attendant followingthe steward of an estate, with this implementof punishment in his hand. ||The mode of attacking and securing the hippopotamusappears, from the sculptures of Thebes,to have been very similar to that now adoptedabout Senna ; where, like the ancient Egyptians,Pliny and Diodorus are correct in saying " it feeds on the cornfields: " but the modern hippopotamus has not retained the dexterity orthe cunning of his ancestors, in walking backwards to deceive his pursuers; mentioned by Plin. viii. 25. : —^tas tarentum, pejor avis, tulip(thos) requires, mox naturesProgeniem vitiosiorem."Hor. iii. Od. vi. 38.+ Plin. viii. 25. " Terrors ad scuta galeasque impenetrability."i Herod, ii. 71. § Vide Diod. i. 35. || Wood-cut, No. 34G.F 370 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. VIII.No. 346. Attendant carrying a whip, or corbdg. Thebes-theyprefer pleasing it in the river, to an openattack on shore : and the modern Ethiopians arecontented to frighten it from the corn-fields by thesolid of drums, and other noisy instruments.I have already had occasion* to explain the methodof taking this animal : it was entangled by arunning noose, at the extremity a long line woundupon a reel, at the same time that it was struck bythe spear of the chasseur. '* This weapon consistedof a broad flat blade, furnished with a deep tooth orbarb at the side, having a strong rope of considerablelength attached to its upper end, and runningover the notched summit of a wooden shaft, whichwas inserted into the head or blade, like a commonjavelin. It was thrown in the same manner, buton striking, the shaft fell, and the iron head aloneremained in the body of the animal, which, onreceiving a wound, plunged into deep water, therope having been immediately let out. Whenfatigued by exertion, the hippopotamus was draggedto the boat, from which it again plunged, and theEgypt and Thebes, p. 226.7>,i,ifia,li- :■'>'•'<-vfe/ir-HASE of tJift HI V I-'O POT A M r ,S .i>- Ohj^seur IS accompanied tjlns till Ji en , dTioittejicjl.«ti' itiKWs <«. noose, over tht wi)und.vjl drnmoil.CHAP. VIII. HIPPOPOTAMUS CHASE. 7'!same was repeated till it became perfectly exhausted; frequently receiving additional wounds,and being entangled by other nooses, which, theattendants held in readiness, as it was broughtwithin their reach."Several representations of this subject have beenfound at Thebes, but the destructive thoughtlessnessof the peasants, or the appropriating inclinations oftravellers have, unfortunately, destroyed them, andfew vestiges now remain beyond the figure of theman, his spear, and a few minor details. I should,therefore, have been unable to introduce a copy ofthis interesting subject, had not the kindness ofMr. Humphreys, who was fortunate enough toobtain a sketch of one of them, furnished me withit for the accompanying plate.*The chasseur is here in the act of throwing thespear at the hippopotamus, which he has alreadywounded with three other blades, indicated bythe ropes he holds in his left hand ; and havingpulled the animal towards the surface of thewater, an attendant endeavours to throw a nooseover its head, as he strikes it for the fourthtime. Behind him is his son, holding a freshspear in readiness : and in order that there shouldbe no question about the ropes belonging to theblades, the fourth is seen to extend from his handto the shaft of the spear he is throwing. Thepupa, heron, and other birds are frightened fromthe rushes as the boat approaches ; and the fish,with a young hippopotamus, seen at the bottom ofPlate 15.F d.72 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. VIII.the water are intended to show the communicationof the fenny lake with the Nile.The mode of attacking the hippopotamus is thusdescribed by Diodorus* : — " It is chased," says thehistorian, " by many persons, each armed withiron javelins. As soon as it makes its appearanceat the surface of the water, they surround it withboats, and closing in on all sides they wound itwith blades, furnished with iron barbs, and havinghempen ropes fastened to them, in order that,when wounded, it may be let out, until its strengthfails it from loss of blood."The spear they used on these occasions, was evidentlyof a different construction from that intendedfor ordinary purposes, and was furnished, as Diodorusobserves, with a rope for letting out thewounded animal, in the same manner as practisedby the modern Ethiopians : there was sometimesNo. 3)7. Spear used in the chase of the hippopotamus, lieges.Diod. i. 35.CHAP. VIII. ABODES OF ANIMALS CHANGED. J3another line fastened to the shaft, and passing overa notch at its upper end j which was probably intendedto give the weapon a greater impetus, aswell as to retain the shaft when it left the blade.The rope attached to the blade was wound upona reel, generally carried by some of the attendants.It was of very simple construction, consisting of ahalf ring of metal, by which it was held, and a barturning in it, on which the line or string was wound.No. 348. A reel held by an attendant. £cni Hassan.Besides the fish cured, or sent to market for thetable, a very great quantity was set apart expresslyfor feeding the sacred animals and birds, — as thecats, crocodiles, ibises, and others; and it is probablethat some of the large reservoirs, attached to thetemples, were used as well for preserves or piscifics^where the fish were kept, as to afford a supply ofwater for the necessary ablutions of the devout,and for various purposes connected with religion.With regard to the number of fish in the riverof Egypt, and the many species said to have beenknown there, it may be conjectured that some formerlycommon to the lower parts of the Nile are no71 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CIIAI'. VIII.longer met with to the north of the first and secondcataracts : or varieties of the same species may havebeen enumerated in the twenty-two mentioned byDiodorus ; and we even find that the Ethiopianssometimes brought fish, perhaps of a rare kindunknown in Egypt, as part of their tribute tothe Egyptians.That some animals, both aquatic and terrestrial,as well as several botanical productions, once commonin Egypt, are now confined to the latitudes ofEthiopia, is well known ; the crocodile, formerlyan inhabitant of Lower Egypt and the Delta*,now limits the extent of its visits northward, to thedistricts about Manfaloot ; and the hippopotamusis no longer seen in Lower Ethiopia. And if onewas known, some years ago, to wander downwardsinto Nubia, below the second cataract, and anothereven as far as Damietta, these were accidental occurrences,which occasioned as much astonishmentto the people who witnessed their unexpected visit,as to the bewildered animals themselves.As usual on such occasions, their unintentionalintrusion, where they could not be objects of terror,was punished with a readiness, which the samepersons would not have displayed in places wherethey are really obnoxious ; and every Turk, orpeasant, who could procure a weapon, was fired withthe proud desire of destroying the intruder, andshowed the same chivalrous feeling, usually calledSeneca, Nat. QvtEst. iv. 2., says, " at the Heracleotic mouth of theNile, which is the largest, a battle occurred between the cloli)hius ofthe sea and the crocodiles of the river, the former being victorious ! "CHAP. VIII. THE CROCODILE AND Centuries. 75forth against an imprudent porpoise, who has venturedto pass the bridges of the English capital.But the hippopotamus once Heed in Lower Egypt,and the city of Papremis, in the Delta, worshippedit as a sacred animal, worthy of the Egyptian Mars.Neither the hippopotamus nor the crocodileappear to have been eaten by the ancient Egyptians.Pliny indeed mentions the medicinal propertiesof both of them* ; and Plutarch affirms t thatthe people of Apollinopolis used to eat the crocodile; this, however, was not a general custom, butmerely upon a certain occasion connected withreligious superstition, and intended to show theirabhorrence of Typhon the evil genius, of whom itwas an emblem. *' They have likewise," he continues," a solemn hunt of this animal upon a particularday, set apart for the purpose, at whichtime they kill as many of them as they can, andafterwards throw their dead bodies before thetemple of their god, assigning this reason for theirpractice, that it was in the shape of a crocodileTyphon eluded the pursuit of Ores."This is one of many instances of the differentfeelings with which the sacred animals were regardedin various parts of Egypt : and as herodotusobserves, "some of the Egyptians considerthe crocodile sacred, while others make war uponit ; and those who live about Thebes and theLake Mceris (in the Arsinoite nome) hold it ingreat veneration."Plan. xxviii. B. t Pint, dc Kid. s. 50.t Herod, ii. 09.76 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. VIII.In some places it was treated with the mostmarked respect, and kept at a considerable expense ;it was fed and attended with the most scrupulouscare ; geese, fish, and various meats were dressedpurposely for it ; they ornamented its head withear-rings, and its feet with bracelets and necklacesof gold or artificial stones * ; it was rendered perfectlytame by kind treatment ; and after death thebody was embalmed in a most sumptuous manner.This was particularly the case in the Theban,Bite, and Arsinoite nomes ; and at a place nowcalled Maabdeh, opposite the modern town ofManfaloot, are extensive grottoes, cut far into thelimestone mountain, where numerous crocodilemummies have been found, perfectly preserved,and evidently embalmed with great care.The people of ApoUinopolis, Tentyris, ,and other places, on the contrary, heldthis animal in abhorrence, and lost no opportunityof destroying it ; and the Tentyrites were so expert,from long habit, in catching, and even in engaging,this powerful animal in its native element, that theywere known to follow it into the Nile, and bring it byforce to the shore. Pliny and other ancient authorsmention the wonderful feats performed by themnot only in their own country, but in the presenceof the Roman people : and Strabott says that onthe occasion of some crocodiles being exhibitedat Rome, the Tentyrites who had followed them,fully confirmed the truth of the report of theirpower over those animals ; for, having put themHerod, ii. 69. f Strabo, xvii. p. 360., ed. Cas.CHAP. VIII. NATURE OF THE CROCODILE. 77into a spacious tank of water, with a shelvingbank artificially constructed at one side, the menboldly entered the water, and entangling them in anet, dragged them to the bank, and back again intothe water, in the presence of numerous spectators.Pliny observes, " that though the Tentyrites aresmall men, they have the greatest presence of mindin their encounters with the crocodile, which is ananimal most dangerous to those who fear it, buttimid when pursued. They even dare to follow itsingly, and swimming after it in the river springupon its back, and thrust a bar into its open mouth,which, being held at the two extremities, serves asabit, and enables them to force it to the shore."Pliny even goes so far as to state that, frighteningthem with the voice alone, they compelled them torender the bodies they had devoured to the (disappointed)embalmers*; but as crocodiles show themselvesmuch greater epicures in their mode of eating,and tear their food to pieces before they swallow it,we may take the liberty of suggesting the probabilitythat, in these cases, the animal abandoned thebody on their approach : its usual habit being tobring it to the shore, and there to tear it up, theclothes having been stripped off while in the water.Seneca t accounts for the power possessed by theTentyrites over the crocodile from their intrepidity,and in accordance with Pliny, and with modern experience,he states it to be " timid before the bold,Plin. (viii. 25.) " Voce etiam sola tcrritos, count elsmere re-celiacorpora ad sepulture", and xxviii 3.f Seneca, Nat. Quiet. iv. 2.78 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. VIII.and most ready to attack those who fear it : theTentyrites excelling neither in their nature nor constitution,but in their fearless contempt of it ; forthey follow, and by means of a snare, stop it in itsflight; nor are any killed except those who arewanting in presence of mind."The crocodile is in fact," as I have elsewhereremarked*, *' a timid animal, flying on the approachof man, and generally speaking, only venturing toattack its prey on a sudden ; for which reason weseldom or never hear of persons devoured by it,unless incautiously standing at the bank of theriver, where its approach is concealed by the water;and where, by the immense power of its tail, it isenabled to throw down and overcome the strongestman, who, being carried instantaneously to thebottom of the river, has neither the time nor themeans to resist.Pliny, like other authors t, has been led into acommon error, that the sight of the crocodile is defectiveunder water, which a moment's consideration,without the necessity of pe^'^owa/ experience,should have corrected ; for it is at least reasonableto suppose that an animal, living chiefly on fish,should, in order to secure its prey, be gifted withan equal power of sight ; and that offish cannot beconsidered defective: but Herodotus, the. fatherof history, and of these errors, affirms that it istotally ' blind under water.*Egypt and Thebes, p. 409.f Ai-istot. Hist. An. ii. 10. " They sec imperfectly in the water."\ Herod, ii. 68.CHAP. Vir. CHASE OF THE CROCODILE. 79*' Egypt produces two varieties of this animal*,distinguished by the number and position of thescales on the neck. One has the front row composedof six scales, behind which is a cluster of four largecentral scales in two lines, with two smaller ones oneach side of the uppermost of these lines ; the otherhas in the front row four only, and the dispositionof the other eight is thus : four central scales in twolines, with one smaller one on each side of theupper line, and two behind the second and lowerline. The first row of the body consists of sixscales, the former variety having only four. Theother scales of the body are nearly alike in both.They do not exceed eighteen or nineteen feet,though travellers have mentioned some of stupendoussize."Herodotus enters into a detail of the habits ofthe crocodile, and relates the frequently repeatedstory of the trochilust entering the animal's mouth,during its sleep on the sand banks of the Nile, andrelieving it of the leeches which adhere to its throat.The truth of this assertion is seriously impugned,when we recollect that leeches do not abound inthe Nile ; and the polite understanding supposed toexist, between the crocodile and the bird, becomesmore improbable, when we examine the mannerin which the throat of the animal is formed ;for having no tongue, nature has given it themeans of closing it entirely, except when in theEgypt ami TJicbcs, p. 223. note. Coif. Plin. xxviii. 8.t licrod. ii. (iH. Plin. viii. 25.80 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. VIII.act of swallowing j and during sleep, the throat isconstantly shut, though the mouth is open.The hostile intrusion of the ichneumon, relatedby other writers*, is equally destitute of probability.That birds living on flies frequently flit about thecrocodile, while lying on the sand, we can readilybelieve ; and this circumstance as well as the presenceof a small running bird (a species of charmswhich is often seen on the same bank, andwhich, loudly chirping on the approach of man maybesupposed to warn the crocodile of danger, verypossibly led to the fable of those visits of thetrochilus t, and the friendly services it rendered thesleeping crocodile.Its eggs, as Herodotus and Pliny observe, aresmall, considering the size which it afterwards attains,and are deposited by the female in the sand,or in the light loose earth of the river side ; and itsconstant desire to enjoy the fresh air, during thesummer, is shown by its lying for a length of timeasleep on the sand banks, with its open mouth turnedto the prevailing wind.They had many different modes of catchingit," says Herodotus § ; *' that most worthy of noticeis as follows : — They fasten a piece of pork to ahook, and throw it into the middle of the stream,as a bait; then, standing near the water's edge, theybeat a young pig, and the crocodile, being enticedto the spot by its cries, finds the bait on its way,and swallowing it is caught by the hook. TheyPlin. viii. 25. f Called sicsac in ArabicX The name Trochilus signifies running. <) Herod, ii. 70.CH. VIII. WAR OFTHE Orbits AND Centuries. 81then pull it ashore, and the first step is to cover itseyes with mud, and thus being deprived of sight itis unable to offer an effectual resistance." Wealso find from the sculptures that they attacked thecrocodile with a spear, transfixing it as it passedbeneath the boat in shallow water.The hatred borne by some of the Egyptiansagainst the crocodile frequently gave rise toserious disputes, and the inhabitants of Tentyris,who had killed and eaten the sacred animal ofOmbos, were attacked with all the fury of religiousfeud. On one occasion, after many had beenwounded on both sides, and the Tenty rites wereworsted and compelled to fly, the Orbits secureda prisoner of the opposing party, and if we maybelieve Juvenal*, satiated their revenge by eatinghis body. The statement, however, is questionable,nor is it probable even in that depraved age, whenEgypt had passed under the dominion of the Romans,that such a scene actually occurred ; andgreat licence is always allowed to poets, and stillmore is taken by the severity of satire.Juv. Sat. XV. 33. 80.Box in the form of a fish with turning lid, and handle in the shape of a fox.Mr. Salt's Collection.VOL. III.Vignette H. Modem Boats of the Nile. On the opposite bank is a whirlwind of sand.CHAP. IX.Arts and Manufactures. — Glass. — Linen. — Dyeing. — Rojie-making. — The Papyrus. — Leather-cutters. — Potters. —Cabinet-makers and Carpenters. — Makers of Chariots andCoffins. — Coopers. — Boats and War Galleys. — Tin andother Metals. — Gold Mines. — Gold Working and Gilding.Of the progress of the ancient Egyptians in manyuseful branches of art, we have unquestionableproofs in the monuments that remain, and fromthe evidence of ancient writers. The sculpturesinform us that many inventions were known tothem at the early periods when most other nationswere still in their infancy, which, though generallyascribed to a much later epoch, are, from thefacility we now have of fixing the chronology ofEgyptian monuments, ascertained to be coevalwith the Exodus, or the bondage of the Israelites.CHAP. IX. DOWNFAL OF ART. 83The scientific skill they possessed in architecture,is always a matter of surprise to the traveller whobeholds the stupendous monuments of Egypt ;whose solid masonry would have defied the ravagesof time, and have remained unimpaired tothe present day, had not the destructive hand ofman been employed against them. The invasionof Cambyses, and the subsequent wars with thePersians ; the three years' siege of Thebes, byPtolemy Lathy r us, which laid several of her buildingsin ruins, and so completely reduced thatancient capital, that it was no longer worthy to beconsidered an Egyptian city ; the inveteracy of theChristians against their Pagan predecessors, andthe abhorrence of the Moslems for the monumentsof the idolatrous infidels ; and, lastly, the positionof the temples, which presented themselves to themason as a convenient quarry, supplying, at littlelabour and expense, abundance of stones for theerection of new edifices, were the baneful causesof the downfal of the Egyptian monuments ; but,though great portions of the finest buildings weredestroyed, sufficient remains to attest their formergrandeur, and to proclaim the wonderful skill andmechanical knowledge of their founders.At the period of the Persian invasion, Egyptwas looked upon as the great school of science,and the repository of all kinds of learning; butthe arts had fallen from the degree of excellenceto which they attained, under the Augustan ageof the 18th dynasty, and though luxury and privatewealth increased, taste in scripture and archie284 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.lecture had long since been on the decline, andminute and highly finished details were substitutedfor the simple and dignified forms of an earlierperiod. The arts, however, continued to flourishunder the succeeding dynasties, and in the reignsof Psamaticus and Amasis, the encouragementgiven to architecture, sculpture, and painting,seemed to promise an improvement, if not therevival, of taste, and arrested for a time theirdownfal : but an unexpected event was destinedto bring about their sudden decadence, and thePersian conquest dealt a blow, from which theyvainly strove to recover in the succeeding reigns ofthe Macedonian dynasty; for not only were thefinest monuments destroyed or mutilated, statues*,works of art, and all the wealth t of the countrycarried off to Persia, but the artists themselves werecompelled to leave their homes to follow the conquerorsto their capital, and to commemorate thevictories obtained over Egypt, by the authors oftheir own captivity and misfortunes. Thus deprivedof the finest models, humbled by the lengthenedoccupation of the country, and losing the only personscapable of directing taste, or encouraging art,Egypt, already beginning to sink, vainly endeavouredto struggle with the overwhelming currentof events ; and while Persia was benefited, Egyptianart received its death blow from the invasionof Cambyses.Ptolemy Euergetes is said to have brought back 2o00 statues,when he invaded the Persian dominions, which had been taken fromEgypt by Cambyses.■f Conf. Diodor. i. 46. " The silver and gold, the abundance of ivoryand precious stones, carried away by the Persians," and i. 49.CHAP. IX. STYLE OF THEIR MONUMENTS. 85The Egyptians had long been renowned formathematical science ; but it was not till the powerand wealth of the country were at their zenith,that full scope was given for its display in thegrand style of public monuments ; a fact, sufficientlyindicated by their increase of scale andvastness of size at that period; the buildings of oldentime being generally of much smaller dimensionsthan those of the advanced age of the 18th dynasty.I particularly allude to the temples and to the colossalstatues erected at the latter epoch, which farexceed in their scale, and the size of the blocksthemselves, the ordinary monuments of an earlierera, as may be observed in the increased proportionsof the grand hall of Karnak, added by Remesesthe Great, and the dimensions of the sitting colossiof Amunoph, in the plain of Thebes ; or that ofRemeses, at the Memnonium, which weighed about886 tons, and was brought over land from thequarries at the cataracts of Syene, a distance ofmore than 120 miles.*Many obelisks, cacti of a single block of granite,had already been hewn, and transported from thesame quarries, as early at least as the reign ofOsirtasen T., whom I suppose to have been the.contemporary of Joseph ; and the same mechanicalskill had already existed even beforethat period, as is shown from the construction ofthose wonderful monuments the pyramids, nearMemphis, which in the size of the blocks, andI shall have occasion to notice this hereafter.G 38() THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.their style of building, evince a degree of architecturalknowledge, perhaps inferior to none possessedat a subsequent epoch. But it was notgenerally called forth in early times ; they werethen contented with monuments of an inferiorscale, and their ordinary buildings were not of thesame gigantic dimensions. A grand work was thenseldom undertaken without an adequate motive,and the knowledge they possessed was reservedfor particular and extraordinary occasions : butwhen riches and the love of show increased, theyextended the size of their temples, and constantpractice having made the means familiar to them,artisans and engineers vied with each other inhewing and transporting colossal statues, monoliths,and other ponderous monuments, whichserved for ornament, and the display of theirmechanical knowledge.It was not in this branch of science alone thatthe Egyptians excelled: the wonderful skill theyevinced in sculpturing or engraving hard stones isstill more surprising ; and we wonder at the meansemployed for cutting hieroglyphics, frequently, tothe depth of more than two inches, on basalt, onsyenite, and other stones of the hardest quality.Nor were they deficient in taste, — a taste toonot acquired by imitating approved models, butclaiming for itself the praise of originality, anduniversally allowed to have been the parent ofmuch that was afterwards perfected, with suchwonderful success, by the most highly gifted ofnations, the ancient Greeks : and no one can lookCHAP. IX. PRESCRIBED RULES OF ART. 87upon the elegant forms of many of the Egyptianvases, the ornamental designs of their architecture,or the furniture of their rooms, without concedingto them due praise on this point, and admitting,that however whimsical some of the figures may bein sacred subjects, they often showed considerabletaste, where the regulations of the priesthood andreligious scruples ceased to interfere.In their temples they were obliged to conformto rules established in the early infancy of art,which custom and prejudice had rendered sacred :the ancient style was always looked upon withthe highest veneration, and it is probable that fromthe same feeling of respect, the formulas anddiction of their books of law or religion continuedthe same as in early times ; a custom prevalentamong many people, whatever improvements languageundergoes ; for neither would the TurkishMoslem dare to translate the Arabic Coran, nor theIrene to alter it to his own dialect ; and wemight ourselves object to a Bible written in thestyle of Robertson or Hume.Plato and Synesius both mention the stern regulationswhich forbade their artists to introduceinnovations in religious subjects ; and the moreeffectually to prevent this, " the profession ofartist was not allowed to be exercised by commonor illiterate persons, lest they should attempt anythingcontrary to the laws established, regardingthe figures of the deities."In their household furniture, and the ornamentalobjects used in their dwelling houses, they wereG 488 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.not restricted by any established rules ; here, asI have observed, much taste was displayed, andtheir vases frequently bear so strong a resemblanceto those of Greece, that we might feel disposed toconsider them borrowed from Greek models, didnot their known antiquity forbid such a conclusion ;and many have mistaken the ornamental devices,attached to them, and to other fancy works ofEgyptian art, for the productions of Greek sculptors.Now, that we are acquainted with the datesof the Egyptian monuments, the square border andscrolls, so common on Athenian, Sicilian, Etruscan,and Graeca-Italian vases, are shown to be, from themost remote time, among the ordinary deviceson cups, and the ceilings of tombs, at Thebesand other places ; and the graceful curve * of theEgyptian cornice, which, not confined to architecture,is repeated on vases, and numerous articlesof furniture, was evidently adopted, for the sameornamental purpose, by the Greeks.GLASS, PORCELAIN, AND FALSE STONES.One of the most remarkable inventions of a remoteera, and one with which the Egyptians appearto have been acquainted, at least as early as thereign of the first Osirtasen, upwards of 3500 yearsago, is that of glass-blowing. The process is representedin the paintings of Beni Hassan, execu-Vule vases, woodcut, No. 2i4:, and doorways, woodcuts, Nos. 101,102, and 104.CHAP. IX.INVENTION OF GLASS.ted during the reign of that monarch, and his immediatesuccessors ; and the same is again repeated,in other parts of Egypt, in tombs of various epochs.Part 1.'kitPart 2No. AsiaPart 1. Glass-blowersa. The same.Bent Hassan.Thebes.The glass at the end of the blowpipe b b, is coloured green.a is the fire. d a glass bottle.The form of the bottle and the use of the blowpipeare unequivocally indicated in those subjects ;and the green hue of the fused material, taken fromthe fire at the point of the pipe, cannot fail to showthe intention of the artist. But if the sceptic shouldfeel disposed to withhold his belief on the authorityof a painted representation, and deny that theuse of glass could be proved on such evidence, itmay be well to remind him that images of glazedTHE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IXpottery were common at the same period, that thevitrified substance with ^^•hich they are covered isof the same quality as glass, and that therefore themode of fusing, and the proper proportions of theingredients for making glass, were already knownto them ; and we can positively state, that 200years after, or, about 1500 eg., they made ornamentsof glass ; a bead bearing a king's name wholived at that period, having been found at Thebes,by my friend Captain Henvey, R. N., the specificgravity of which, 25*^ 23', is precisely the same asof crown glass, now manufactured in England.No. 349. a.Figs. 1. 2. Glass bottles represented in the sculptures of Thebes.3. Captain Henvey's glass bead. About the rc.il size.4. The hieroglyphics on the bead, containing the name of a monarch wholived 1500. B. C.Many glass bottles and objects of various formshave been met with in the tombs of Upper and LowerCHAP. IX. EARLY USC OF GLASS. 91Egypt, some unquestionably of very remote antiquity,though not readily ascribed to any fixed epoch,owing to the absence of royal names, indicative oftheir date ; and glass vases, if we may trust tothe representations in the Theban paintings, arefrequently shown to have been used for holdingwine, at least as early as the Exodus, 1490 yearsbefore our era.Till within a few years, prejudice forbade thebelief that the ancients were acquainted with themanufacture of glass, and many persons could notbe persuaded that the Romans used it, though representedin the paintings of Pompeii with the mostunquestionable truth, and a pane of glass and numerousfragments of broken bottles had been discoveredin that excavated city. The fact, however,became established, and these doubts were silenced;still it was questioned whether the invention datedbefore the destruction of that city ; the glass wasmuch condemned as of inferior quality ; and the authorityof Pliny*, previously disbelieved, was nowwelcomed as an old friend, and called forth toprove that glass was a late discovery of some Phoenicianmariners, who having lighted a fire on thesea shore, and supported their cooking utensils onblocks of nitre, were taught by the union of thefused substances the secret of this useful invention.The Roman naturalist had fixed no time for thisevent, and if he spoke of improvements in the art,introduced in the reign of Tiberius, it was presumedPlin. xxxvi. c. 26.92 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.that, though a vitrified substance was known, itsqualities were not properly understood, and thatits discovery only dated about the Augustan age.They even objected that under the first emperors,windows were made of a transparent stone, broughtfrom Spain and other countries, called Lapisspeculations ; and they hence inferred the imperfectknowledge of glass.This stone is now well known under the nameof talc ; it was only used in the houses of therich, in litters, or as an ornament to the bestapartments : other persons being content withlinen, horn, or paper.Such were the feeble arguments brought forwardto disprove the use of glass for vases and for ornamentalpurposes, among the Romans ; but withmuch less reason did they apply to its invention inother countries : and though the Egyptians neverknew the necessity, or rather the annoyance, ofglass windows, under a burning sun, they were wellacquainted with vases of that material ; and theworkmen of Thebes and Memphis, and subsequentlyAlexandria, were famed for the excellentqualities of glass ware they produced, with whichRome continued to be supplied, long after Egyptbecame a province of the empire. Strabo was informedby a dressmaker of Alexandria* that a peculiarearth was found in Egypt, without which itwas impossible to manufacture certain kinds ofglass of a brilliant and valuable quality ; and someStrabo, lib. xvii.CHAP. IX. A PECULIAR KIND OF GLASS. 93vases, presented by an Egyptian priest to theemperor Hadrian*, were considered so curiousand valuable, that they were only used on grandoccasions.Such too was the skill of the Egyptians in themanufacture of glass, and in the mode of stainingit of various hues, that they counterfeited withsuccess the amethyst and other precious stones,and even arrived at an excellence in the art whichtheir successors have been unable to retain, andwhich our European workmen, in spite of theirimprovements in other branches of this manufacture,are still unable to imitate ; for not only do thecolours of some Egyptian opaque glass offer themost varied devices on the exterior, distributedwith the regularity of a studied design, but thesame hue and the same device pass in right linesdirectly through the substance ; so that in whateverpart it is broken, or wherever a section maychance to be made of it, the same appearance, thesame colours, and the same device present themselves,without being found ever to deviate fromthe direction of a straight line, from the externalsurface to the interior.This quality of glass, of which I have seen severalspecimens, has been already noticed by thelearned Winkelmann, who is decidedly of opinionthat ** the ancients carried the art of glass makingto a higher degree of perfection than ourselves,though it may appear a paradox to those who haveViscus in Vita Saturnine, c. 8.94 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.not seen their works in this material"* He describestwo pieces of glass, found at Rome, a fewyears before he wrote, which were of the qualityabove mentioned. t " One of them," he says,though not quite an inch in length, and a thirdof an inch in breadth, exhibits on a dark and variegatedground, a bird resembling a duck, in verybright and varied coloiu's, rather in the mannerof a Chinese painting than a copy of nature. Theoutlines are bold and decided, the colours beautifuland pure, and the effect very pleasing; inconsequenceof the artist having alternately introducedan opaque and a transparent glass. Themost delicate pencil of a miniature painter couldnot have traced with greater sharpness the circleof the eyeball, or the plumage of the neck andwings ; at which part this specimen has beenbroken. But the most surprising thing is, that thereverse exhibits the same bird, in which it is impossibleto discover any difference in the smallestdetails; whence it may be concluded that thefigure of the bird continues through its entirethickness. The picture has a granular appearanceon both sides, and seems to have been formed ofsingle pieces, like mosaic work, united with somuch skill, that the most powerful magnifying glassis unable to discover their junction.'* From the condition of this fragment, it was atfirst difficult to form any idea of the process employedin its manufacture : and we should haveWinkelmann, Orig. de I'Art., lib. i, 2. 19.f Winkelmann, Ibid.CHAP. IX. SPECIMENS OF THIS GLASS. 95remained entirely ignorant of it, had not the fractureshown that filaments of the same colours, ason the surface of the glass, and throughout itswhole diameter, passed from one side to the other ;whence it has been concluded that the picture wascomposed of different cylinders of coloured glass,which being subjected to a proper degree of heat,united by (partial) fusion. I cannot suppose theywould have taken so much trouble, and have beencontented to make a picture only the sixth of aninch thick, while, by employing longer filaments,they might have produced one many inches inthickness, without occupying any additional timein the process ; it is therefore probable this wascut from a larger or thicker piece, and the numberof the pictures taken from the same depended onthe length of the filaments, and the consequentthickness of the original mass.The other specimen, also broken, and aboutthe size of the preceding one, is made in thesame manner. It exhibits ornaments of a green,yellow, and white colour, on a blue ground, whichconsist in volutes, strings of beads, and flowers,ending in pyramidical points. All the details areperfectly distinct and unconfused, and yet so veryminute, that the keenest eye is unable to followthe delicate lines in which the volutes terminate ;the ornaments, however, are all continued, withoutinterruption, through the entire thickness of thepiece."Sometimes, when the specimens were very thin,they applied and cemented them to a small slab of96 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.stone of their own size*, which served as a supportat the back ; and by this means they were enabledto cut them much thinner, and consequently toincrease their number.Two of the most curious specimens I haveseen, of this kind of glass, have been brought toEngland. One is in the possession of my friend,Capt. Henvey, R. N., to whose kindness I am indebtedfor the copy I have given of it, and of thebead before mentioned. The other was found inEgypt by Dr. Hogg.The quality and the distribution of the colours inCaptain Henvey's specimen are strikingly beautiful :the total size is about If,, inch square ; and theground is of an amethyst hue. In the centre isa device consisting of a yellow circle, surroundedby light blue with a bright red border, and on thefour sides shoot forth light blue rays edged withwhite. Around this, which is isolated, runs asquare ornament of bright yellow, divided intodistinct parts, formed by openings in each of thesides, and at the four corners a beautiful deviceprojects, like a leaf, formed of a succession ofminute lines, green, red, and white, the two lastencircling the green nucleus, which meet in acommon point towards the base, and terminate inalmost imperceptible tenuity. The delicacy ofsome of the lines is truly surprising, and not lessthe accuracy with which the patterns are executed;and the brilliancy of the colours is as remarkable• Mr. Rogers has a specimen applied in this manner.CHAP. IX. THIS GLASS, HOW COMPOSED. 97as the harmony maintained in their disposition :an art then much more studiously attended to,and far better understood than at the present day.The secret of making these glass ornaments ismore readily explained from this specimen thanany I have met with. It consists of separatesquares, whose original division is readily discoveredin a bright light, as well as the manner ofadjusting the different parts, and of uniting themin one mass ; and here and there we find that theheat applied to cement the squares has causedthe colours to run between them, in consequenceof partial fusion from too strong a fire. This fact,and the disposition of the separate squares, will bebetter understood from a reference to the plate*,from which too some idea may be obtained of thefineness of the lines composing the devices.Not only were these various parts made atdifferent times, and afterwards united by heat,rendered effective on their surfaces, by means ofa flux applied to them, but each coloured line wasat first separate, and, when adjusted in its properplace, was connected with those around it by thesame process : and these, as Winkelmann veryproperly suggests, were cylinders, or laminae, accordingto the pattern proposed, which passed indirectlines through the substance, or ground, inwhich they were imbedded.Paw, Goguet, and other antiquaries had longago been convinced that glass was known to theVide, plate 17, — Frontispiece.VOL. III. H98 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.Egyptians, as well as the Phoenicians, at a veryremote period, and the immense emeralds mentionedby ancient authors were considered glassimitations of those precious stones ; a conjecturerendered still more plausible by the experienceof modern times, which shows that the most notedjewels of Christian churches are frequently formedof the same materials. Such were the colossalstatue of Serapis*, in the Egyptian labyrinth, ninecubits, or thirteen feet and a half, in height ; anemerald presented by the king of Babylon to anEgyptian Pharaoh t, which was four cubits, or sixfeet, long, and three cubits broad; and an obelisk tin the temple of Jupiter, which was forty cubits,or sixty feet, in height, and four cubits broad,composed of four emeralds. §The opinion of those writers, respecting theearly invention of glass is now fully confirmed ;and whether the first idea originated with thePhoenicians, or their neighbours the Egyptians,we have satisfactory evidence of its use 3300, orperhaps 3500 years ago.Of the different purposes to which glass wasapplied by the ancients, Winkelmann gives a furtheraccount in the same chapter, where he pronounceshis opinion that, ** generally speaking, itwas employed more frequently in ancient than inmodern times ; " and cites, as another proof ofPlin. lib. xxxvii. 5. on the authority of Apion, surnamed Pistont Plin. loc. cit. on the authority of Theophrastus.J Plin. loc. cit. See also Theophrastus on stones, s. 44.^\ To have made them of glass required extraordinary skill.CHAP. IX. FALSE STONES* 99their great skill in its manufacture, the vase preservedin the Palazzo Bartering, at Rome, which,from the manner in which the layers of colour wereunited " had been mistaken for a real sardonyx."It is the same that is now in the British Museum,and known by the name of the Portland vase.*That the Egyptians, at the early period of the18th dynasty, were well acquainted not only withthe manufacture of common glass, for beads andbottles of ordinary quality, but with the art of stainingit of divers colours, is sufficiently proved by thefragments found in the tombs of Thebes ; and soskilful were they in this complicated process, thatthey imitated the most fanciful devices, and succeededin counterfeiting the rich hues, and brilliancyof precious stones, t The green emerald,the purple amethyst, and other expensive gemswere successfully imitated ; a necklace of falsestones could be purchased at a Theban jeweller's,to please the wearer, or deceive a stranger, by theappearance of reality ; and the feelings of envymight be partially allayed, and the love of show begratified by these specious substitutes for real jewels.Pliny states t that the emerald was more easilycounterfeited than any other gem, and considers theSome imitations of it were made by Wedgwood.seneca says that Democritus first showed the method of polishingivory, and of imitating precious stones (Epist. 90.) ; but this was longafter the art was common in Egypt. Vide Plin. (xxxvi. 26.), " Fit etalbum et murrhinum, aut hyacinthus sapphirosque iniitatum (virum;"and Herodot. ii. 69., who calls them XiOiva xi"""^ or melted compositionof stone.X Non est smaragdo alia imitabilior gemma mendacio viri ; " andex crystal tangential smaragdi, ncciue est ulla fnuis vitelucrosior," lib. xxvii. c. 12.II 2100 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.art of imitating precious stones a far more lucrativepiece of deceit than any devised by the ingenuityof man ; Egypt was, as usual, the countrymost noted for its skill in this manufacture *,and Strabott says, " that an earth found there wasthe only kind which would answer for certainrich and variegated compositions." The emeraldsmentioned by Apion and Theophrastus, which,as before observed, are supposed to have been ofglass, might also be cited to show that the art wasknown in a Pharaonic age, if we had not abundantand far more satisfactory proofs from specimensfound in the ruins of Thebes : and we can readilybelieve the assertion of Pliny, that in his time theysucceeded so completely in the imitation as torender it "difficult to distinguish false from realstones." tMany, in the form of beads, have been met withindifferent parts of Egypt, particularly at Thebes;and so far did the Egyptians carry this spirit ofimitation, that even small figures, scarabaeus, andobjects made of ordinary porcelain, were counterfeited,being composed of still cheaper materials,A figure, which was entirely of earthenware, witha glazed exterior, underwent a somewhat morecomplicated process than when cut out of stone, andsimply covered with a vitrified coating ; this lastcould therefore be sold at a low price : it offeredVide the memoir of M. Boudet, " Sur I'Art do la Verrerie, n^ enEgypt," in that valuable work the Description de I'Egypte, vol. ix.p. 213. I cannot agree with M. B. respecting the trees and the waterat the Natron Lakes, p. 239. note c.f Strabo, lib. xvi. p. 521. ed.Cas.X Plin. xxxvii. 12.CHAP. IX. PRINCIPAL USES OF GLASS. 101all the brilliancy of the former, and its weightalone betrayed its inferiority ; by which means,whatever was novel, or pleasing from its externalappearance, was placed within reach of all classes ;or at least the possessor had the satisfaction ofappearing to partake in each fashionable novelty.Such inventions, and successful endeavours toimitate costly ornaments by humbler materials, notonly show the progress of art among the Egyptians,but strongly argue the great advancementthey had made in the customs of civilised life ; sinceit is certain, that until society has arrived at a highdegree of luxury and refinement, artificial wants ofthis nature are not created, and the lower classesdo not yet feel the desire of imitating their wealthiersuperiors, in the adoption of objects dependent ontaste or accidental caprice.Glass bugles and beads were much used by theEgyptians for necklaces, and for a sort of network,with which they covered the wrappersand parsonage of mummies, arranged so as toform, by their varied hues, numerous devices andfigures, in the manner of our bead purses ; andthe ladies sometimes amused themselves by stringingthem for ornamental purposes, as at the presentday.The principal use to which glass was applied bythe Egyptians, (besides the beads and fancy workalready noticed,) was for the manufacture ofbottles, vases, and other utensils * ; wine was freelamps mentioned by Herodotus (ii. 62.), at the festival oflamps at Sais, were probably glass. Vide infra, p. 112.H 3102 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.quietly brought to table in a bottle, or handed toa guest in a cup * of this material, and a body wassometimes buried in a glass coffin, t Occasionallya granite sarcophagus was covered with a coatingof vitrified matter, usually of a deep green colour,which displayed, by its transparency, the sculpturesor hieroglyphic legends engraved upon the stone ; aprocess well understood by the Egyptians, and thesame they employed in many of the blue figures ofpottery and stone, commonly found in their tombs ;the stone, in one case, being covered with a compositioncapable of vitrifying, and then exposed to acertain degree of heat, until properly melted anddiffused over the surface, and, in the other,dipped into a mixture, which was vitrified in thesame manner.Like the Romans, they used glass for mosaicwork, and pieces of various colours were employedin fancy ornaments, in the figures of deities, insacred emblems, and in the different objects forwhich inlaid work was particularly adapted, thequality there used being generally of an opaquekind. In some of these vitrified compositions, thecolours have a brilliancy which is truly surprising;the blues which are given by copper are vivid andbeautifully clear ; and one of the reds, which isprobably derived from minium, has all the intensenessof ross antics with the brightness of theIn Rome the use of glass vases superseded that of gold and silver.Plin. xxxvi. 26. " Usus ad potandum argenti nietalli et auri penult(virum."f Alexander the Great was said to have been buried in a glass coffinat Alexandria.CHAP. IX. PORCELAIN. 103glassy material in which it is found ; thus combiningthe qualities of a rich enamel.Many of the cups discovered at Thebes, presenta tasteful arrangement of varied hue.-!;, and evincethe great skill of the Egyptians in the manufactureof porcelain; and no one can examine similarspecimens without feeling convinced of the greatexperience they possessed in this branch of art.The manner in which the colours are blended andarranged ; the minuteness of the lines, frequentlytapering off to an almost imperceptible fineness ;and the varied directions of tortuous curves, traversingthe substance, but strictly conforming tothe pattern designed by the artist, display no ordinaryskill, and show that they were perfect mastersof the means employed to produce the effectproposed.The Egyptian porcelain should perhaps be denominatedglass-porcelain, as partaking of the qualityof the two, and not being altogether unlike the poreinvented by the celebrated Reaumur ;who discovered, during his curious experimentson different qualities of porcelain, the method ofconverting glass into a substance very similar tochinaware.The ground of Egyptian porcelain is generallyof one homogeneous quality and hue, either blue orgreen, traversed in every direction lines or devicesof other colours — red, white, yellow, black, lightor dark blue, and green, or whatever the artistchose to introduce ; and these are not alwaysconfined to the surface, but frequently penetrateH 4104 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.considerably into the ground, sometimes havingpassed half, at others entirely through, the fusedsubstance ; in which respect they differ from theporcelain of China, where the flowers or patternsare applied to the surface, and perhaps justify theuse of the term glass-porcelain, which I haveadopted. In some instances, the yellows were puton after the other colours, upon the surface of thevase, which was then again subjected to a properdegree of heat ; and after this, the handles, therim, and the base, were added, and fixed by arepetition of the same process. It was not withoutconsiderable risk that these additions weremade, and many vases were broken during theoperation ; to which Martial alludes, in an epigramon the glass cups of the Egyptians.*That the Egyptians possessed considerable knowledgeof chemistry and the use of metallic oxides,is evident from the nature of the colours appliedto their glass and porcelain ; and they were evenacquainted with the influence of acids upon colour,being able, in the process of dyeing or stainingcloth, to bring about certain changes in the hues t,by the same process adopted in our own cottonworks, as I shall show in describing the manufacturesof the Egyptians.It is evident that the art of cutting glass wasknown to the Egyptians at the most remoteMartial, Epic. lib. xiv. 115. Calicoes vitrei : —Auspices ingenium Nile, quibus adhere pluralDum cepit, ah, quoties perdidit auctor opus."t Plin. XXXV. 11.CHAP. IX. CUTTING OF GLASS AND STONES. 105periods, hieroglyphics and various devices beingengraved upon vases and beads, made in the timeof the 18th dynasty ; and some glass, particularlythat which bears figures or ornaments inrelief, was cast in a mould. Some have supposedthat the method of cutting glass was unknown tothe ancients, and have limited the period of itsinvention to the commencement of the seventeenthcentury of our era, when Gaspar Lehmann, atPrague, first succeeded in it, and obtained a patentfrom the emperor Rudolph II. ; but we may inferfrom the authority of Pliny, that glass-cutting wasknown to the ancients, and that the diamond wasused for the purpose as at the present day, even ifthey were ignorant of the art of cutting this stonewith its own dust. ** Diamonds," says that author *,are eagerly sought by lapidaries, who set themin iron handles, for they have the power of penetratingany thing, however hard it may be." Healso states that emeralds and other hard stones wereengraved, though in early times it was " consideredwrong to violate gems with any figuresor devices t j" and the diamond was found capableof cutting those of the hardest quality, " for allgems," he observes, " may be engraved by thediamond." tIt is difficult to decide upon the precise methodPlin. xxxvii. 4. " Expetiintur (adamantine crusta;) a sculptor's,ferrous includuntur, nulla non durham ex facile cervantes."•j- Plin. xxxvii. Proem, and xxxiii. 1. He thinks the stone of Polycrates'ring was a sardonyx, xxxvii. c. 1.% Plin. xxxvii. 13. " Verum omnes (gemmae) adamant (scalpspossunt)."loci THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.adopted by the Egyptians for cutting glass andhard stones ; but if nothing remains to show theprocess they employed, there is sufficient evidenceof its effect ; and their early intercourse with Indiamay have led them to the knowledge of thediamond, and of its great utility in engravingthose materials. It is also probable that emerypowder, as I shall hereafter have occasion to observe,and the lapidary's wheel were used in Egypt;and there is little doubt that the Israelites learntthe art of cutting and engraving stones in thatcountry.*Some glass bottles were enclosed in wickerwork, very nearly resembling what is now calledby the Egyptians a damage : they were generallyof considerable size, holding from one to two gallonsof fluid; and some of a smaller size, from six to nineinches in height, were protected by a coveringmade of the stalks of the papyrus or cyperus rush,like the modern bottles containing Florence oil X :others again appear to have been partly cased inleather, sewed over them, much in the same manneras some now made for carrying liquids on ajourney. §Among the many bottles found in the tombsof Thebes, none have excited greater curiosityand surprise, than those of Chinese manufacture.The stones engraved by the Israelites were the " sardius, topaz,and carbuncle; the emerald, sapphire, and diamond; the figure, agate,and amethyst ; the beryl, onyx, and jasper." Exod. xxviii. 17, IS, 19, 20.and xxxix. 6.t Wood-cut, 3.50. Jig. 2. X Wood-cut, 350. /?g. 3.§ Wood-cut, 350. fg.l.CHAP. IX.CHINESE BOTTLES.No. 350. Fig. 1, has apparently leather sewed over the glass.2, glass damage enclosed in wicker work.3, glass bottle covered with papyrus rush, like the Florence oil flasks. Inthe possession of S. Rogers, Esq.4, a piece of cloth with a border 01 a blue colour. In my possession.presenting inscriptions in that language. Theaccidental discovery of a single bottle of thiskind would naturally pass unheeded, and if wefelt surprised that it should be deposited in anEgyptian sepulchre, conjecture would reasonablysuggest that an accidental visiter in later timesmight have dropped it there, while searching forancient treasures of a more valuable kind. Butthis explanation ceases to be admissible, when wefind the same have been discovered in variousTheban tombs. I myself have seen several, twoof which I brought to England* ; another isdescribed by the learned Professor Rosellinit,and found by him "in a previously, unopenedOne is in the British Museum, the other in my possession,f In his extensive work on the Egyptian monuments, part 2. vol. ii.p. 3.37.THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. IX.tomb, of uncertain date, which," he refers, " fromthe style of the sculptures, to a Pharaonicperiod, not much later than the 18th dynasty ; "a fourth is in the museum at Jersey ; anotherwas purchased by Lord Prude, at Coptos, andis now in the museum at Alnwick Castle ; twoothers are in the possession of Mrs. Bowen ; andanother belongs to Mr. W. Hamilton. They areabout two inches in height : one side presents aflower, and the other an inscription, containing,according to the valuable authority of Mr. Davis,/Chinese bottles found in the Egyptian tombs.Fig. 1, in the Museum of Alnwick Castle.2, brought by me from Thebes.3, belonging to Mr. W. Hamilton.4, in my possession. From Thebes.CHAP. IX. ENAMELLING. 109(in three out of the eight,) the following legend" The flower opens, and lo I another year."The quality of these bottles is very inferior, andthey appear to have been made before the manufactureof porcelain had attained the same degreeof perfection in China as in after times ; they wereprobably brought to Egypt, through India, withwhich country I believe the Egyptians to havetraded at a very remote period, and contained someprecious ingredient, whose value may be inferredfrom the size of the vase. It cannot be supposedthat the Egyptians, who manufactured porcelain offar better quality, would have sought or importedthese as articles of value ; we can therefore onlysuppose that they were prized for their contents :and after they were exhausted, the valueless bottlewas applied to the ordinary purpose of holding theKohl or Collyrium, used by women for stainingtheir eyelids.It has been questioned, if the Egyptians understoodthe art of enamelling upon gold or silver,though, even in the absence of further evidence,we might infer it from an expression of Pliny t,who says : " The Egyptians paint their silvervases, representing Anubis upon them, the silverbeing painted and not engraved." Small goldfigures are frequently found with ornamentedwings, and bodies, whose feathers, faces, or othercoloured parts are composed of a vitrified comeam happy to find that Mr. Davis is preparing an account of theseinteresting curiosities.\ Plin. xxxiii. 9.110 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.position, let into the metal ; some again appear tohave been really enamelled ; and it is probable thatthe early specimens of encaustum were made bytooling the devices to a certain depth on bronze,and pouring a vitrified composition into the hollowspace, the metal being properly heated, atthe same time ; and when fixed, the surface wassmoothed down and polished.Both the encaustic painting in wax, and thatwhich consisted in burning in the colours wereevidently known to the ancients, being mentionedby Pliny*, Ovid, Martial t, and others ; and thelatter is supposed to have been on the same principleas our enamelling on gold. Pliny § says itwas uncertain to whom the invention was due :some ascribed it to Aristides, as that of perfectingthe art to Praxiteles ; but he supposes " it wasknown, long before that time, to Polygnotus, Ni-canoe,and Arcesilaus of Paros."Bottles of various kinds, glass, porcelain, alabaster,and other materials were frequently exportedfrom Egypt to other countries. The Greeks, theEtruscans, and the Romans received them asarticles of luxury, which being remarkable for theirbeauty were prized as ornaments of the table ; andwhen Egypt became a Roman province, part of theIbid. XXXV. II-f- Ovid, Fast, lib.viii. 275.et picta coloris ustisCoelestum matron concave puppis habet."% Mart. Epic. lib.iv. ep.39.Encaustus Phaeton tabula depicting in hac est;Quid tibi vis Dipyron qui Phaetons faces ? "5 Plin.xxxv.il. " Ceres fingers, ac picture inured quis primusexcogitaverit, non constat."CHAP. IX. Murrain VASES LAMPS. Illtribute annually paid to the conquerors consistedof glass vases, from the manufactories of Memphisand Alexandria.The intercourse between Egypt and Greecehad been constantly kept up after the accession ofPsamaticus and Amasis ; and the former, the parentof the arts at that period, supplied the Greeks andsome of the Syrian tribes with the manufacturesthey required.The Etruscans, a commercial people, appear tohave traded with Egypt, about, or a little after thesame period, and we repeatedly find small alabasterand porcelain bottles in their tombs, which haveall the character of the Egyptian ; and not onlydoes the stone of the former proclaim by its qualitythe quarries from which it was taken, but the formand style of the workmanship leave no doubt ofthe bottles themselves being the productions ofEgyptian artists.It is uncertain of what stone the murrhine vases,mentioned by Pliny*, Martial, and other writers,were made ; it was of various colours, beautifullyblended, and even iridescent, and was obtained ingreater quantity in Carmina than in any country.It was also found in Parthia and other districts ofAsia, but unknown in Egypt ; a fact quite consistentwith the notion of its being fluor-spar,which is not met with in the valley of the Nile ;and explaining the reason why the Egyptiansimitated it with the composition known under thePlin. xxxvii. 2.112 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.name of false murrhine, said to have been made atThebes *, and Memphis. The description given byPliny certainly bears a stronger resemblance to thefluor-spar, than to any other stone, and the onlyobjection to this having been murrhine, arisesfrom our not finding any vases, or fragments, ofit ; and some may still be disposed to doubtif the stone is known to which the naturalistalludes. But the fluor-spar appears to have thestrongest claim j and the porcelain of Egypt,whose various colours are disposed in wavinglines, as if to imitate the natural undulations ofthat crystallised substance t, may perhaps belooked upon with reason as the false murrhine ofthe ancients.It is difficult to say whether the Egyptians employedglass for the purpose of making lamps orlanterns : ancient authors give us no direct informationon the subject; and the paintings offerno representation which can be proved to indicatea lamp, a torch, or any other kind of light, tHerodotus § mentions a " fete of burning lamps,"which took place at Sais, and indeed throughoutArran, in his Pericles of the Red Sea (p. 3.), mentions " XiOiagvar]£ TrXtiova yeinj, Kai aWrjg fioppivrjg tic, ytvontvrjg tv AiodTroKii." AtMedeenet Haboo are numerous agonised pebbles, which were evidentlybrought there (the nearest known spot where they are found beingNubia), but at what period is uncertain. Were they not for some purposeconnected with art ? If so, it is not probable they were broughtthere by the Christians, though generally found upon the surface ofthe mounds.\ Vide wood-cut, No. 256. fig. 2, 257. /g. 5, and ^U.fg. 1, a.X In the funeral processions, one person carries what seems to be acandle or torch.Herodot. ii. 62.CHAP. IX. LAMPS LINEN. 113the country, at a certain period of the year, anddescribes the lamps used on this occasion as*' small vases filled with salt and olive oil, on whichthe wick floated, and burnt during the wholenight ; " but it does not appear of what materialsthose vases were made, though we may reasonablysuppose them to have been of glass.No. 352. A guard apparently with a lantern. Alabasfron.The sculptures of Alabastron, again, represent aguard of soldiers, one of whom holds before himwhat resembles, and may be considered, a lantern ;but here too there is great uncertainty, and neitherof these are sufficient to decide the question.MANUFACTURE OF LINEN.The Egyptians, fi'om a most remote era, werecelebrated for their manufacture of linen and othercloths, and the produce of their looms was exportedto, and eagerly purchased by, foreign nations.The fine linen, and embroidered work, the yarn,VOL. III. I114 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.and woollen stuffs, of the upper and lower countryare frequently mentioned, and were highly esteemed.Solomon purchased many of those commodities,as well as chariots and horses, fromEgypt ; and Chemist, the city of Pan, retained *the credit it had acquired in making woollen stuffs,nearly till the period of the Roman conquest.Woollen garments were chiefly used by the lowerorders ; sometimes also by the rich, and even bythe priests, who were permitted to wear an upperrobe in the form of a cloak of this material : butunder garments of wool were strictly forbiddenthem, upon a principle of cleanliness ; and as theytook so much pains to cleanse and shave the body,they considered it inconsistent to adopt clothesmade of the hair of animals. No one was allowedto be buried in a woollen garment, inconsequence,as I have already observed t, of itsengendering worms, which would injure the body ;nor could any priest enter a temple without takingoff this part of his dress.The quantity of linen manufactured and used inEgypt was truly surprising, and independent ofthat made up into articles of dress, the greatabundance used for enveloping the mummies, bothof men and animals, shows how large a supplymust have been kept ready for the constant demandat home, as well as for that of the foreign market.That the bandages employed in wrapping thedead are of linen, and not, as some have imagined,Strabo, xvii. p. 559.f Vol. I. p. 280., vide Herodot. ii. 81.CHAP. IX. LINEN AND COTTON. 115of cotton, has been already ascertained by the mostsatisfactory tests ; and though no one, even amongthe unscientific inhabitants of modern Egypt, everthought of questioning the fact, received opinionin Europe had till lately decided that they werecotton ; and it was forbidden to doubt that "thebands of hissing linen" said by Herodotus* tohave been used for enveloping the mummies,were cotton. My own impression had certainlybeen that the mummy cloths were invariablylinen, but positive experience had not then confirmedmy opinion, and I reluctantly yielded tothe universal belief, and concluded that some atleast might be cotton.The accurate experiments made, with the aidof powerful microscopes, by Dr. Ure, Mr. Bauer,Mr. Thompson, and others, on the nature of thefibres of linen and cotton threads t, have shownthat the former invariably present a cylindricalform, transparent, and articulated, or jointed likea cane, while the latter offer the appearance of aflat ribbon, with a hem or border at each edge ; sothat there is no possibility of mistaking the fibresof either, except perhaps, when the cotton is in anunripe state, and the flattened shape of the centreis less apparent. The results having been foundsimilar in every instance, and the structure of thefibres thus unquestionably determined, the threadsof mummy cloths were submitted to the same test,Herodot. ii. 8G. " "S-ivcovoq ftviraunjc reXniuom."■f Vide Dr. Ure's Philosophy of Manufactures, p. 95.j Vide Mr, Thompson on the Mummy cloth of Egypt.1 2116 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.and no exception was found to their being linen,nor were they even a mixture of linen and cottonthread.The fact of the mummy cloths being linen istherefore decided. It now remains to inquire intothe nature of the issus, in which I confess considerabledifficulty presents itself, owing to theHebrew slash being translated byssus in the Septuagintversion, and, in our own, *' fine linen* ;"and to slash being the name applied at this day bythe Arabs to fine muslin, which is of cotton and notof linen ; for the similarity of the words in thesecognate languages argues in favour t of the samemeaning. On the other hand, Herodotus says themummy cloths were *' of hissing sidon t,'* andthey are found to be invariably linen : he uses theexpression " tree wool" to denote cotton §; andJulius Pollux adopts the same name ll, distinguishingit also from byssus, which he calls a species ofIndian flax. The use of the two words byssusand linoji present no difficulty, since they mightbe employed, like our flax and linen, to signifythe plant, and the substance made from it.Cotton cloth, however, was among the manufacturesof Egypt, and dresses of this materialwere worn by all classes. Pliny states that theEgyptian priests, though they used linen, wereIn Exodus, XXV. 4, " iSvaaov KticXwai^itvrjv;" in Coptic " she's."there are instances to the contrary, as kussiif " silver," in Hebrew,and kussub " gold lace," in Arabic, and others.t Herodot. loc. cit. Sidon is unquestionably linen.^ Herodot. iii. 47. " Etpioio-i air ^vXov."II J. Poll. Onom. vii. 17.CHAP. IX. FINE LINEN. Iiparticularly partial to cotton robes*, and '* cottongarments," supplied by the government for theuse of the temples t, are distinctly mentionedin the Rosetta stone. Herodotus and Plutarch taffirm that linen was preferred, owing as well toits freshness in a hot climate, as to its great tendencyto keep the body clean, and that a religiousprejudice forbade the priests to wear vestmentsof any other quality § j we may, however, concludethat this refers to the inner portion of thedress; and the prohibition of entering a templewith cotton or woollen garments, may have led tothe notion that none but linen were worn by themat any time. The same custom was adopted bythe votaries of Isis, when her rites were introducedby the Greeks and Romans || ; and linendresses were appropriated to those who had beeninitiated in the sacred mysteries.Whatever restrictions may have been in forcerespecting the use of cotton among the priesthood,it is probable that other individuals were permittedto consult their own choice on this point; and itwas immaterial whether they preferred, during life,the coolness of flax, or the softness of cottonraiment, provided the body, after death, was en-plain.xix. 8.-|- " The sacred robes with which the statues of the gods are adorned."Plut. de Is. s. 78.t Plut. de Is. S.4.§ Herodot. ii. 37. " The priests . . . wear only one robe of linen,and sandals of the byblus. They are not allowed to have any othervestment, or covering to the feet."II Plut. de Is. s. 3.1 Apud. Mctani. lib. xi.I 3118 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.eloped in bandages of linen* ; and this regulationaccounts for the mummy cloths of the poorestindividuals being invariably found of that material.It was not only for articles of dress that cottonwas manufactured by the Egyptians : a greatquantity was used for the furniture of their houses,the coverings of chairs and couches, and variousother purposes; and a sort of cloth was made ofthe united filaments of flax and cotton. This ismentioned by Julius Pollux, who, after describingthe cotton plant as an Egyptian production, andstating that cloth was manufactured of the *' woolof its nut," says they sometimes " make the woofof it, and the warp of linen t ;'* a quality of clothstill manufactured by the modern Egyptians.From the few representations which occur in thetombs of Thebes, it has been supposed that theEgyptian looms were of rude construction, andtotally incapable of producing the fine linen somuch admired by the ancients ; and as the paintingsin which they occur were executed at a veryearly period, it has been conjectured that, in aftertimes, great improvements took place in theirconstruction. But when we consider with whatsimple means oriental nations are in the habit ofexecuting the most delicate and complicated work,we cease to feel surprised at the apparent imperfectionof the mechanism, or instruments usedby the Egyptians ; and it is probable that their fainEngland woollen cloth has been chosen for this purpose, inorder to encoiiraije the staple commodity of the country'sJ. Poll. Onom. vii. IT. •CHAP. IX. NATURE OF THEIR CLOTH. 119famed "fine linen" mentioned in scripture, and byancient writers*, was produced from looms of thesame construction as those represented in the paintingsof Thebes and Eilethyas. Nor was the praisebestowed upon that manufacture unmerited t ; andas I have already observed, the quality of somelinen in my possession fully justifies it, and excitesequal admiration at the present day, being, to thetouch comparable to silk, and not inferior in textureto our finest cambric.The mummy cloths are generally of a verycoarse quality; and little attention was bestowedon the disposition of the threads, in the cloths ofordinary manufacture. Mr. Thomson, who examinedmany specimens of them, is of opinion thatthe number of threads in the warp invariablyexceeded those of the woof, occasionally even byfour times the quantity; and as his observationsare highly interesting, I shall introduce an extractfrom his pamphlet on the subject.Of the products of the Egyptian loom, weknow scarcely more than the mummy pits havedisclosed to us ; and it would be as unreasonableto look through modern sepulchres for specimensand proofs of the state of manufacturing artamongst ourselves, as to deduce an opinion of theskill of the Egyptians, from those fragments ofcloth, which envelope their dead, and have comedown,almost unchanged, to our own time. ThePliny allows that the Egyptians invented the art of weaving, vii. 56. ;and Athenaeus ascribes it to Pathymias the Egyptian. Dcipn. lib. ii.f Some was so fine that it obtained the. appellation of " woven air."I 4120 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.curious or costly fabrics which adorned the living,and were the pride of the industry and skill ofThebes, have perished ages ago. There are, however,amongst these remains, some which are notunworthy of notice, which carry us back into theworkshops of former times, and exhibit to us theactual labours of weavers and dyers of Egypt,more than 2000 years ago.*' The great mass of the mummy cloth, employedin bandages and coverings, whether ofbirds, animals, or the human species, is of coarsetexture, especially that more immediately incontact with the body, which is generally impregnatedwith resinous or bituminous matter.The upper bandages, nearer the surface, are finer.Sometimes the whole is enveloped in a coveringcoarse and thick, and very like the sacking of thepresent day: sometimes in cloth coarse and open,like that used in our cheese-presses, for which itmight easily be mistaken. In the college of surgeonsare various specimens of these cloths, someof which are very curious.The beauty of the texture, and peculiarity inthe structure of a mummy cloth given to me by Mr.Belong, was very striking. It was free from gum,or resin, or impregnation of any kind, and hadevidently been originally white. It was close andfirm, yet very elastic. The yarn of both warp andwoof was remarkably even and well spun. Thethread of the warp was double, consisting of twofine threads twisted together. The woof wassingle. The warp contained 90 threads in anCHAP. IX. OTHER SPECIMENS OF CLOTH. 121inch ; the woof, or weft, only 4^4. The finenessof these materials, estimated after the manner ofcotton yarn, was about thirty hanks in the pound.The subsequent examination of a great varietyof mummy cloths showed, that the disparity betweenthe warp and woof belonged to the systemof manufacture, and that the warp generally hadtwice or thrice, and not seldom four times, thenumber of threads in an inch, that the woof had:thus, a cloth containing 80 threads of warp in theinch, of a fineness about 24 hanks in the pound,had 40 threads in the woof: another with 120threads of warp, of 30 hanks, had 40; and a thirdspecimen only 30 threads in the woof. These haveeach respectively double, treble, and quadruple thenumber of threads in the warp that they have inthe woof. This structure, so different from moderncloth, which has the proportions nearly equal, originated,probably, in the difficulty and tediousnessof getting in the woof, when the shuttle was thrownby hand, which is the practice in India at the presentday, and which there are weavers still living oldenough to remember the universal practice in thiscountry'*Mr. Thomson then mentions some fragmentsof mummy cloths, sent to England by the lateMr. Salt, which he saw in the British Museum.They were " of different degrees of fineness ;some fringed at the ends, and some striped at theedges." " My first impression," he continues"on seeing these cloths, was that the finest kindswere muslin and of Indian manufacture, since122 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.we learn from the *'Periplus of the ErythreanSea," ascribed to Arran, but more probably thework of some Greek merchant himself engagedin the trade, that muslins from the Ganges were anarticle of export from India to the Arabian gulf:but this suspicion of their being cotton was soonremoved by the microscope of Mr. Bauer, whichshowed that they were all, without exception, linen.Some were thin and transparent, and of very delicatetexture. The finest appeared to be made ofyarns of near 100 hanks in the pound, with 140threads in the inch in the warp, and about 64 inthe woof. A specimen of muslin in the museumof the East India house, the finest production ofthe Dacca loom, has only 100 threads in an inchin the warp, and 84 in the woof; but the surprisingfineness of the yarns, which, though spun by hand,is not less than 250 hanks in the povmd, givesto this fabric its unrivalled tenuity and lightness.Some of the cloths were fringed at the ends,and one, a sort of scarf, about four feet long, andtwenty inches wide, was fringed at both ends.Three or four threads twisted together with thefingers to form a strong one, and two of theseagain twisted together, and knotted at the middleand at the end to prevent unravelling, formed thefringe, precisely like the silk shawls of the presentday.*' The savages of the Egyptian cloths are generallyformed with the greatest care, and are wellcalculated by their strength to protect the clothfrom accident. Fillets of strong cloth or tape alsoCHAP. IX. STRIPED BORDERS OF THE CLOTH. 123secure the ends of the pieces from injury, showinga knowledge of all the little resources of modernmanufacture. Several of the specimens, bothof fine and coarse cloth, were bordered with bluestripes of various patterns, and in some alternatingwith narrow lines of another colour. The widthof the patterns varied from half an inch to aninch and a quarter. In the latter were seven bluestripes, the broadest about half an inch wide nearestthe selvage, followed by five very narrow ones, andterminated by one an eighth of an inch broad.Had this pattern, instead of being confined to theedge of the cloth, been repeated across its wholebreadth, it would have formed a modern gingham,which we can scarcely doubt was one of the articlesof Egyptian industry.A small pattern about half an inch broad formedthe edging of one of the finest of these cloths,and was composed of a stripe of blue, alternatingwith three lines of a fawn colour, forming a simpleand elegant border. These stripes were producedin the loom by coloured threads previouslydyed in the yarn. The nature of the fawn colourI was unable to determine. It was too muchdegraded by age, and the quantity too small toenable me to arrive at any satisfactory conclusion.Though I had no doubt the colouring matter ofthe blue stripes was indigo, I subjected the clothto the following examination. Boiled in waterfor some time, the colour did not yield in theleast; nor was it at all affected by soap, nor bystrong alkalies : sulphuric acid, diluted only so124 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.far as not to destroy the cloth, had no action onthe colour. Chloride of lime gradually reduced,and at last destroyed it. Strong nitric acid, droppedupon the blue, turned it orange, and in thesame instant destroyed it. These tests prove thecolouring matter of the stripes to be indigo."This dye was unknown to Herodotus, for hemakes no mention of it. It was known to Pliny,who, though ignorant of its true nature, and thehistory of its production, has correctly describedthe most characteristic of its properties, the emissionof a beautiful purple vapour when exposed toheat. Had his commentators been acquainted withthe sublimation of indigo, it would have savedmany learned doubts. We learn from the Pericles,that it was an article of export from Barbarian onthe Indus, to Egypt, where its employment by themanufacturers of that country, probably from a remoteperiod, is clearly established by the specimenshere described."I have a piece of cloth, brought from Thebes byMr. Arundel, which offers a very good instance ofthe coloured border mentioned by Mr. Thomson.It is of ordinary quality, the number of threads inthe inch are ninety-six in the warp, and thirty-fourin the woof; and the border consists of one broadband and six narrow stripes, of a blue colour, evidentlydyed with indigo; the band which is nearestthe selvage is one inch and two tenths in breadth,the others consist each of two threads, in the directionof the warp, with the exception of the innermostone, which is of five threads ; and the dividingCHAP. IX. SPECIMENS OF FINE LINEN. 125line between the fourth and fifth is varied by the introductionof a blue thread down the centre.* Therest of the cloth has the usual yellowish tinge,"supposed to arise from some astringent preparationemployed for its preservation," which, accordingto Mr. Thomson, imparts to water a similarcolour, but offers no trace of tannin. " In noneof the specimens I have examined," he adds, *dideither gelatine or albumen, or solution of iron, affordany precipitate ; but the subacetate of leadproduced a cloud, indicating the presence of extractivematter."It is evident that the colour was imparted to thethreads previous to the cloth being made, as theblue remains unaltered ; and the cloths with broadcoloured borders are the more curious, as theyillustrate the representations in the paintings, andshow that they were similar to those made by thelooms used in the age of the Pharaohs of the lothand 18th dynasties, which occur in the tombs atEilethyas and Thebes ; and it is curious to seetheNubians wearing shawls with the same blueborders, manufactured in the valley of the Nile, atthe present day.Another piece of linen, which I obtained atThebes, has 152 threads in the warp, and 7I inthe woof, to each inch ; it is of a much darker huethan the cloth just mentioned, and was perhapsVide woodcut, No. 350. fg. 4.-|- As was the case with the threads used by the Israelites, Exod.XXXV. 25. "And all the women that were wise-hearted did spin withtheir hands, and brought that which they had spun, both of blue, andof purple, and of scarlet, and of fine linen."126 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.dyed with the carthamus victories *, or safe-flower,which Mr. Thomson supposes to have been used forthis purpose. The piece of fine linen, previouslyalluded to, is of the same light brown colour.Some idea may be given of its texture, from thenumber of threads in the inch, which is 540 (or270 double threads) t in the warp ; and the limitedproportion of 110 in the woof §, shows the justnessof Mr. Thomson's observation, that this disparitybelonged to their " system of manufacture," sinceit is observable even in the finest quality of cloth.Another very remarkable circumstance in thisspecimen is, that it is covered with small figuresand hieroglyphics, so finely drawn, that here andthere the lines are with difficulty followed by theeye ; and as there is no appearance of the inkhaving run in any part of the cloth, it is evidentthey had previously prepared it for this purpose.Pliny cites four qualities of linen, particularlynoted in Egypt: the Fanatic, and Pelusiac, theButine, and the Tentyritic ; and mentions in thesame place 1 1 the cotton tree of Egypt, which heconfines to the upper country. He also states thatthe quantity of flax, cultivated in Egypt, was accountedfor, by their exporting linen to Arabia andI am still doubtful if it was indigenous in Egj'pt.f Some of our cambric has only IGO in an inch of the warp, and140 of the woof.t Vide supra, p. 120. and 121.§ The Egyptians, instead of throwing the shuttle, appear to haveput in the threads by means of a rod with a hook at either end. Videwood-cuts, No. 91. and 334.|] Plin. xix. c. 1. " Superior pars egypt in Arabian verges gignitfruticem, quem aliqui gossiping vacant, plumes xylon, et ideo line indefacta xylina."CHAP. IX. Corslet OF Amass. 127India; and the quality of that produced by theEgyptian looms is shown to have been far superiorto any other.The threads used for nets were remarkable fortheir fineness ; '* and so delicate were some ofthem," says Pliny*, "that they would pass througha man's ring, and a single person could carry asufficient number of them to surround a wholewood. Julius Lupus, who died while governor ofEgypt, had some of these nets, each string ofwhich consisted of 150 threads ; a fact perfectlysurprising to those who are not aware, that theRhodian preserve to this day, in the Temple ofMinerva, the remains of a linen corslet, presentedto them by Amasis, king of Egypt, whose threadsare composed each of 365 fibres ; and in proof ofthe truth of this, Mutinous, who was thrice consul,lately affirmed at Rome, that he had examined it;and the reason of so few fragments remaining wasattributable to the curiosity of those who hadfrequently subjected it to the same scrutiny."Herodotus mentions this corslet t, and another,presented by Amasis to the Lacedaemonian,which had been carried off by the Samian; *ritwas of linen, ornamented with numerous figures oianimals, worked in gold and cotton. Each threadof the corslet was worthy of admiration, t For,though very fine, every one was composed of 360other threads, all distinct; the quality being similarto that dedicated to Minerva, at Hindus, by thesame monarch."Plin. xix. 1 . f Herodot. ii. 182., and iii. 47»% Herodot. iii. 47.128 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.Many of the Egyptian stuffs presented variouspatterns worked in colours by the loom, independentof those produced by the dyeing or printingprocess, and so richly composed, that theyvied with cloths embroidered with the needle.*The art of embroidery t was commonly practisedin Egypt. We find that the Hebrews, on leavingthe country, took advantage of the knowledgethey had there acquired to make a richhanging for the door of the tent, of blue, andpurple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen, wroughtwith needlework t ; " a coat of fine linen was embroideredfor Aaron ; and his girdle was *' of finetwined linen, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, ofneedlework." §The gold thread used for these purposes is supposedto have been beaten out with the hammer ||,and afterwards rounded ; and even the delicatenet made by Vulcan, which was so fine that thegods themselves were unable to see it, is representedto have been forged on his anvil withthe hammer. ^ Pliny mentions cloth woven withgold threads, sometimes entirely of those materials,without any woollen or linen ground, as were theMartial, xiv. Epigr. 50.Haec tibi Memphitis tellus dat funera ; vita estPectine Iliac jam Babylonia acts."■]■ Vide Ezekiel, xxvii. 7. " Fine linen, with broidered work from^gJ'Pt-"J Exod. XXVI. 36., xxvii. 16., xxxvi. 37., and xxxviii. 18.^ Exod. xxviii. 39., and xxxix.29.II Conf. Exod. xxxix. 3. " And they did beat the gold into thinplates, and cut it into wires, to work it in the blue, and in the purple,and in the scarlet, and in the fine linen."H Hour. Od. viii. 274.CHAP. IX. SILVER THREAD WIRE. 129garment of Agrippina *, the tunic of Heliogabalus t,and that worn by Arminius Priscus, mentionedby Verrius.t** Coloured dresses," says Pliny §, " were knownin the time of Homer, from which the robes oftriumph were borrowed: and from the Phrygianhaving been the first to devise the method of givingthe same effect with the needle, they have beencalled Phrygian. But to weave cloth with goldthread was the invention of an Asiatic king. AttainsII, from whom the name Attic was derived :and the Babylonians were most noted for theirskill in weaving cloths of various colours."The question still remains undecided respectingthe time when silver thread came into use ; and asno mention of silver stuffs occurs in the writingsof ancient authors, it has been supposed that itsintroduction was of late date. Silver wire, however,was already known in Egypt at the remote epochof the 18th dynasty, as is proved by being foundat Thebes of the time of the third Thothmes:nor is there any reason to suppose it was then anovel invention; and it was probably known andused as early as gold wire, which we find attachedto rings bearing the date of Osirtasen the First.This wire is supposed not to have been drawn,like our own, through holes in metal plates, butto have been beaten out, and rounded with thePlin. xxxiii. 3. " Auro textile sine alia materia."f Lamprey. Vit. Heliog. c. 23.I Plin. loc. cit. 5) Plin. viii. 48.II Attains, king of J?crgauius.VOL. III. K130 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.file : but the appearance of some found at Thebesalmost justifies the conclusion that a mode ofdrawing it was not unknown to them ; and theomission of every representation of the process inthe paintings cannot be adduced as an argumentagainst it, since they have also failed to introducethe casting of metals, and various other arts, withwhich they were undoubtedly acquainted.It is reasonable to suppose that wire-drawing wasfirst attempted with the most ductile metals, thatgold and silver were first used, and brass and iron ata much later period ; and this is further arguedby the probability of wire having been originallyemployed for ornamental purposes. Gold threadand wire were always made entirely of that metal,even to the time of the latter Roman emperors* :nor are there any instances of flattened wire woundround silk or linen threads, or of silver or otherwire gilt, in the ruins of Herculaneum andPompeii. That the Egyptians had arrived atgreat perfection in the art of making the thread isevident, from its being sufficiently fine for weavinginto cloth, and for embroidery; and the exceedingdelicacy of the linen corslet of Amasis f, on whichnumerous figures of animals were worked in gold,required a proportionate degree of fineness in thegold thread used for the purpose.The coloured dresses represented in the Egyptianpaintings, worn by women of rank, and by thedeities, much resemble our modern chintz, in theProbably till the reign of Aurelian.f Heroic. iii. 47.CHAP. IX. USE OF MORDANTS. 131style of their patterns, though it is probable thatthey were generally of linen instead of calico:some were probably worked with the needle*, andothers woven with gold threads.I have already observed that the Egyptians possesseda knowledge of the effect of acids on colour,and submitted the cloth they dyed to one of thesame processes adopted in our modern manufactories; as is plainly pointed out by Pliny in the followingpassage t : — '* Pungent et vestes in egyptinter paca mirabih genere, Candida vel postquamattrivere illnesses non coloris, sed colored sorsmedicaments. Hoc cum fecercj non apparentin veris : sed in cortical pigment servantsmerse, post momentum extrahuntur picta. ,cum sit unus in corunna colos, ex illoalius atque alius fit in veste, accidents medicamentsqualitative mutatis, nee postea ablui protest:ita corunna non dubie confusura colores si picts acci-pere." *' Moreover in Egypt they stain cloths in awonderful manner. They take them in their originalstate, quite white, and imbue them, not with adye, but with certain drugs which have the powerof absorbing and taking colour. When this isdone, there is still no appearance of change in thecloths ; but so soon as they are dipped into a bath ofthe pigment, which has been prepared for thepurpose, they are taken out properly coloured.The singular thing is, that though the bath consCandida Sidon percent pectora silo,Quod Pilots acts pcrcu.ssuin pcctiiic SeriiiuSolvit." Lucan. Pears. x. HitPlin. XXXV. II.K 'Z132 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.pains only one colour, several hues are imparted tothe piece, these changes depending on the natureof the drug employed : nor can the colour beafterwards washed off; and surely if the bath hadmany colours in it, they must have presented aconfused appearance on the cloth."From this it is evident that the cloth was preparedbefore steeping ; the momentary effect hementions could only be produced by the powerfulagency of mordants ; and they not only usedthem to make the cloth take the colour equally,but also to change the hues.Whether the Egyptians really understood theprinciple, on which the salts and acids of the mordantsacted, or calculated their effects solely fromthe experience they had acquired, it is difficult todecide. They had long been used in Europe, beforetheir chemical agency was properly explained ; andwhen the term mordant was first applied by theFrench dyers, they imagined "that the intentionof passing the substances, which were to be dyed,through certain saline liquors, was to corrodesomething that opposed the entering of the colouringprinciple, and to enlarge the pores of thesubstances ; " (the effect of acids in changing thehues being a later discovery;) we cannot thereforepositively prove that the Egyptians had aknowledge of chemistry, though from their longexperience, and from their skill in the employmentof the metallic oxides, we may find strongreasons to infer it. For if at first ignorant ofthe reason of such changes, it is probable that inCHAP. IX. KNOWLEDGE OF CHEMISTRY. 133process of time they were led to investigate thecauses, by which they were effected.Many discoveries, and even inventions, are morethe effect of chance than of studious reflection, andthe principle is often the last to be understood. Indiscoveries this is generally the case, in inventionsfrequently. But when men have observed, fromlong practice, a fixed and un deviating result, theircuriosity naturally becomes excited, the thirst forknowledge, and above all the desire of benefitingby the discovery, prompt them to scrutinise thecauses to which they are so much indebted ; andfew people, who have made any advance in thearts of civilised life, long remain ignorant of themeans of improving their knowledge.We may therefore suppose, some general notionsof chemistry, or at least of chemical agency, wereknown to the Egyptians ; and the beautiful coloursthey obtained from copper, the composition variousmetals, and their knowledge of the effects producedon different substances by the salts of the earth, tendto confirm this opinion.The Egyptian yarn seems all to have been spunwith the hand, and the spindle is seen in all thepictures representing the manufacture of cloth.Spinning was principally the occupation of women* ;but men also used the spindle, and were engagedin the loom ; though not as Herodotus t wouldlead us to suppose, to the exclusion of women,Vide wood-cut, No. 91. Vol, II. p. 60.t Herodot. ii. 35. Sophocles, (Edit. Col. v. 352. makes the santoremark.K 3THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.Tart 1.d -i e f g h iNo. 353. Parti. Men engaged in spinning, and making a sort of net-work.2. The horizontal loom, or perhaps mat-making.Bent Hassan.who he pretends undertook the duties of men inother countries, '* by going to market, and engagingin business, while the men, shut up inthe house, worked at the loom." Men, to thisday, are employed in making cloth, in Egypt andin other countries, but it cannot be said thatthey have relinquished their habits for those ofwomen ; and we find from the paintings executedby the Egyptians themselves, far more authenticand credible than the casual remarks of a Greek,that both men and women were employed inmanufacturing cloth.*' Other nations," continues the historian, " makecloth by pushing the woof upwards, the Egyptians,on the contrary, press it down ; " and this is con-chap.IX.LOOMS.firmed by the paintings * which represent the processof making cloth ; but at Thebes, a man whois engaged in making a piece of cloth, with a colouredborder or selvage, appears to push the woofupwards, the cloth being fixed above him, to theupper part of the frame. They had also thehorizontal loom, which occurs at Beni Hassan andother places.Csy^nf:fi!-tu.\No. 351.Fig. 1. A piece of cloth on a frame. Eiletkyas.2. A loom. Thieves./,- is ;i shuttle, not thrown, but put in with the hand. It had a hook at each end. Videwoodcut. No. 91. fig. 2.In woodcut, No. 91./^. 2. Vol. II. p. 60.K ']tTHE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. IX.In the hieroglyphics over persons employedwith the spindle, it is remarkable that the wordsalts which in Coptic signifies to twist, constantlyoccurs. The spindles were generally small,being about one foot three inches in length, andseveral have been found at Thebes, and are nowpreserved in the museums of Europe.* Theywere generally of wood, and in order to increaseSpindles.2 1British and Berlin Mtiseiims.Fig. 1 is a sort of cane split at the top to give it a globular shape.2 has the head of gypsum.3 entirely of wood.4 of plaited or basket work.5 the loop to put over the twine.6 a ring of wood for securing the twine.One of those in the British Museum, which I found at Thebes,"had some of the linen thread with it. Vide wood-cut, No. .335. ^g. 2.CHAP. IX. SPINDLES. 13^their impetus in turning, the circular head wasoccasionally of gypsum, or composition : some,however, were of a light plaited work, made ofrushes, or palm leaves, stained of various colours,and furnished with a loop of the same materials,for securing the twine after it was wound.*Besides the use of the spindle t, and the formof the loom, we find the two principal purposes,to which flax was applied, represented in thepaintings of the tombs : and at Beni Hassan themode of cultivating the plant, in the same squarebeds now met with throughout Egypt, (much resemblingour salt-pans,) the process of beating thestalks, and making them into ropes, and the manufactureof a piece of cloth, are distinctly pointedout.It is, however, possible that the part of thepicture, where men are represented pouring waterfrom earthen pots, may refer to the process ofsteeping the stalks of the plant, after they werecut ; the square spaces would then indicate thedifferent pits in which they were immersed, containingsome less, some more, water, according tothe state in which they were required ; and thisis rendered more probable by the flight of steps,for ascending to the top of the raised sides of thepits, which would not have been introduced if thelevel ground were intended.Vide wood-cut, No. 353. /%. 5. Another of wood, ^g. 6.■f- The ordinary distaff does not occur in these subjects, but we mayconclude they had it; and Homer mentions one of gold, given to Helenby " Alexandra, the wife of Polybius," who lived in Egyptian Thebes.Od.iv. 131.THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. IX.sacg 01 C8!J> = 2S ~o si-=■«. .•= Eai: ♦J-^ qq rtI ^ bos= sp-1- SPc> 01 C« M "Solon^ c s•" « oaCHAP. IX, PREPARATION OF THE FLAX. 139The steeping, and the subsequent process ofbeating the stalks with mallets, illustrate the followingpassage of Pliny* upon the same subject:*' The stalks themselves are immersed in water,warmed by the heat of the sun, and are kept downby weights placed upon them ; for nothing islighter than flax. The membrane, or rind, becomingloose is a sign of their being sufficientlymacerated. They are then taken out, and repeatedlyturned over in the sun, until perfectlydried ; and afterwards beaten by mallets on stoneslabs. That which is nearest the rind is calledstupa, * tow,' inferior to the inner fibres, and fitonly for the wicks of lamps. It is combed outwithiron hooks, until all the rind is removed.The inner part is of a whiter and finer quality.Men are not ashamed to prepare itAfter it is made into yarn, it is polished bystriking it frequently on a hard stone, moistenedwith water ; and when woven into cloth it is againbeaten with clubs, being always improved in proportionas it is beaten."They also parted and cleansed the fibres of theflax with a sort of comb, probably answering to theiron hooks mentioned by Pliny ; two of which,found with some tow at Thebes, are preserved inthe Berlin museum ; one having twenty-nine, theother forty-six, teeth, tThe border of some of their cloths consists oflong fringes, formed by the projecting threads ofXliii. xix. I. t Vide wood-cut, No. 357.THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. IX.the warp, twisted together, and tied at the endin one or more knots, to prevent their unravelling,*' precisely,"as Mr. Thomson observes, "like the silkshawls of the present day;" and specimens of thesame borders, in pieces of cloth found in the tombs,may be seen in the British Museum, and othercollections.*The sculptures, as well as the cloths which havebeen discovered, perfectly bear out Herodotusin his statement that they had the custom ofleaving a fringe to their pieces of linen t, which,when the dresses were made up, formed a borderround the legs ; but they do not appear to haveNo. 557iWUUHIIIHUHlH1: 2No. 358Berlin Museum .No. .357 wooden comb found with some tow.No. 358 fig. 1 netting needle of wood in Mr. Salt's collection.2 part of another of bronze, of later date, found by me at Terence.3 wooden plane for smoothing or pressing cloth. Fran Thchcs.Vide woodcut, No. 330.\ Hcrodot. ii. 81.CHAP. IX. CARPETS. 141been universally worn. This kind of dress hecalls calasiris. When the fringe was wanting, theborder was hemmed, which had the same effectof preventing the unravelling of the cloth. TheJews wore a similar kind of fringed dress, andMoses * commanded the children of Israel to*' make them fringes in the borders of their garments,. . . and . . . put upon the fringe of theborders a ribband of blue."Besides the process of making cloth, that ofsmoothing, or cantering, is represented in thepaintings ; which appears to have been done bymeans of wooden rods, passed to and fro over thesurface ; but from the appearance of some of thefine linen found in the tombs, we may conjecturethat much greater pressure was sometimes used forthis purpose, and such as could only be applied bya press, or cylinders of metal.For smoothing linen after washing, a woodensubstitute for what we call an iron was used bythe Egyptian washerwomen, some of which havebeen found at Thebes, six inches in length, madeof athul or tamarisk wood, tI have had occasion to observed that the Egyptianshad carpets, which, according to Diodorus,were spread for the sacred animals, and are noticedby Homer 11 , as a very early invention ; they were ofwool ^, but of their quality we are unable to form 'Numbers, xv. 38.f Vale wood-cut, No. 358. Jig. 3.X Vol. II. p. 201. S) Diodor. i. 34.II Horn. Od. iv. 124., and called lajicta, the modern name of a carpet.11 As ill Homer, " Ta7r>/r« . . . jiaXaKov tpiuio," loc. cit.142 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.any opinion, the fragments discovered in the tombsbeing very imperfectly preserved. Some portions ofwoollen work have been found at Thebes, whichpresented the appearance of a carpet ; and a smallrug was lately brought to England, and is now inthe possession of Mr. Hay, whose valuable collectionof drawings from Thebes and other parts ofEgypt, I have already noticed.This rug is eleven inches long by nine broad. Itis made like many carpets of the present day, withwoollen threads on linen string. In the centre is thefigure of a boy in white, with a goose above it, thehieroglyphic of " child," upon a green ground ;around which is a border composed of red andblue lines ; the remainder is a ground of yellow,with four white figures above and below, and oneat each side, with blue outlines and red ornaments;and the outer border is made up of red, white, andblue lines, with a fancy device projecting from it,with a triangular summit, which extends entirelyround the edge of the carpet. Its date is uncertain; but from the child, the combination of thecolours, and the ornament of the border, I am inclinedto think it really Egyptian.I have also been informed by Lord Prude, thatin the Turin museum he met with " some specimensof worked worsted upon linen, in which thelinen threads of the weft had been picked out, andthe coloured worsted sewed on the warp."CHAP. IX. TWISTING LEATHER THONGS. 143ROPE-MAKING.I have noticed the use of flax for making ropes,string, and various kinds of twine ; for large ropes,however, of ordinary quality, and for commonpurposes, the leefi or fibres of the date tree, wereemployed, as at the present day ; and many specimensof these durable materials have been foundin the excavations of Upper and Lower Egypt.In a tomb at Thebes, of the time of ThothmesIII., is represented the process of twisting thongs ofleather, which, as it is probably the same as thatadopted in rope-making, may be properly introducedhere.The ends of four thongs were inserted and fastenedinto a hollow tube, from the side of which abar projected, surmounted by a heavy metal ball ;and the man, who twisted them, held the tube inhis right hand, whirling it round, as he walkedbackwards, by means of the impetus given by theball. A band, attached to a ring at the other endof the tube, went round his body, in order tosupport it and give it a free action, and the ringturned upon a nut, to prevent the band itself fromtwisting.At the other extremity of the walk, a man, seatedon the ground, or on a low three-legged stool, letout the separate thongs, and kept them from becomingentangled. Behind him sat another, who,with the usual semicircular knife, cut the skin intostrips, as lie turned it round ; showing that what144-THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.<U tiec-a «o c 9J= n '^mS §>-•3 5P -^ aoo e'^■o-a e P.JZB«ooXIoco■S3^be3 EgCo - Q■|n~- "JS0) sc *2aZ^^oO ^JS ■eo«-° 3.>i-cj^ oo"^ ■§ .C £ m^ .2 ♦^ " S^X,BBS-o.^o 2 fl o.2 £ c « ■"^|.§^.l"^ £ ^ « t^"^-•2^3o i,r « ji uj:5 « j: >.■"■"»! •^ -3g O O (JO ««.2 c Sic.J5 cosC t3 ^ —.5 ^-^1 S■^2&-gg« « c3 "'S.ets-^ S oo5S~3JS tooc■c aCHAP. IX. TWISTING LEATHER THONGS. 14)5we term the circular cut was known to the ancientEgyptians at this early period, and that they hadalready adopted this mode of obtaining the longestthongs from a single piece of leather. * Whenfinished, the twisted thongs were wound round ahollow centre, through which the end was passed,and repeatedly bound over the concentric coils inthe same manner as ropes.Some, indeed, have supposed the present subjectto represent rope-making; but the presence of theskin on the left, and the shoemakers on the right,forming a continuation of the picture, sufficientlyprove that they are engaged in preparing leathernthongs for sandals, and other similar purposes.Their nets were made of flax-string t, both forfishing and fowling : and portions of them havebeen discovered at Thebes, and are preserved inour European museums. The netting neediestwere of wood, very like our own, split at each end,and between ten and eleven inches in length, andothers were of bronze, with the point closed.Sieves were often made of string, but some ofan inferior quality, and, for coarse work, were constructedof small thin rushes or reeds (very similarto those used by the Egyptians for writing, andfrequently found in the tablets of the scribes) ; aspecimen of which kind of sieve is preserved inThis calls to mind the fable of Dido's purchasing as much land inAfrica, as could be covered by a bull's hide, upon which she builtBursa, the origin of Carthage. Vir. jEn. i. 368.f Conf. Isaiah, xvii. 9. " They that work in fine flax, and they thatweave networks." Vide Plin. 19, 1., and stiprd, p. 127.% Fide wood-cut. No. 338. fgs. 1, 2.VOL. III. L146 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.the Paris museum. The paintings also representthem made of the same materials ; and indeed it isprobable that the first they used were all of thishumble quality, since the hieroglyphic indicating asieve is evidently borrowed from them.THE PAPYRUS.The Egyptians were not less famed for theirmanufacture of paper, than for the delicate textureof their linen. The plant from which it was made,the Cyperus papyrus of modern botanists, mostlygrew in Lower Egypt, in marshy land, or in shallowbrooks*, and ponds, formed by the inundation ofthe Nile, where they bestowed much pains on itscultivation.The right of growing, and selling it, belonged,as I have already observed, to the government,who made a great profit by its monopoly ; andthough we frequently find mention of the use ofthe byblus or papyrus, for constructing canoes orrude punts, for making baskets, parts of sandals,sails, and for numerous other common purposes, itis evident, that we are to understand, in these instances,some other species of the numerous familyof Cyperus ; which too is unequivocally shown byStrabo, when he distinguishes the ordinary fromthe hieratic byblus."The papyrus, or byblus heretics, of the geographer,our Cyperus papyrus, was particularlyIsaiah, xix. 7. '* The paper reeds by the brooks, by the mouthof the brooks."CHAP. IX. PAPYRUS. 147cultivated in the Sebennytic nome * : other partsof the Delta also produced it, and probably evensome districts in Upper Egypt. The paper madefrom it differed in quality ; being dependent uponthe growth of the plant, and the part of the stalkwhence it was taken ; and we find many of thepapyri which have been preserved vary greatly intheir texture and appearance. They are generallyfragile, and difficult to enrol, until rendered pliantby gradual exposure to steam, or the damp of ourclimates ; and some are so brittle that they appearto have been dried by artificial means.We are however less surprised at the effect of theparched climate of Upper Egypt, when we considerthe length of time they have been kept beyondthe reach of moisture, and observe that our drawingpaper, after a very few years, becomes so dryin that country, that it is too brittle to fold withoutbreaking. Indeed, those papyri which have notbeen exposed to the same heat, being preserved inthe less arid climate of Lower Egypt, still preservetheir pliability ; and a remarkable proof of this isshown in one brought by me from Memphis, whichmay be bent, and even twisted in any way, withoutbreaking, or without being more injured than apiece of common paper. The hieroglyphics fromtheir style show it to be of an ancient Pharaonic age,and, what is remarkable, they present the name ofthe city, where the papyrus was found, Memoire, orMemphis.Plin. xiii. 11.L 2148 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.The mode of making papyri, was this : — Theinterior of the stalks of the plant, after the rindhad been removed, was cut into thin slices in thedirection of their length, and these being laid on aflat board, in succession, similar slices were placedover them at right angles * ; and their surfaces beingcemented together by a sort of glue, and subjectedto a proper degree of pressure, and well dried, thepapyrus was completed. The length of the slicesdepended of course on the breadth of the intendedsheet, as that of the sheet on the number of slicesplaced in succession beside each other, so thatthough the breadth was limited, the papyrus mightbe extended to an indefinite length.The papyrus is now no longer used, paperfrom linen rags and other materials having supersededit ; but some few individuals, following theexample of the Cavaliers Salerno Landolina Nave,of Syracuse, continue to make it ; and sheets fromthe plant, which still grows in the small rivuletformed by the fountain of Cane, near Syracuse,are offered to travellers, as curious specimens of anobsolete manufacture. I have seen some of thesesmall sheets of papyrus ; the manner of placingthe pieces is the same as that practised in formertimes ; but the quality of the paper is very inferiorto that of ancient Egypt, owing either to the preparationof the slices of the stalk, before they areglued together, or to the coarser texture of theThe slices which were placed longways were called by the Romansstamen, the others crossing them subtemen, like the warp and the woofin cloth.CHAP. IX. PLINY's account OF THE PAPYRUS. 149plant itself, certain spots occurring here and therethroughout the surface, which are never seen onthose discovered in the Egyptian tombs.Pliny thus describes * the plant and the mode ofmaking paper : — " The papyrus grows in the marshlands of Egypt, or in the stagnant pools left inlandby the Nile, after it has returned to its bed, whichhave not more than two cubits in depth. The rootof the plant is the thickness of a man's arm ; it has atriangular stalk, growing not higher than ten cubits(fifteen feet), and decreasing in breadth towards thesummit, which is crowned as with a thyrsus, containingno seeds, and of no use except to deck thestatues of the gods. They employ the roots asfire-wood, and for making various utensils. Theyeven construct small boats of the plant ; and out ofthe rind, sails, mats, clothes, bedding, and ropes ;they eat it either crude or cooked t, swallowingonly the juice ; and when they manufacture paperfrom it, they divide the stem, by means of a kind ofneedle, into thin plates, or laminae, each of whichis as large as the plant will admit . . . ."'* All the paper is woven upon a tablet, and iscontinually moistened with Nile water, which beingthick and slimy, furnishes an effectual species ofglue. § In the first place, they form upon a table,perfectly horizontal, a layer the whole length ofthe papyrus ; which is crossed by another placedPlin. xiii. 11. f Conf. Diod. i. 80.t Plin. xiii. 12.§ It is scarcely necessary to correct this misconception of Pliny, orto suggest the necessity of something more tenacious than Nile water,L 3150 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.transversely, and afterwards inclosed within a press.The different sheets are then hung in a situationexposed to the sun, in order to dry, and the processis finally completed by joining them together,beginning with the best. There are seldom morethan twenty * slips, or stripes, produced from onestem of the plant.Different kinds of broad paper vary in breadth.The best is thirteen digits broad ; the hieratic onlyeleven; the Fanning ten, and the amphitheatrenine. The Saith is still narrower, being only thebreadth of the mallet ; and the paper used for businessis only six digits broad. Besides the breadth,the fineness, thickness, whiteness, and smoothnessare particularly regarded ; . . . when it is coarseit is polished with a (boar's) tooth, or a shell ; butthen the writing is more readily effaced, as it doesnot take the ink so well.'*tPliny is greatly in error when he supposes thatthe papyrus was not used for making paper, beforethe time of Alexander the Great, since we meetwith papyri of the most remote Pharaonic periods ;and the same mode of writing on them is shownfrom the sculptures to have been common in theage of Suphis, or Cheops, the builder of the GreatPyramid, more than 2000 years before our era.It is uncertain until what period paper made otthe papyrus continued in general use — but there isSome read " vicinage," not " viginti."f So called from Annius, who had a manufactory at Rome for preparingpaper. Plin. xiii. 12.J Vide Plin. xiii. 12., where he makes other observations on thequality of paper.CHAP. IX. PARCHMENT. OTHER MATERIALS. 151evidence of its having been occasionally employed,to the end of the seventh century, when it wassuperseded by parchment. All public documents,under Charlemagne and his dynasty, were writtenon this last, and the papyrus was then entirelygiven up.Parchment, indeed, had been invented long before,and was used for writing, as early as the year250 before our era, by Eugene, king of pegasus; who being desirous of collecting a librarywhich should vie with that of Alexandria, andbeing prevented by the jealousy of the Polemicsfrom obtaining a sufficient quantity of papyrus,had recourse to this substitute ; and its inventionat Pegasus claimed, and secured to it, the lastingname of Permanent.* It was made of the skinsof sheep and calves ; but to the former the nameof parchment is more correctly applied, as to thelatter that of vellum, tThe monopoly of the papyrus in Egypt so increasedthe price of the commodity, that personsin humble life could not afford to purchase it forordinary purposes; few documents, therefore, aremet with written on papyrus, except funeral rituals,the sales of estates, and official papers, which wereabsolutely required : and so valuable was it, thatthey frequently obliterated the old writing, andinscribed another document on the same sheet.For common purposes, pieces of broken pottery,Called also membrana by the Romans.f From vcUiis, " a skin," or vitulinum, " of calf."L 4152 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.stone, board, and leather were used ; an order to visitsome monument, a soldiers leave of absence, accounts,and various memoranda, were often writtenon the fragments of an earthenware vase ; an artistsketched a picture, which he was about to introducein a temple or a sepulchre, on a large flat slab oflimestone, or on a wooden panel prepared with athin coating of stucco : and even parts of funeralrituals were inscribed on square pieces of stone, onstuccoed cloth, or on leather. Sometimes leatherrolls were substituted for papyri, and buried in thesame manner with the deceased ; they are of anearly period, and probably adopted in consequenceof the high price of the papyrus ; but few havehitherto been found at Thebes.In the infancy of society, various materials wereemployed for writing, as stones, bricks, tiles, platesof bronze, lead and other metals, wooden tables *,the leaves and bark of trees, and the shoulder bonesof animals. Wooden tablets covered with wax,were long in use among the Romans, as well asthe papyrus t; and the inner bark of trees t,and pieces of linen §, had been previously adoptedby them.Many Eastern people still write on the leavesof trees, or on wooden tablets, and waraka con-thesewooden tablets, which are covered with a glazed compositioncapable of receiving ink, were used by the Egyptians long after theyhad papyri, and they are still common in schools at Cairo in lieu ofour slates. One is represented in wood-cut. No. 90. Jig. 5.t Whence the word " paper j" as in byblus, or bibles, originated thename bible or book.X Called liber, whence the Latin name liber, " a book."§ Liv. iv. 7, xiii. 20. " Lines Bris," about the year 440 B.C.CHAP. IX. OUR MODERN PAPER. 153tenues to signify, in Arabic, both " a leaf" andpaper."The early Arabs committed their poetry andcompositions to the shoulder-bones of sheep : theyafterwards obtained the papyrus paper from Egypt,on which the poems called Moallaqdt were written,in gold letters ; and after their conquests in Asiaand Africa, these people so speedily profited by, andimproved the inventions of the nations they hadsubdued, that parchment was manufactured inSyria, Arabia, and Egypt, which in colour anddelicacy might vie with our modern paper. Itspeedily superseded the use of the papyrus, andcontinued to be employed until the discovery ofthe method of making paper from cotton and silk,called Carta homhycina, which is proved by Mont-falconto have been known at least as early asA. D. 1100 ; and is supposed to have been inventedabout the beginning of the ninth century. Beingintroduced into Spain from Syria, it was denominatedCarta Damascena ; and some manuscripts oncotton paper are said to exist in the Escurial,written in the eleventh century.It is a matter of doubt to what nation, and period,the invention of paper manufactured from linenought to be ascribed. The Chinese were acquaintedwith the secret of making it from various vegetablesubstances long before it was known in Europe ;the perfection to which they have carried thisbranch of art continues to excite our admiration ;and " the librarian Castri relates," according toGibbon, " from credible testimony, that paper was154 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.first imported from China to Samarcand a. h. 30(ad. 652), and invented or rather introduced, atMecca ash. 88 (ad. 710)."*It may, however, be questioned whether it wasmade from linen at that early period, and we haveno positive proof of linen paper being known evenby the Saracens, prior to the eleventh century. TheMoors, as might be expected, soon introduced itinto Spain, and the Escurial library is said to containmanuscripts written on this kind of paper, as old asthe twelfth centuryBut paper of mixed cotton and linen, which wasmade at the same time, appears to have been inmore general use ; and linen paper continued to berare in most European countries till the fifteenthcentury. That it was known in Germany as earlyas the year 1312, has been satisfactorily ascertainedby existing documents, and a letter on linen paper,written from Germany to Hugh Spencer, aboutthe year 1315, is preserved in the Chapter-house atWestminster ; which, even to the water-mark, resemblesthat made at the present day.It was not till the close of the sixteenth centurythat paper was manufactured in England. Thefirst was merely of a coarse brown quality, verysimilar to that of the modern Arabs, whose skill inthis, as in many arts and sciences, has been transferredto people once scarcely known to them, andthen greatly their inferiors ; and writing or printingGibbon, vol. ix. c. 51. p. 379.f Some doubt the existence of any MS. on linen paper before theyear 1270 ; but an Arabic version of the Aphorisms of Hippocrates, inthe Escurial, dates in the beginning of the 13th century.CHAP. IX. TANNERS AND Carriers. 155paper was not made in London before 1690 ; Franceand Holland having, till that time, supplied us withan annual importation, to the amount of nearly100,000 pounds.TANNERS AND LEATHER CUTTERS.The tanning and preparation of leather was alsoa branch of art, in which the Egyptians evincedconsiderable skill ; the leather-cutters, as I havealready observed, constituted one of the principalsubdivisions of the third caste ; and a district of thecity was exclusively appropriated to them, in theLibyan part of Thebes.Leather is little capable of resisting the action ofdamp, the salts of the earth, or excessive dryness,so that we cannot reasonably expect to find it sufficientlywell preserved, to enable us to judge ofits quality ; but the fineness of that employed formaking the straps, placed across the bodies of mummies,discovered at Thebes, and the beauty ofthe figures stamped upon them, satisfactorily provethe skill of "the leather cutters," and the antiquityof embossing : some of these bearing thenames of kings, who ruled Egypt about the periodof the Exodus, or 3300 years ago.Many of the occupations of their trade are portrayedon the painted walls of the tombs at Thebes.They made shoes, sandals, the coverings and seatsof chairs or sofas, bow-cases, and most of the Vol. II. p. 7.156 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.mental furniture of the chariot ; harps were alsoadorned with coloured leather, and shields andnumerous other things were covered with skinprepared in various ways. They also made skinsfor carrying water, wine, and other liquids ; andthe custom of coating them within with a resinoussubstance was the origin, as I have alreadyobserved*, of that acquired taste, which led theEgyptians to imitate the flavour it imparted to wine,even in their earthen amphorae.Part of the process of curing the skins is introducedin the sculptures ; and that of dyeing themismentioned in the Bible t, being doubtless borrowedby the Jews from Egypt. In one instance,a man is represented dipping the hide into a vase,probably containing water, in which it was sufferedto soak, preparatory to the lime being applied toremove the hair j a process very similar to thatadopted at the present day in Egypt and other countries.The Arabs prefer the acrid juice of a plantgrowing in the desert, for the purpose, as its effectis still more rapid, and as it has the advantage ofmaking the skin better and more durable.This plant is the Periploca Sycamore ; its stalkscontain a white milky juice, which exudes from itwhen bruised, and which is so acrid as to be highlyinjurious to the eye, or to the wounded skin. Itsupports itself by winding around every neighbouringshrub, and its not ungraceful stalks appear tohave been occasionally used by the ancient EgyptII. p. 158.f Exod. XXV. 5. " i^rid rains' skins dyed red."CHAP. IX. MODE OF CUTTING LEATHER. 157trans, for the same ornamental purpose as the ivy,in forming festoons. But there is no evidence of itshaving been employed by them in curing skins,though they seem to have been well acquaintedwith the properties of the plants which grew in thedeserts, as well as in the valley of the Nile; andhowever we might be inclined to suppose that, inthe sculptures of Thebes representing the occupationsof carriers, they are pounding something ofthe kind for this purpose, the absence of every indicationof the contents of the vase, or mortar,leaves it undecided if it be the periploca, or lime,salt, or other substance.According to the Arabs, the method of preparingskins with the periploca, or Ghulga, is as follows :'* The skins are first put into flour and salt forthree days, and are cleansed of all the fat andimpurities of the inside. The stalks of the plantbeing pounded between large stones, are then putinto water, applied to the inner side of the skin forone day, and the hair having fallen ofl", the skin isleft to dry for two or three days, and the process iscompleted."The mode of stretching or bending leather overa form is frequently represented at Thebes ; and itis curious to observe, that the semicircular knife *,used by the ancient Egyptians between 3000 and4000 years ago, is precisely similar to that of ourmodern carriers.As in other trades, the tools they employed wereVide wood-cut, No. 55. fig. c. Vol. I. p. 350.158 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.neither numerous nor complex, and their meansmight sometimes appear inadequate, did we not seethebeautiful work performed at the present day,in China, India, and other countries, where theimplements are equally simple. The semicircularknife, a sort of chisel, the common awl, (specimensof which have been found at Thebes, similar toour own,) a stone for polishing the leather, thecutting table, the bending form, the horn, and afew other utensils, were all that occurred in theshop of the shoemaker, or the currier ; and aprepared skin, the emblem of their trade, was suspended,together with ready-made shoes and otherarticles, to indicate their skill, and to invite a customer.The shops of an Egyptian town were probablysimilar to those of Cairo *, and other Easterncities: which consist of a square room, open infront, with falling or sliding shutters, to close it atnight; and the goods ranged in shelves, or suspendedagainst the walls, are exposed to the view of thosewho pass. In front is generally a raised seat, wherethe owner of the shop and his customers sit, duringthe long process of concluding a bargain, previousto the sale and purchase of the smallest article ; andhere an idle lounger frequently passes whole hours,less intent on benefiting the shopkeeper, than inamusing himself with the busy scene of the passingcrowd.Among the many curious customs introduced inVide Lane's Modern Egyptians, vol. ii. p. 9. and 10., wood-cuts.CHAP. IX.SHOPS.the paintings, and still retained in the East, isthat of holding a strap of leather, or other substance,with the toes, which from their being alwaysfree, and unincumbered with tight shoes, retaintheir full power and pliability ; and the singular, INo. 360. Currier holding a strap of leather with his toes, while cutting it. Thebes,b b are straps tied up, and deposited in the shop.may say, primitive, mode of tightening a thongwith the teeth, while sewing a shoe, is also portrayedin the paintings of the time of the thirdThothmes.It is probable that as at the present day, theyate in the open front of their shops, exposed to theview of every one who passed ; and to this customHerodotus may allude, when he says '* the Egyptianseat in the street." *In Eastern towns, no regal arms, or gilded inscription,proclaim the patronage t of *' his Majesty,"and no picture or description, affixed to theshop, announce the trade of the owner; beingHerodot. ii. 35.f A Turk in London once observed, " How very changeable yourking must be, if all the shops having royal arms have been successivelytried by him."THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. IX.No. 361. Part 1. Shoemakers.Fart 2, Men employed in polishing a column. Thebes.Fig. 1. making a hole with an awl. 2. tightening a thong with his teeth.b b sandals hanging up in the shop. c to / various tools.thought Sufficiently shown by the goods exposedfor sale; but this does not prevent the consistency,perhaps profanation, of attaching a religioussentence, or the name of the Deity, to walls,which hourly witness an attempt to defraud the inexperiencedcustomer. Nor is there any direct evidencethat the ancient Egyptians affixed the nameand trade of the owner of the shop, though the presenceof hieroglyphics, denoting this last, togetherwith the emblem which indicated it, may seem toarffue in favour of the custom ; and the absence ofmany individuals* names in the sculptures is readilyaccounted for by the fact, that these scenes referCHAP. IX. TANNERS AND Carriers. l6lto the occupation of the whole trade, and not toany particular person.Of all people, we may suppose Egyptian shopkeepersmost likely to display the patronage receivedfrom royalty ; the name of a monarch being so oftenintroduced in the most conspicuous manner onthe coffins of private individuals, and in the paintingsof the tombs; many of the calabash theywore presenting the name of a king; and themost ordinary devices being formed to resemble aroyal oval. But whether or not they had this custom,or that of affixing the name and occupation ofthe tradesman, it is difficult to determine ; andindeed in those cities where certain districts wereset apart for particular trades, the latter distinctionwas evidently uncalled for, and superfluous.The great consumption of leather in Egypt, andthe various purposes to which skins *, both in thetanned and raw state, were applied, created ademand far greater than could be satisfied by theproduce of the country : they therefore importedskins from foreign countries, and part of thetribute, levied on the conquered tribes of Asiaand Africa, consisted of hides, and the skins of wildanimals, as the leopard, fox, and others ; whichare frequently represented in the paintings ofThebes, laid before the throne of the Egyptianmonarch, together with gold, silver, ivory, rareSkins were considered of great value by many ancient people : therewards in the games at Chemist in Upper Egypt, were skins, cattleand cloaks, and we find the same custom among the Greeks. VideHorn. II. xxii. 159. Herodot. ii. 91.VOL. III. M16^2THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. IX.woods, and the various productions * of each vanquishedcountry.For tanning they used the pods of the Sont orAcacia (Acacia or Mimosa Nilotica), the acanthusof Strabo and other writers ; which was cultivatedin many parts of Egypt, being also prized for itstimber, and gum ; and it is probable that thebark and wood of the Rhus oxyocanthoides, anative of the desert, were employed for the samepurposeFULLERS.Many persons, both men and women, were engagedin cleaning cloth, and stuffs of various kinds ;and the occupations of the fuller form some of thenumerous subjects of the sculptures. It is, however,probable that they were only a subdivision ofNo. 362.^ Fullers. Beni Hassan.a i inclined tables, cc the water running oS* into the trough below.Some of these tributes put us in mind of the objects which camein Solomon's ships : " gold, and silver, ivory, and apes, and peacocks,"1 Kings, X. 22.; see also Athenaeus (lib. v.), where he mentions thepresents brought to Ptolemy Philadelphus.f The Arabs also use the bark of the Acacia Sayal for tanning ; itgrows in the desert, but not in the valley of the Nile.CHAP. IX. POTTERS. l63the dyers, whose skill in colouring cloth I havealready noticed.POTTERS.A far more numerous class were the potters ;and all the processes of mixing the clay, and ofturning, baking, and polishing the vases, are representedin the tombs of Thebes and BeniHassan.They frequently needed the clay with their feet,and after it had been properly worked up, they formedit into a mass of convenient size with the hand,and placed it on the wheel *, which, to judge fromthat represented in the paintings, was of verysimple construction, and turned with the hand.The various forms of the vases were made out bythe finger during their revolution ; the handles, ifthey had any, were afterwards affixed to them ;and the devices and other ornamental parts weretraced with a wooden or metal instrument, previousto their being baked. They were then sufferedto dry, and for this purpose were placed onplanks of wood ; they were afterwards arrangedwith great care in trays, and carried, by means ofthe usual yoke, borne on men's shoulders, to theoven.Many of the vases, bottles, and pans of ordinaryquality were very similar to those made inEgypt at the present day, as we learn from theSome supposed the potter's wheel to have been invented by Ana-classis,but, as Strabo observes, it was already known to HomerStrabo, vii. p, 209. Seneca Epist. 90. Plin. vii. 56.M 2THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. IX.CHAP. IX. POTTERS. misrepresentationsin the paintings, and from thosefound in the tombs, or in the ruins of oldtowns ; and judging from the number of Copticwords applied to the different kinds, their nameswere as varied as their forms. Coptos and itsvicinity were always noted for this manufacture ;the clays found there were peculiarly suited forporous vases to cool water ; and their qualities arefully manifested, at the present day, in the woollenor hardak bottles, of Qeneh.That the forms of the modern woollens are borrowedfrom those of an ancient time is evident, fromthe fragments found amidst the mounds, which markthe sites of ancient towns and villages, as well asfrom the many preserved entire ; and a local traditionaffirms that the modern manufacture is borrowedfrom, and has succeeded without interruptionto, that of former days.It is impossible to fix the period of the inventionof the potter's wheel, and the assertion of Pliny,who attributes it to Croesus the Athenian*, is notonly disproved by probability, but by the positivefact that it was known at the earliest epoch ofEgyptian history, of which the sculptures havebeen preserved, previous to the arrival of Joseph,and consequently long before the foundation ofAthens.But Pliny's chapter of inventions abounds witherrors of this kind, and serves to show low commonlythe Greeks adopted the discoveries of otherPlin. vii. 36.M 3I6t) THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.nations, particularly of Egypt and Phoenicia, andclaimed them as their own : even the art of cuttingstones is attributed to Cadmus, of Thebes ; andThales of Miletus was said to have enlightened theEgyptians, under whom he had long been studying*,by teaching them to measure the altitude ofa pyramid, or other body, by its shadow t, at thelate period of 600 b. c. Though we may pardon,we must smile at, the vanity of the Greeks, whopretended to the merit of pointing out to theirinstructors a discovery t, of which men so skilfulin astronomy and mathematics could not havebeen ignorant ; but we must express our surpriseat the simplicity of modern writers, who believeand repeat so improbable a story.The Egyptians displayed much taste in theirgold, silver, porcelain, and glass vases, but whenmade of earthenware, for ordinary purposes, theywere sometimes devoid of elegance, and scarcelysuperior to those of England, before the classic tasteof Wedgwood substituted the graceful forms otGreek models, for the unseemly productions of ourold potteries. Though the clay of Upper Egyptwas particularly suited to porous bottles, it couldnot be obtained of a sufficiently fine quality forthe manufacture of vases like those of Greece andItaly ; in Egypt too, good taste did not extend toThe Greeks went to study in Egypt, as modern artists in Italy.t Plin. XXX vi. 12. " When the shadow was equal to its height," atan angle of 45°.J On a par with this is their deriving foreign names from their ownlanguage, as Isis from the Greek word signifying "knowledge." —EXXjjwikov yap jj long tan" Plut. de Is. s. 2.: and many others.CHAP. IX. CARPENTERS AND Cabinet-makers. lOjall classes, as in Greece ; and vases used for fetchingwater from a well, or from the Nile, were frequentlyof a very ordinary kind, far inferior to thosecarried by the Athenian women to the fountain ofKallirhoe.*The Greeks, it is true, were indebted to Egyptfor much useful knowledge, and for many early hintsin art, but they speedily surpassed their instructorsin taste, and improved on the information they hadacquired ; and in nothing, perhaps, is this morestrikingly manifested than in the productions of thepotter.CARPENTERS AND Cabinet-makers,Carpenters and cabinet-makers were a verynumerous class of workmen : and their occupationsgenerally form one of the most important subjectsin the paintings which represent the Egyptiantrades.Egypt produced little wood ; and with the exceptionof the date and dom palms, the sycomore,tamarisk, and acacias, few trees of native growthafforded timber either for building, or for ornamentalpurposes.The principal uses of the date and dom trees Ihave already mentioned, tFor coffins, boxes, tables, doors, and other objects,which required large and thick planks, for idols andwooden statues, the sycomore was principally einMr. Rogers's choice collection is a vase, on which this subjectis represented.t In Vol.11, p. 177, 178.M il68 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.played ; and from the great quantity discovered inthe tombs alone, it is evident that the tree was cultivatedto a great extent. It had the additional recommendationof bearing a fruit, to which theEgyptians were very partial ; and a religious prejudiceclaimed for it, and the Persia, the name andrank of sacred fruit trees.The tamarisk was preferred for the handles oftools, wooden hoes, and other things requiring a hardand compact wood ; and of the acacia were made theplanks and masts of boats, the handles of offensiveweapons of war, and various articles of furniture.Large groves of this tree were cultivated in manyparts of Egypt ; especially in the vicinity ofMemphis and Abydus, where they still exist ; andbesides its timber, the acacia was highly valued forthe pods it produced, so useful for tanning, andfor the gum, which exudes from the trunk andbranches, now known under the name of gum Arabic.* This tree is not less prized by the modernEgyptians, who have retained its name as well as itsuses ; sont being applied to this species of acacia,both in Arabic and the ancient Egyptian language.Besides the Sont, or Acacia (Mimosa) Nilotica,the Seller, SumVy Tulh^ Fitness Lehbekh^ andother acacias, which grew in Egypt, were alsoadapted to various purposes ; and some instancesare met with of the wood of the Eqleeq^ or Balances^gyptiaca, and of different desert trees having beenused by the Egyptian carpenters.Other acacias produce this gum. The Tull has, liar excellence, thespecific title of gummifera. Vide Vol. II. p. 182.CHAP. IX. IMITATION OF RARE WOODS. lt)9For ornamental purposes, and sometimes evenfor coffins, doors, and boxes, foreign woods wereemployed ; deal and cedar were imported fromSyria ; and part of the contributions, exacted fromthe conquered tribes of Ethiopia, and Asia, consistedin ebony and other rare woods, which wereannually brought by the chiefs, deputed to presenttheir country's tribute to the Egyptian monarchs.Boxes, chairs, tables, sofas, and other pieces offurniture were frequently made of ebony, inlaidwith ivory ; sycomore and acacia were veneeredwith thin layers, or ornamented with carved devices,of rare wood, applied, or let into them ; and afondness for this display suggested to the Egyptiansthe art of painting common boards, to imitateforeign varieties, so generally adopted at the presentday.The colours were usually applied on a thin coatingof stucco, laid smoothly upon the previouslyprepared wood, and the various knots and grains,painted upon this ground, indicated the quality ofthe wood they intended to counterfeit.The usual tools * of the carpenter were the axe,adze, hand-saw, chisels of various kinds (which werestruck with a wooden mallet), the drill, and two sortsof planes, (one resembling a chisel t, the other apparentlyof stone, acting as a rasp on the surfaceof the wood, which was afterwards polished by asmooth body, probably also of stone t ;) and theseVide supra, woodcut, No. 151. Vol. II. c. 5. p. 181.t Vide woodcut, No. 89./g. 3. Vol. 11. p. 42.t Vide woodcut, No. 89./g. 2. Vol. II. p. 42.170 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.with the ruler*, plummet, and right angle t, a leatherbag containing nails, the hone, and horn of oil,constituted the principal, and perhaps the only,implements he used.Some of the furniture of their rooms, the workof the cabinet-maker, I have already noticed t, andhave observed § the perfection to which they hadarrived in the construction of the chairs and ottomansof their saloons ; nor can I omit the mentionof the art of dovetailing, already practised in theearliest Pharaonic ages, or the mode of applyingtwo planks together in the same plane, by meansof broad pins, or tongues, of hard wood. Of theformer numerous instances occur, both in large andsmall objects, and no illustration of it is required ;the latter is peculiar, and shows the great caretaken to make every thing durable, which characterizesall the works of the Egyptians.When two boards are joined together by ourmodern carpenters, they insert small round pinshorizontally, into corresponding parts of the edges,and then apply them together, so as to form as itwere a single piece ; but the Egyptian carpenter wasnot content with this precaution, and having used flatpins for this purpose about two inches in breadth, hesecured these again, after the boards had been appliedto each other, by round pins or wooden nails, drivenvertically through the boards, into each of the flatpins ; and thus the possibility of the joint openingr«/e woodcut, No. 364,/+ Vide woodcut, No. 359. part ii. fg. v. ; and No. SG*. e.j At the beginning of chapter vi.J Vol. II. ch. vi. p. 193.CHAP. IX. CARPENTERS. Iiwas effectually prevented, even should the glue,which was added as in our modern boxes, fail tohold them.After the wood had been reduced to a propersize by the saw, the adze was the principal toolemployed for fashioning it; and from the precisionwith which even the smallest objects areworked with it at the present day, by the unskilfulcarpenters of modern Egypt, we mayform some idea of its use in the hands of theirexpert predecessors; and we are less surprised tomeet with it so frequently represented in thesculptures.Many of them, together with saws and chisels,have been found at Thebes : the blades are all olbronze, the handles of the acacia or the tamarisk ;and, which is very singular, the general mode otfastening the blade to the handle, appears to havebeen by thongs of hide. It is probable that someof those discovered in the tombs are only models,or unfinished specimens ; and it may have beenthought sufficient to show their external appearance,without the necessity of nailing them, beneaththe thongs * ; for those which they used werebound in the same manner, though I believe themto have been also secured with nails. Some,however, evidently belonged to the individuals inwhose tombs they were buried, and like the chiselsappear to have been used : for these last often bearIt is probable that the stone and bronze celts found in Britainwere fastened to their handles in the same manner. Vide wood-cut.No. 'Sci. c. and No. 359. u. part 2.172 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.the signs of having been beaten with the hammeror mallet.The drill is frequently exhibited in the sculptures.Like all the other tools, it was of theearliest date, and precisely similar to that ofmodern Egypt, even to the nut of the dom * inwhich it turned, and the form of its bow with aleathern thong.The chisel was employed for the same purposes,and in the same manner, as at the present day,and was struck with a wooden mallet, sometimesflat at the two ends, sometimes of circular or ovalform ; several of which last have been found atThebes, and are preserved in our European museums.The handles of the chisel were of acacia,tamarisk, or other compact wood; the blades ofbronze ; and the form of the points varied inbreadth, according to the work for which theywere intended.The hatchet was principally used by boat-builders,and those who made large pieces offramework ; and trees were felled with the sameinstrument.The mode of sawing timber was primitive andimperfect, owing to their not having adopted thedouble saw; and they were obliged to cut everypiece of wood, however large, single-handed. Inorder, therefore, to divide a beam into planks, theyplaced it, if not of very great length, upright betweentwo posts, firmly fixed in the ground, andVie woodcut, No. 359, part 2,, and Vol. II. p. 180, 181.CHAP. IX. EARLY USE OF GLUE. 173being lashed to them with cords, or secured withpins, it was held as in a vice.*Among the many occupations of the carpenter,that of veneering is noticed in the sculptures ofThebes, as early as the time of the third Thoth-mes,whom I suppose to be the Pharaoh of theExodus ; and the application of a piece of rarewood of a red colour, to a yellow plank of sycomore,or other ordinary kind, is clearly pointedout. And in order to show that the yellow woodis of inferior quality, the workman is representedto have fixed his adze carelessly in a block of thesame colour, while engaged in applying them together.Near him are some of his tools, with a boxor small chest, made of inlaid and veneered wood,of various hues ; and in the same part of the shopare two other men, one of whom is employed ingrinding something with a stone on a slab, and theother in spreading glue with a brush.It might, perhaps, be conjectured that varnishwas intended to be here represented ; but the appearanceof the pot on the fire, the piece of gluewith its concave fracture, and the workman beforementioned, applying the two pieces of wood together,satisfactorily decide the question, and attestthe invention of glue 3300 years ago. This isnot, however, the only proof of its use at an earlyVide woodcut, No. 368. a.■f Professor Rosellini seems to think that the application of colouris here represented; but the presence of the pot, containing the brush,upon the fire, (Wood cut. No. 364. 8.) will scarcely admit of this,though the figure (Jig. 2.) grinding something on the slab, might appearto strengthen his conjecture. He has placed this subject with theTHE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.painters of Beni Hassan, but it is at Thebes. Pliny ascribes the inventionof glue to Daedalus, as well as of the saw, the axe, the plumb-line,and the auger. Plin. vii. 36.CHAP. IX. BOXES. 17.1period, and several wooden boxes have beenfound, in which glue was employed to fasten thejoints.Various boxes, shrines, articles of furniture, andother works of the cabinet-maker are frequentlyportrayed in the paintings of Thebes, many of whichpresent not inelegant forms, and are beautifullymade. I have already noticed* several of thesmaller objects, as boxes for trinkets and ointment,wooden spoons, and the like ; and have described ta curious substitute for a hinge, in some of thosediscovered at Thebes.Many boxes had lids resembling the curvedsummit of a royal canopy $, and were ornamentedwith the usual cornice § ; others had a simple flatcover ; and some few a pointed summit, resemblingthe shelving roof of a house. 1| This last kind of lidwas divided into two parts, one of which aloneopened, turning on two small pins at the base, onthe principle of the doors of their houses andtemples ; and when necessary, the two knobs atthe top could be tied together and sealed, in thesame manner as in that previously mentioned. * *When not veneered, or inlaid with rare wood,the sides and lid were painted, and those intendedfor the tombs, to be deposited there inhonour of the deceased, had usually a funerealinscription, or a religious subject painted uponIn Vol. II. p. 355. to 362. f In p. 361, 362.% Woodcut, No. 365. Jigs. 1, 2, 3, 6. ^ Fig. 1.II Woodcut, No. 363. j%5. 4. 8. H Fig. 4!.** In Vol. II. p. 362.lyOTHE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.No. 365.Different boxesFigs. 1. and 2. Mode of placing the lid when the box was opened.3. Man opening a box, from a painting at Thebes.*. and 5. A painted box of Mr. Salt's collection, showing how the lid opened.fi. and 7. Boxes from the paintings of Thebes.8. Another box with a shelving lid, from a tomb at Thebes, in Mr. Salt's collection.CHAP. IX. BOXES. 177them, representing offerings presented by membersof his family.*Several boxes have been found at Thebes ; andthe British Museum possesses some formerly belongingto M. Salt, one of which is remarkable forthe brilliancy of the colours imparted to the piecesof ivory with which it is inlaid. The box is ofebony ; the ivory, painted red and blue, is let intothe sides and edges, and the lid is ornamented inthe same manner. There is in this a substitute forahinge, similar to the one before mentioned, exceptthat here the back of the cross bar, cut to a sharpedge along its whole extent, fits into a correspondinggroove at the end of the box : the twoknobs are fixed in their usual place at the top andfront.The lids of many boxes were made to slide inagroove, like our small colour boxes, as that givenin a preceding wood-cut t ; others fitted into thebody, being cut away at the edges for this purpose;and some turned on a pin at the back, as Ihave shown in the long-handled boxes before mentioned,tIn opening a large box they frequently pushedback the lid, and then either turned it sideways §and left it standing across the breadth of the box,or suffered it to go to the ground ; but in thoseof still larger dimensions, it was removed altogetherand laid upon the floor.Figs. 4, and 8. f Woodcut, No. 2G9. p. 361. Vol. II.Vule woodcuts, Nos. 258. 239. and 263.Woodcut, No. 365.//?.?. 1, 2, 3.VOL. III. NI178 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.With the carpenters may be mentioned thewheelwrights, the makers of coffins, and thecoopers ; and this subdivision of one class of artisans,showing a systematic partition of labour, isone of many proofs of the advancement of thiscivilised people.I have already shown that the Egyptian chariotwas of wood*, and have pointed out whatportion of it was the province of the carpenter andthe currier t ; and having described the war chariot,and the curricle of the towns, it only remains tonotice the travelling car, or light plaustrum, whichwas drawn by oxen.Though so frequently used in Egypt, it is singularthat one instance alone occurs of this kind ofcar, in a tomb I opened at Thebes in 1827 ; ^i^dthis ought to show how wrong it is to infer thenon-existence of a custom from its not being metwith in the sculptures. The same remark alsoapplies to the camel, which, in consequence of itsnot being found either in the paintings or hieroglyphicst, is conjectured by some to have been unknownin Egypt at an early period ; though, as Ihave already observed §, it is distinctly mentionedin the Bible among the presents given to Abrahamby the king of Egypt.Vol. I. p. 342. I have observed that the Egyptian chariot hadonly two wheels, and one instance is alone met with of a four wheeledcarriage. Pliny says waggons with four wheels were an invention ofthe Phrygian, lib. vii. 56.t Vol. I. p. 348.X I have noticed an instance of it on a seal I found in Nubia, ofuncertain date.^ In chap. viii.CHAP. IX.THE PLAUSTRUM.The plaustrum was very similar to the warchariot * and the curricle, but the sides appear tohave been closed, and it was drawn by a pair ofoxen instead of horses. The harness was muchthe same, and the wheels had six spokes. In ajourney it was occasionally furnished with a sort ofumbrella, fixed upon a rod rising from the centre,or back part of the car : the reins were the same asthose used for horses, and apparently furnished witha bit ; and besides the driver, a groom sometimesattended on foot, at the head of the animals, perhapsfeeding them as they went.The accompanying wood-cut represents anEthiopian princess, who is on her journey through1 2 3No. 366. An Ethiopian princess travelling in a plaustrum, or car drawn by oxen. Overher is a sort of umbrella. Thebes.3 an attendant. 4 the charioteer or driver.It has been always a matter of surprise how the ancients couldtraverse hilly countries, where no roads were made, with so much facility,in chariots.N 2180 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.Upper Egypt to Thebes, where the court thenresided ; but whether it was on the occasion of herprojected marriage with the king, the brother of thethud Amunoph, or merely to present her homageto him, is uncertain. A large tribute is broughtat the same time from her countrymen, the " Cush,"or "Ethiopians;" which seems to show that itmerely relates to a visit of ceremony from thequeen or princess of that country j and the fact ofthe charioteer and some other of the attendantsbeing Egyptians, suggests that the plaustrum wasalso provided from Egypt, as was the case whenPharaoh * sent for Jacob, and his family, to bringthem to Egypt. The plaustra are called in Genesist "waggons:" they were commonly used inEgypt for travelling; and Strabo performed thejourney from Syene, to the spot, where he crossedthe river to visit Philee, in one of those carriages, tBesides the plaustrum, they had a sort of palanquin§, and a canopy or frame-work, answering thepurpose of a sedan chair, in which they sometimessat or stood, in their open pleasure boats, or in situationswhere they wished to avoid the sun ; andthese were also the work of the cabinet-maker.Certain persons were constantly employed inthe towns of Egypt, as at the present day in Cairoand other places, to pound various substances inlargestone mortars ; and salt, seeds, and otherthings were probably taken, in the same manner, byGenes, xlv. 19.f They are termed ageloot m^sr, ivkeekd carriages. Gen. loc. cit.i Strabo, lib. xvii. p. 562. ed. Cas. " amtvri"^ Vide supra, Vol. II. p. 228. Woodcut, No. 174.CHAP. IX. POUNDING IN STONE MORTARS.a servant to these shops, whenever it was inconvenientto have it done in the house. The pestlesthey used, as well as the mortars themselves, wereprecisely similar to those of the modern Egyptians;and, their mode of pounding was the same ; twomen alternately raising ponderous metal pestleswith both hands, and directing their falling pointto the centre of the mortar ; which is nowNo. 367. Pounding various substances in stone mortars, with metal pestles. Thebes.ag i mortars. il d pestles. Figs. 1 and 2 alternately raising and letting fall the pestles into the mortar.Fig. 3 and 4 silting the substance after it is pounded ; the coarser parts fi, being returned into themortar to be again pounded.generally made of a large piece of granite, orother hard stone, scooped out into a long narrowtube, to little more than half its depth. Whenthe substance was well pounded, it was taken out,and passed through a sieve, and the larger particleswere again returned to the mortar, until it wassufficiently and equally levigated ; and this, andthe whole process here represented, so stronglyresemble the occupation of the public poundersat Cairo, that no one, who has been in the habitof walking in the streets of that town, can fail toN 3182 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.recognise the custom, or doubt of its having beenhanded down from the early Egyptians, and retainedwithout the slightest alteration, to the present day.In a country where water and other liquids werecarried, or kept, in skins and earthenware jars, therewas little necessity for the employment of woodenbarrels, which too are little suited to a climate likethe hot and arid Egypt ; and modern experiencethere shows how ill adapted barrels are for suchpurposes, and how soon they fall to pieces, if neglectedor left empty for a very short period. Wecannot, therefore, expect that they should be incommon use among the ancient Egyptians ; andthe skill of the cooper * was only required tomake wooden measures for grain t, which werebound with hoops either of wood or metal, andresembled in principle those now used in Egyptfor the same purpose ; though in form they approachednearer to the small barrels t, or kegs, ofmodern Europe.In an agricultural scene, painted at Beni Hassan,a small barrel is represented, placed upon astand, apparently at the end of the field, which Iat first supposed to have been intended to holdwater for the use of the husbandmen, one of whomis approaching the spot ; calling to mind the cupof wine presented to the ploughman on reachingthe end of the furrow, mentioned by Homer, inThe coopers of Cairo are generally Greeks.f One of these is represented in woodcut, No. 90. fig. 2.j In Europe, barrels were said by Piny to have been invented bythe Gauls, who inhabited the banks of the Po. Varro and Columellamention them in their time. They were pitched within.CHAP. IX.COFFIN MAKERS.N 4184 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.his description of the shield of Achilles * ; but itis probable that in this instance, also, it is intendedto indicate the measure of grain, with which theland was to be sown after the plough had passed.A great number of persons were constantly employedin making coffins, as well as the numerousboxes, wooden figures, and other objects connectedwith funerals, who may be comprehendedunder the general head of carpenters ; the undertakers,properly so called, being a different class ofpeople, attached to and even forming part of thesacerdotal order, though of an inferior grade. Indeedthe ceremonies of the dead were so numerous,and so many persons were engaged in performingthe several duties connected with them, that noparticular class of people can be said to have hadthe sole direction in these matters ; and we findthat the highest orders of priests officiated in some,and in others those of a very subordinate station.Thus the embalmers were held in the highest consideration,while those who cut open the body, whenthe intestines were removed, are said to have beentreated with ignominy and contemptBoat-builders AND SHIPS.The boat-builders may be divided into two separateand distinct classes ; one of which formed asubdivision of the carpenters, the other of thebasket-makers, or the weavers of rushes andosiers; another very numerous class of workmen.Homer, 11. a. 545. f Diod. i. 91.CHAP. IX. BOATS OF THE PAPYRUS, 185The boats made by these last were a sort of canoeor punt, used for fishing, and consisted merely ofwater plants or osiers, bound together with bandsmade of the stalks of the papyrus or cyperus.* Theywere very light, and some so small that they couldeasily be carried from one place to another t ; andthe Ethiopian boats, mentioned by Pliny t, whichwere taken out of the water, and carried on men'sshoulders past the rapids of the cataracts, wereprobably of a similar kind.Strabo, on the other hand, describes the boatsat the cataracts of Syene passing the falls in perfectsecurity, and exciting the surprise of the beholders,before whom the boatmen delighted in displayingtheir skill ; and Celsius affirms that they were madeof the papyrus.Papyrus boats are frequently noticed by ancientwriters. Plutarch describes Isis going, in searchof the body of Osiris, *' through the fenny country,in a bark made of the papyrus || ; whenceit is supposed that persons using boats of thisdescription are never attacked by crocodiles, outof fear and respect to the goddess ; " and Moses issaid to have been exposed in "an ark (or boat) ofbulrushes, daubed with slime and with pitches**From this last we derive additional proof that theNot the same species as that used for making paper. Vit£ supra,p. 146.+ Achilles Statius, lib. iv.I Plin.v. 9. § Strabo, xvii. p. 562.II Plut. de Is. S. 18. " Ev fSapih Trcnrvpivy."if " Ev TTcnrvpivoiQ fficatpiai TrXeovrag." Plut. loc. cit.** Exod. ii. 3. The bulrush is called nqj ; the paper reeds in Isaiah,xix. 7. are nny-186 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.body of such boats was composed of rushes, which,as I have observed, were bound together with thepapyrus ; and the mode of rendering them imperviousto water is satisfactorily pointed out by thecoating of pitch, with which they were covered.Nor can there be any doubt that pitch was knownin Egypt at that time, since we find it on objectswhich have been preserved of the same early date ;and the Hebrew word flQ^ (sift) is precisely thesame as that used for pitch by the Arabs, to thepresent day.Pliny mentions boats " woven of the papyrus *,"the rind being made into sails, curtains, matting,ropes, and even into cloth ; and observes elsewherethat the papyrus, the rush, and the reedwere all used for making boats in Egypt. t*' Vessels of bulrushes" are again mentioned inIsaiah t : Lucan alludes to the mode of bindingor sewing them with bands of papyrus §; and Theophrastusnotices boats made of the papyrus, andsails and ropes of the rind of the same plant.That small boats were made of these materialsis very probable ; and the sculptures of Thebes,Memphis, and other places abundantly show thatthey were employed as punts or canoes for fishing,in all parts of Egypt, during the inundation of theNile ; particularly in the lakes and canals of theDelta.Plin. xiii. 11. "Ex ipso quidem papyro navigia texunt."Plin. vii. 16. and vi. 22. J Isaiah, xviii. 2.Conservator fibula Memphitis cymba papyro."Lucan, iv. 136.II Theophr. iv. 9.tCHAP. IX. LARGE BOATS OF BURDEN. 187There was another kind, called by Strabo ^ec^o/i,in one of which he crossed the Nile to the Islandof Phase, " made of thongs, so as to resemblewicker-work * ; " but it does not appear from hisaccount whether it was formed of reeds bound togetherwith thongs, or was like those made in Armenia,and used for going down the river to Babylon,which Herodotus describes, of osiers coveredwith hides, tThe Armenian boats were merely employed fortransporting goods down the current of the Euphrates,and on reaching Babylon were brokenup ; the hides being put upon the asses whichhad been brought on board for this purpose, andthe traders returning home by land. *' Theywere round, in form of a shield, without either heador stern ; the hollow part of the centre being filledwith straw." " Some were large, others small, andthe largest were capable of bearing 5000 talentsweight." They were therefore very different fromthe boats, reported by the same historian to havebeen made in Egypt for transporting goods up theNile, which he describes as being built in the formof ordinary boats, with a keel, and a mast andsails.The Egyptian boats of burden," he says, "aremade of a thorn wood, very similar to the lotus ofCyrene, from which a tear exudes, called gum. Ofthis tree they cut planks measuring about two cubits,Strabo, xvii. p. 562.f Herodot. i. 194. Those of the ancient Britons were made ofwickerwork covered with hides. Cases. B.C. i. 54.188 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.and having arranged them Uke bricks, they buildthe boat in the following manner: — They fasten theplanks round firm long pegs, and, after this, stretchover the surface a series of girths, but without anyribs, and the whole is bound within by bands ofpapyrus. A single rudder is then put throughthe keel, and a mast of thorn-wood, and sails ofthe papyrus (rind) complete the rigging. Theseboats can only ascend the stream with a strongwind, unless they are towed by ropes from theshore ; and when coming down the river, they areprovided with a hurdle made of tamarisk*, sewedtogether with reeds, and a stone, about two talentsweight, with a hole in the centre. The hurdle isfastened to the head of the boat, and allowed tofloat on the water ; the stone is attached to thestern; so that the former, carried down the river bythe rapidity of the stream, draws after it the paris(for such is the name of these vessels), and thelatter, dragged behind, and sinking into the water,serves to direct its course. They have many ofthese boats ; some of which carry several thousandtalents weight." tThat boats of the peculiar construction he heredescribes were really used in Egypt, is very probable;they may have been employed to carrygoods from one town to another, and navigated inthe manner he mentions : but we may be allowedto doubt their carrying several thousand talents, ormany tons, weight; and we have the evidence of theVide Plin. xiii. 21. " Myricen, qiiam alii taniaricen vacant."t Herod, ii. 96.CHAP. IX. SAILS. — SHIPS OF WAR. 189paintings of Upper and Lower Egypt to show thatthe large boats of burthen were made of woodenplanks, which men are seen cutting with saws andhatchets, and afterwards fastening together withnails and pins ; and they were furnished with spaciouscabins, like those of modern Egypt.Pliny even goes farther than Herodotus, andspeaks of papyrus vessels crossing the sea, andvisiting the Isle of Taprobane * (Ceylon) ; unless,indeed, he alludes to their sails, made of the rind ofthat plant.We are not, however, reduced to the necessity ofcrediting these statements of Pliny and Herodotus ;and though punts and canoes of osiers, and papyrus,or reeds, may have been used on some occasions, asthey still are t, on the Nile and the lakes of Egypt,we may be certain that the Egyptians had strongand well built vessels for the purposes of trade bysea, and for carrying merchandise, corn, and otherheavy commodities on the Nile ; and that, evenif they had been very bold and skilful navigators,they would not have ventured to India t, nor havedefeated the fleets of Phoenicia §, in their papervessels.The sails, when made of the rind of the papyrus,have been supposed similar to those of thePlin, vi. 22. " Quia papyraceis navies armamentisque Nile pete-return(Taprobane)."j- They are very rude, and much smaller than those of ancient times.J Among the numerous productions of India met with in Egypt,which tend to prove an intercourse with that country, may be mentionedthe pine apple, models of which are found in the tombs, of glazedpottery. One is in the possession of Sir Richard Westmacott.In the reign of Aries. Vide Vol. I. p. 169.190 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.Chinese, which fold up like our Venetian blinds ;but there is only one boat represented in thepaintings, which appears to have sails of this kind,though so many are introduced there ; nor canwe believe that a people, noted for their manufacturesof linen and other cloths, would have preferredso imperfect a substitute as the rind of aplant, especially as they exported sail cloth toPhoenicia for that very purpose. *Diodorus t and Herodotus t both mention thefleet of long vessels, or ships of war, fitted out bySesostris in the Arabian Gulf. The former statesthat they were four hundred in number, and thatSesostris was the ^r*^ Egyptian monarch, who builtsimilar vessels ; but Herodotus merely says he wasthe first who passed into the ocean ; and the necessityof previously having ships of war to protect thetrade and coasts of Egypt, disproves his statement,and suggests that they were used at the early period,when the port of Philoctetes traded with the Arabian,and, perhaps, even the Indian shore. §Pliny supposes that ships were first built byDanaus ||, and taken from Egypt to Greece whenhe migrated to that country ; rafts only having beenpreviously known ; and he states that some attributedtheir invention to the Trojans and Myriads,who crossed the Hellespont, in their wars withThrace. The sculptures, however, of ancient EgyptVide Ezekiel, xxvii. 7. In the lamentation of Tyre, " Fine linen,with broidered work from Egypt, was that which thou spreads forthto be thy sail."t Diodor. i. 55. % Herodot. ii. 102.§ ride Vol. I. p. 46. || Plin. vii. 56.Chap. IX. CHAMPOLLION. 191still remain to decide the question, and their datesbeing now ascertained, we are enabled to form ourown opinions on the subject, without the necessityof trusting to the uncertain accounts of ancientwriters. From the sculptures of the eighteenthdynasty, it appears that the same kind of boats forcarrying heavy burdens were then employed inEgypt, as in the later days of Psamaticus andAmasis; they are found at Eilethyas and BeniHassan of the age of Amoris*, and of Osirtasenthe contemporary of Joseph ; and in the tombs nearthe pyramids they again occur, of an epoch previousto the sixteenth dynasty, and the reign of Osir-taken.The ingenious Champollion conjectured thatsome hieroglyphics at Eilethyas proved t the inmateof one of the tombs there, called — " Ah-moses,the son of Obscene," to have been ** chiefof the mariners, or rather of the pilots," whoentered the naval career in the time of KingAmoris," and *' accompanied that monarch, whenhe went up by water to Ethiopia, to imposetribute upon it** and "commanded ships underThoutmosis the First." If this be true, it confirmswhat I have before stated, respecting the earlyexistence of an Egyptian fleet; and whatever improvementmay have been afterwards made in theships of war, fitted out by Sesostris and othermonarchs, in the Arabian Gulf and Mediterraneantwo names are both written Ames in the hieroglyphics, butI use them thus by way of distinction, and in accordance with Manette.Vide Vol. I. p. 47. and 150.f Champollion's twelfth letter from Egypt. Vide Lit. Gazette, p. 617.192 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.mean*, we have sufficient evidence from the paintingsof the tombs at Eilethyas, that in the timeof the same Amoris, the ordinary travelling boatsof the Nile were of a construction far superior tothose mentioned by Herodotus.To have had frequent occasion to introduce thename of Champollion, to whom we are so deeplyindebted, without paying a just tribute to histalents, is to me a reproach, which I cannotsuffer to remain unremoved. I do not wish toenter into the question respecting the discoveryof the proper mode of reading the hieroglyphics :suffice it to say that Dr. Young gave the firstidea and proof of their alphabetic force, whichwas even for some time after doubted by Champollion.And that the merit of originality in thispoint is due to our distinguished countryman Ican bear a satisfactory testimony, having, withmy much regretted friend Sir William Gell, asearly as the summer of 1821, so far profited byDr. Young's opinions on the subject, as to be enabledto suggest the supposed value of two or threeother characters, besides those he had already ascertained; our taking this view of the question beingsolely in consequence of his discovery that they werethe representatives of letters. But it remained forthe genius of Champollion to kindle the spark thusobtained into a flame, and to display by its light,the path which led to a clear insight into thesubject, to perfect the discovery, and to lay downHerodot. ii. 139. and 102. Diodor. i. 68.CHAP. IX. CHAMPOLLION. 193certain rules, applicable in individual as well as ingeneral cases ; and in justice to him be it confessed,that if our knowledge of hieroglyphics were confinedto the limited extent to which it was carriedby Dr. Young, we should have no regularsystem to guide us, in the interpretation of them,and should know little more than the alphabeticvalue of a few letters, without the means of affixinga positive construction to a single sentence on anyEgyptian monument.Had Champollion been disposed to give morecredit to the value and originality of Dr. Young'sresearches, and to admit that the real discovery ofthe key to the hieroglyphics, which in his dexteroushand proved so useful in unlocking those treasures,was the result of his labours, he would unquestionablyhave increased his own reputation, withoutmaking any sacrifice. In this, as in the case ofMr. Burton's triangular (or rather epigrammatic)stone, and in a few other points, he may haveshown a want of ingenuousness : all have theirfaults and vanities; but this is not a reason thatthe memory of one so respectable as Champollionshould be aspersed, or due praise refused him ; andwe cannot forgive the ungenerous conduct of thosewho, from private pique, summon up and misapplytalents, to pervert truth; denying the merit oflabours which, every one acquainted with the subject,knows to have been crowned with unexampledand wonderful success. This is not an era, whenwe could believe men capable of lending themselvesto the unworthy office of maligning one noVOL. III. o194 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.longer living to defend himself, and one, who present,or absent, merits and possesses the respectand admiration of every unprejudiced person. Yethave some been found, in more than one country,prompted to this malicious act by personal enmity,envy of his superior talents and success, or by thataffectation of scepticism, which, while it endeavoursto conceal ignorance, often hopes to acquire creditfor discernment and superior knowledge.When the subject of hieroglyphics becomes betterunderstood, and the world is capable of judginghow much we owe to him, the wonderful ingenuityof Champollion will be appreciated, and the greatestpraise we can bestow on him is confidently topronounce, that time will do justice to his merits,and experience prove the truth of what inexperiencenow calls in question.In the mean time, his last labours, when in Egypt,are not lost to us ; and though we deeply regret thathis life was not spared to complete the task he soably commenced, it is satisfactory to find his powerfulaid still benefits and guides us, by the publicationof his grammar of hieroglyphics ; and some of thevaluable materials collected by him and ProfessorRosellini are already before us. It is indeed fortunate,that one, so talented and so persevering asthe Italian Professor, should have presided overthat part of the scientific expedition sent to Egyptby the Tuscan government; and those who followin the field of hieroglyphic enquiry will re-echothe praises we so willingly bestow on the liberalityof governments, whose patronage is given to sucha worthy object.CHAP. IX. MODERN BOATS OF THE NILE.The construction of the various boats used onthe Nile varied, according to the purposes forwhich they were intended. The punts or canoeswere either pushed with a pole, or propelled witha paddle * ; they had no mast, nor even rudder ; andmany of the small boats, intended merely for rowing,were unprovided with a mast or sails. Theywere also destitute of the raised cabin, common inlargesailing boats, and the rowers appear to havebeen seated on the flat deck, which covered theinterior from the head to the stern, pushing insteadof pulling the oars, contrary to the usual customin boats of larger dimensions. The absence of amast did not altogether depend on the size of theboat, since those belonging to fishermen, whichwere very small, were often furnished with a sail,besides three or four oars t ; and some largeboats, intended for carrying cattle and heavy goods,were sometimes without a mast.No. 369.Boats for carrying cattle and goods on the Nile.riches.a b two boats, fastened to the hank hy the ropes and pegs //; in the cabin of one, a maninflicts the bastinado on a boatman. He is one of the stewards of the estate, and isaccompanied by his dog. In the other boat is a cow, and a net of hay or copied straw r,precisely the same ns the slurtfnow used in Egypt.Vide Contest of boatmen, woodcut, No. 313. /?i,'. 1.-}■ Vide Fishing scene, woodcut, No. 333. part 1. a.O 2THE Ancient EGYPTIANS.CHAP. IX'In going up the Nile, they used the sail, wheneverthe wind was favourable, occasionally rowing,in those parts where the sinuosities of the riverbrought it too much upon the bows ; for it is probablethat, like the modern Egyptians, they did nottack in navigating the river; and when the windwas contrary, or during a calm, they generallyemployed the tow-line, which was pulled by menonshore.After they had reached the southernmost pointof their journey up the stream, the sail was nolong-er considered necessary ; and the mast andyards being taken down, were laid over the topof the cabin, or on a short temporary mast, witha forked summit ; precisely in the same way, andwith the same view, as at the present day, onboardthe canvas, and other masted rowing boatsof Egypt. For as the wind generally blows fromthe N. W., it seldom happens that the sail can beused in going down the Nile, and in a strong windthe mast and rigging are so great an incumbrance,that the boat is unable to make any way againstit, with oars.No. 37(1. — A boat with the mash and sail taken blown, liavmg a chariot and lioroL-s on hoard.EUethyas.The heavy boats of burden, which from theirCHAP. IX. MODERN BOATS OF THE NILE. 197great size cannot be propelled by oars, are sufferedto retain their masts and sails, and float down theriver sideways at the rate of the stream, advantagebeing taken of the wind whenever the bends of theriver allow of it ; and the large germs, used forcarrying corn during the inundation, are only employedwhen the water is very deep, and are laid upthe rest of the year, and covered with matting fromthe sun. These, therefore, form exceptions to theordinary boats of the Nile, and may be consideredsimilar to some represented in the sculptures ofAlabastron, which are fastened to the shore byseveral large ropes, and are shown from the size oftheir cabins, the large awning in front for coveringthe goods they carried, and the absence of oars, tohave been of unusual dimensions.In a boat given in the preceding woodcut from,a tomb at Eilethyas, an error has frequently beenmade respecting the wheel upon the top of thecabin, which some have supposed to be connectedwith the sail*, in order to enable the yard to traversewith greater facility, or for some such purpose ; buton a careful examination of the subject it proves tobe part of a chariot, too much defaced by time to beeasily perceived at first sight, and the horses belongingto it are seen below in front of the cabin. Thiscircumstance not only shows the comforts withwhich the Egyptian grandees travelled, when goingfrom one part of the country to the other, but affordsadditional proof of the size of the boats usedupon the Nile.The other boat represented in this subject has the sail up, andthe same chariot on board. It is, indeed, the same boat, with and withoutthe sailo 3198 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.Large boats had generally one, small pleasureboats two rudders, at the stern. The former traversedupon a beam, between two projecting heads,a short pillar or mast supporting it and actingas the centre on which it moved ; the latter werenearly the same in principle except that theyturned on a bar, or in a ring, by which theywere suspended to the gunnel at either side ; andin both instances the steersman directed them, bymeans of a rope fastened to the upper extremity.The rudders consisted of a long broad blade and stilllonger handle, evidently made in imitation of theoars, by which they originally steered their boats,before they had so far improved them as to adopt afixed rudder ; and in order to facilitate its motionupon the mast or pillar, and to avoid the friction ofthe wood, a piece of bull's hide was introduced, as isthe custom in the modern boats, between the mastand yard.The oars were a long round wooden shaft, towhich a flat board, of oval or circular form, was fastened,and it is remarkable that the same oar is usedto this day on the Ganges, and in the Arabian Gulf.They turned either on toll-pins, or in rings, fastenedto the gunnel of the boat, and the rowers sat on thedeck, on benches, or on low seats, or stood or kneltto the oar, sometimes pushing it forwards, sometimes,and indeed more generally, pulling it, as isthe modern custom in Egypt, and most othercountries.At the head of the boat a man * usually stood,The " Custos et tutela prorae." Ovitl, Met. iii. 617.CHAP. IX. CONSTRUCTION OF THE BOATS. 199with a long pole * in his hand, by which he tried atintervals the depth of the water, lest they shouldrun upon any of the numerous sandbanks withwhich the river abounds, and which, from theiroften changing at the time of the inundation, couldnot always be known to the most skilful pilot ; aprecaution still adopted by the modern boatmen ofthe Nile.That the ancient Egyptian boats were built withribs, like those of the present day, is sufficientlyproved by the rude models discovered in the tombsof Thebes. It is probable that they had very littlekeel, in order to enable them to avoid the sandbanks,and to facilitate their removal from themwhen they struck ; and indeed if we may judgefrom the models, they appear to have been flat-bottomed.The boats now used on the Nile havea very small keel, particularly at the centre, whereit is concave ; so that when the head strikes, theyput to the helm, and the hollow part clears thebank ; except in those cases where the impetus istoo great, or the first warning is neglected.The sails of the ancient boats appear to have beenalways square, with a yard above and below ; inwhich they differ from those now adopted in Egypt.The only modern boats with square sails are asort of lighter, employed for conveying stonesfrom the quarries to Cairo and other places ; andthese have only a yard at the top. All other boatshave latine or triangular-shaped sails, which, inThe middle of the Arabs, the contes, or persia, of the Romans.o 4200 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.order to catch the wind when the Nile is low, aremade of immense size : for unless they reach aboveits lofty banks they are often prevented from benefitingby a side wind at that season of the year ; butthe number of accidents which occur are a greatobjection to the use of such disproportionate sails.The cabins of the Egyptian boats were lofty andspacious ; they did not, however, always extendover the whole breadth of the boat, as in themodern canvas, but merely occupied the centre ;the rowers sitting on either side, generally on abench or stool. They were made of wood, with adoor in front, or sometimes on one side, and theywere painted within and without with numerousdevices, in brilliant and lively colours.* The samecustom continued to the latest times, long after theconquest of the country by the Romans ; andwhen the Arabs invaded Egypt in 638, underAmer the general of the Caliph Omer, one of theobjects which struck them with surprise was thegay appearance of the painted boats of the Nile.The lotus was one of their favourite devices, ason their furniture, the ceilings of rooms, and otherplaces, and it was very common on the blade of therudder, where it was frequently repeated at bothends, together with the eye. But the place consideredpeculiarly suited to the latter emblem wasthe head or bow of the boat ; and the custom is stillretained in some countries to the present day. InIndia it is very generally adopted ; and we evenndc plate Ifi. — Conf. Plin. 357.CHAP. IX. BOATS PAINTED. 201see the small barks which ply in the harbour ofMalta bearing the eye on their bows, in the samemanner as the boats of ancient Egypt.• They do not appear to have had any thing like thelustre of the Romans, an ornament fixed to thestern, and sometimes to the prow, on which a staff'was erected, bearing a ribbon or flag ; but streamerswere occasionally attached to the pole of the rudder,and a standard was erected near the head of thevessel.* The latter was generally a sacred animal t ;a sphinx, or some emblem connected with religionor royalty, like those belonging to the infantry beforedescribed t ; and sometimes the top of the mastbore a shrine or feathers, the symbol of the deityto whose protection they committed themselvesduring their voyage.There is a striking resemblance, in some points,between the boats of the ancient Egyptians andthose of India ; and the form of the stern, theprinciple and construction of the rudder, thecabins, the square sail, the copper eye on eachside of the head, the line of small squares at theside, like false windows §, and the shape of theoars of boats used on the Ganges, forcibly call tomind those of the Nile, represented in the paintingso/ the Theban tombs.The head and stern of the Egyptian pleasure-boatswere usually ornamented with, or terminatedin the shape of, a flower richly painted ; in theVide plate 16. boats with coloured sails.f Perhaps answering to the izupcwrjixov of the Greeks, though not atthe prow itself.X Vol. I. p. 294. § Vide woodcut, No. 373.202 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.boats of burden they were destitute of ornament,and simply rounded off; and I have met with twoonly in which there was any resemblance to a beak.But as this was in Nile boats, and at the stern*,it could not have been intended for an offensivepurpose. Nor are the ships of war, represented atMedeenet Haboo, furnished with beaks.At the head, a forecastle frequently projectedabove the deck, which was assigned to the manwho held the fathoming pole, above mentioned,and at the stern another of similar form was sometimesadded, where the steersman sat ; remindingus of the poop of Roman vessels, t They werevery generally adopted, and found of great servicein the war earliest ; the archers profiting by thesecommanding positions to rake the enemy's decks,as they bore down upon a hostile galley, and to disablethe rowers. In the pleasure-boats they servedalso as hatches for going below deck, and were similarto what the Nile boatmen now call the hon.The gallies or ships of war differed in their constructionfrom the boats of the Nile. They wereless raised at the head and stern, and on each side,throughout the whole length of the vessel, a woodenbulwark, rising considerably above the gunnel,sheltered the rowers, who sat behind it, from themissiles of the enemy ; the handles of the oarsThe remainder of the boat is destroyed, I cannot therefore say ifthe head vas of the same form.f " Ipse generator puppy Palinurus ab alta." Virgg. Ten. v. 12.and 175.J In the Roman gallies the fighting men were placed in a similarmanner at the head and stern, Liv. xxx. 43. and xxxvi. 42., in towers,called propugnacula. Hor. Exod. i. 2.CHAP. IX.SHIPS OF WAR.passing through an aperture at the lower part.Besides the archers in the raised poop and forecastle,a body of slingers was stationed in the tops,where they could with more facility manage thatweapon, and employ it with effect on the enemy.On advancing to engage a hostile fleet, the sailwas used till they came within a certain distance,when the signal or order being given to clear foraction, it was reefed by means of ropes runningin pulses, or loops, upon the yard. The ends ofthese ropes, which were usually four in number,dividing the sail as it rose into five folds, descendedand were attached to the lower part of the mast, soas to be readily worked, when the sail required tobe pulled up, at a moment's notice, either in asquall of wind or on any other occasion ; and in thisrespect, and in the absence of a lower yard, the sailNo. 371.War galley ; the sail being pulled up during the action.Thebes.a raised forecastle, in which the archers were posted. c another post for the archers,and the pilot d. e a bulwark, to protect the rowers. / slingers, in the top.of the war galley greatly differed from that of the204 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.boats on the Nile. Having prepared for the attack,the rowers, whose strength had been hitherto reserved,plied their oars ; the head was directed towardsan enemy's vessel, and showers of missiles werethrown from the forecastle and tops as they advanced.It was of great importance to strike theiropponent on the side ; and when the steersman,by a skilful manoeuvre, could succeed in this, theshock was so great that they sank it, or obtained aconsiderable advantage by crippling the oars ; andgreater facility was given for boarding in this part,being distant from the fighting men, and occupiedonly by the rowers.The small* Egyptian gallies do not appear, as alreadyobserved, to have been furnished with a beak,like those of the Romans, which being of brasssharply pointed, and sometimes below the water's surface,did great damage to an enemy's vessel, and exposedit to the danger of sinking, by forcing in theplanks of the bottom ; but a lion's head fixed to theprow, supplied its place, and being probably coveredwith metal, was capable of doing great execution,when the galley was impelled by the force of 16or 20 oars, t This head occasionally varied in form,and perhaps served to indicate the rank of thecommander, the name of the vessel, or the deityunder whose protection they sailed, like the sign(Trajcao-Tj^ov,) of the Greeks, Romans, and otherpeople; unless indeed the lion was always chosenWe have no representation of their large ships of war.-f- They are represented with eight and ten oars on each side.j Herodot. viii. 88. Act. Post. xxviii. 11. Virgil (^n. v. 116.),shows that ships had names given them, like our own at the presentday, as the Chimaera, the Centaur, and others.CHAP. IX.UNUSUAL KIND OF BOAT.for their war gallies, and the ram, oryx, andothers, confined to the boats connected with theservice of religion.Some of the boats on the Nile were furnishedwith 44 oars, 22 being represented on one side;which, allowing for the steerage and prow, wouldrequire their total length to be about 120 feet.They were furnished, like all the others, with onelarge square sail ; but the mast, instead of beingsingle, was made of two limbs of equal length,sufficiently open at the top to admit the yard betweenthem, and secured by several strong stays,one of which extended to the prow, and others tothe steerage of the boat. Over the top of the masta light rope was passed, probably intended for furlingthe sail, which last, from the horizontal linesrepresented upon it, appears to have been likeNo. 372. — Largo boat with sail, apparently made of the papyrus, a double mast, and manyrowers. In a torn// at Knm Ahmar, above Munich.206 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.those of the Chinese ; and this, as already observed,is the only instance of a sail which has the appearanceof being made of the papyrus.At the extremity of the yard were braces, whichbeing held by a man seated in the steerage, orupon the cabin, served to turn the sail to the rightand left; they were common to all boats, as with theRomans, by whom they were called pedes *i andmanaged in the same manner. The mode of steeringthe boat is also different from that usually describedin the Egyptian paintings ; and instead ofa rudder in the centre of the stern, or at eitherside, it is furnished with three on the same side:all which peculiarities suffice to show that it wasof unusual construction, perhaps of a very earlyperiod, and afterwards abandoned as cumbrousand imperfect. The only satisfactory point itindicates is the mode of arranging the oars, whilenot required during a favourable wind. It isevident that they were drawn up, through thering or band in which they turned, and they wereprobably held in that position by a thong or looppassing over the handle t, which the artist has failedto insert, or which is no longer seen, in consequenceof the imperfect preservation of the painting.There is no instance of a boat with a rudder atboth ends, said to have been used by some ancientnations t, nor do we find them provided with morethan one mast, and a single sail; in which respectthey resembled those of the Greeks, at the periodWhence " facere pcdem," to adjust the sail.Vklc also woodcut. No. .343. fishing scene.Tacit, de Mor. Germ. 44. and Ann. ii. G.tCHAP. IX. RUDDERS. 207of the Trojan war.* Sometimes the single rudder,instead of traversing in a groove, or hollow space,merely rested on the exterior of the curved stern,and was suspended by a rope, or bands ; but thatimperfect method was confined to boats used inreligious ceremonies on the river, an instance ofwhich may be seen in the model preserved atBerlin, as well as in the paintings of Thebes.This model, which is very curious, shows the positionof the rowers, the arrangement of the mast andyard when taken down, the place of the pegs andmallet for fastening the boat to the shore, and of thelanding plank ; which were always kept in readiness,as at the present day, in the bows, and were underthe surveillance of the man stationed at the prowto report and fathom the depth of the water ; italso shows that the boat was decked, and that thecabin did not extend over the whole breadth ;which is in perfect accordance with the sculptures,representing the pleasure boats of the Nile, andthose of their funeral ceremonies.In some boats of burden, the cabin, or raised magazine,was broader, reaching probably from one sideto the other, and sufficiently large to contain cattle,horses, and numerous stores. tUnlike the modern Egyptians, they paid great attentionto the cleanliness of their boats, the cabinsand decks being frequently washed and swept, andwe find the Theban artists thought it of sufficientimportance to be indicated in the sculptures.Homer, Oil. v. 254'. " Vlv ^\arov noiu^Kai nriKfaov apjiivov avrtfi."\ Vide wood-cut, No. .369.THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.No. 373. — Boat of the Nile; showing how the sail was fastened to the yards, and thenature of the rigging. Thebes.Herodotus states that the mast was made of theacanthus (Acacia, or Mimosa Nilotica) ; but as thetrunk and limbs of this tree are not sufficientlylong or straight, it is evident that the historian wasmisinformed ; and we may readily conceive thatthey preferred the fir, with which they were wellacquainted*, great quantity of the wood beingannually imported into Egypt from Syria. Theplanks, the ribs, and the keel were of the acacia,which from its resisting the effect of water for alength of time, was found, says Plhiy t, well adaptedfor this purpose, as is fully proved by modernexperience. The foot of the mast was let into astrong beam, which crossed the whole breadth ofthe boat; it was supported by and lashed to aknee, rising to a considerable height before it ;Vide Plin. xvi. 40.\ Plin. xiii. 9. " Spina nigra . . . qiioniain incognita etiam inaquas durst, ob id utilissima avium coasts." In lib. xvi. 40. he mentionscedar being used in Syria and Egypt for building ships, when fir woodwas scarce.CHAP. IX. WOOD USED FOR BOAT-BUILDING. 209and the many stout stays, fastened at the head,stern, and sides, sufficiently secured it, and compensatedfor the great pressure of the heavy yardsand sail it carried.I have observed that in ships of war, the yardwas allowed to remain aloft after the sail had beenreefed ; but in the boats of the Nile, which had ayard at the top and bottom of the sail, as soon asit was furled, they lowered the upper yard, and inthis position it remained until they again preparedfor their departure. To loosen the sail from thelower yard must have been a tedious operation, ifit was bound to it with the many facings representedin some of the paintings ; but in thesecases it may have been folded up between the twoyards, as soon as the upper one was lowered ; thewhole being lashed together by an outer rope.It is uncertain whether they used pulses forraising and lowering the yards, or if the halliardsmerely passed through a smooth dead-sheave-holeat the top of the mast. The yards were evidentlyof very great size, and of two separate pieces,scarfed or joined together at the middle*, sometimessupported by five or six lifts, and so firmly securedthat men could stand or sit upon them, while engagedin arranging the sail ; and from the upperyard were suspended several ropes, resemblingthe horses of our square-rigged ships t, and perhapsintended for the same purpose when theyfurled the sail. The Egyptians, however, wereFide wood-cut, No. 37.3.//. f Vide wood-cut, 'No. 373. gg.VOL. III. P210 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.not ignorant of the pulley ; and I am inclined tobelieve they introduced it in the rigging of theirboats : though owing to their imperfect style ofdrawing, it is not indicated ; and one has actuallybeen found in Egypt, and is now in the museumof Leyden. It is, however, of uncertain date, andwas apparently intended for drawing water from awell. The sides are of athul or tamarisk wood*,the roller of fir ; and the rope, of lees or fibres ofthe date tree, which belonged to it, was found atthe same time.Many of the sails were painted with richcolours t, or embroidered with fanciful devices,representing the phoenix, flowers, and variousemblems ; some were adorned with cheques, andothers were striped, like those of the present day.This kind of cloth, of embroidered linen, appearsto have been made in Egypt expressly for sails, andwas bought by the Syrians X for that purpose ;but its use was confined to the pleasure boats of thegrandees, or of the king himself, ordinary sailsbeing white; and the ship, says Pliny §, in whichAntony and Cleopatra went to the battle ofActium, was distinguished from the rest of thefleet by its purple sails, which were the peculiarprivilege of the admiral's vessel. The same writerstates that the custom of dyeing the sails of shipswas first adopted in the fleet of Alexander theSamaria orientalis,f The sails of our own vessels in the time of Edward the Fourth,had coats of arms emblazoned upon them.X Ezek. xxra. 7. Vide supra, p. 183., note 3.§ Plin. xix. KCHAP. IX. PAINTED SAILS. 211Great, when navigating the Indus ; but that it waspractised long before, in Egypt, is evident fromthe paintings at Thebes, which represent sailsrichly ornamented with various colours, in thetime of the third Remeses, nine hundred yearsprevious to the age of Alexander.The devices with which they were painted orembroidered depended on fancy, and the samemonarch had ships with sails of different patterns.Of all these the phoenix appears to have been themost appropriate emblem, if, as is stated by Hora-apollo*,it indicated "the return of a traveller, whohad long been absent from his country ; " and it isprobable that the boats used in sacred festivalsupon the Nile were decorated with appropriatesymbols, according to the nature of the ceremony,or the deity in whose service they were engaged.The edges of the sail were furnished with a stronghem or border, also neatly coloured, serving tostrengthen it, and prevent an injury, and a lightrope was generally sewed round it for the samepurpose.Some of the Egyptian vessels appear to havebeen of very great sizes Diodorus mentions oneof cedar wood, dedicated by Sesostris to the godof Thebes, 280 cubits, or 420 feet, long; anotherbuilt by Caligula in Egypt, to transport oneof the obelisks to Rome, carried 120,000 modis(pecks) of lentils as ballast § ; and Ptolemy .Hierogl. lib. i. c. 35.f Coni'. Hor. 1 Exod. i. 1. referring to the large ships of M. Antony,alta avium propiignacula."X Diodor. i. 37. (J Plin. xvi. 40. ; and xxxvi. 9.p 2212 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.pastor built one of forty benches of oars, which was420 feet long, and 72 from the keel to the top ofthe poop, and carried four hundred sailors, besidesfour thousand rowers, and near three thousandsoldiers.*NAVIGATION.Of the origin of navigation no satisfactory conjecturecan be offered, nor do we know to whatnation to ascribe the merit of having conferredso important a benefit on mankind.It is evident that the first steps were slow andgradual, and that the earliest attempts to constructvessels on the sea were rude and imperfect.Ships of burden were originally mere rafts, madeof the thinks of trees bound together, over whichplanks were fastened ; which Pliny states to havebeen first used on the Red Seat ; but he is wrongin limiting the era of ship-building to the age ofDanaus, and in supposing that rafts alone wereemployed until that period. Rafts were adopted,even to carry goods, long after the invention ofships, as they still are for some purposes onrivers and other inland waters ; but boats, made ofhollow trees and various materials, covered withhides or pitch, were also of very early date, andto these may be ascribed the origin of plankedvessels. Improvement followed improvement, andPlut. Life of Demerits. Pliny (vii. 56.) says it had fifty benches ;and he mentions another of Ptolemy Philadelphus with forty.f Plin. vii. 57. The Phoenicians were supposed to have come fromthe Red Sea, and to have settled on the coast of the Mediterranean.Ilerodot. i. 1. Vide Strabo, lib. i. p. 29.CHAP. IX. NAVIGATION. ^13in proportion as civilisation advanced, the inventivegenius of man was called forth to push on an invention,so essential to those communities, where theadvantages of commerce were understood, andnumerous causes contributed to the origin of navigation,and the construction of vessels for traversingthe sea.Curiosity may have prompted those who livedon the coast to visit a neighbouring island ; or thedesire of conquest, to cross a narrow channel, toinvade a foreign land, as Pliny observes in the caseof the Trojans ; but it is more probable that theoccupation of the fisherman was the principalcause and promoter of this useful art : those whoat first employed themselves merely on a shelteredriver, venturing at length in the same boat uponthe sea, and having acquired confidence from habit,extending their excursions along the coast ; forit was long, before the art of navigation was so farimproved, that the boldest mariner * dared to trusthis vessel out of sight of land.The first sea voyages, of which we have anydirect notice, are those undertaken by the Egyptiansat the early period when they led colonies intoGreece ; but the people to whom the art of navigationwas most indebted, who excelled all othersin nautical skill, and who carried the spirit of adslUi robur et aes triplexCirca pectus erat, qui fragile truceCommit pelago ratePrimus, nee tenuit precipice AfricanDecertantem Aquilonibus."Hor. i. Od. iii. 9P 3214 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.venture far beyond any contemporary nation, werethe Phoenicians ; and those bold navigators evenvisited the coast of Britain, in quest of tin.The fleets of Sesostris and the third Remesescertainly date at a very remote age, and some Phoeniciansailors, sent by Neo * on a voyage of discovery,to ascertain the form of the African continent,actually doubled the Cape of Good Hope,about twenty-one centuries before the time ofBartholomew Dia, and Vasco de Gama; but itwas not till the discovery of the compass t thatnavigation became perfected, and the uncertainmethod of ascertaining the course by the stars tgave place to the more accurate calculations ofmodern times.After the fall of Tyre, and the building ofAlexandria, Egypt became famous as a commercialcountry, and the emporium of the East ; the richesof India, brought to Terence, Myos-Hormos, andother ports on the Red Sea, passed through it, tobe distributed over various parts of the Romanempire ; and it continued to benefit by theseadvantages, until a new route was opened toIndia by the Portuguese, round the Cape of GoodHope.Vide Vol, I. p. 158. Pliny mentions others who performed thisvoyage, lib. ii. 07.+ The Chinese used the compass at a very early period ; and MarcoPolo probably introdiicetl it from China, about 1290 ad., 12 yearsbefore Gioia of Amalfi, its supposed inventor. The loadstone (heraclituslapis) was different from the Magnetic of Theophrastus, (onstones, 73.) as is explained by Hesychius, " jMayj'jjric \i9og . . . apyvpo)tfi(ptpi]Q oval, >/ ^i 'UpciKKsoiTiQ prov mSijpov iiriffTarai" Plutarch says theloadstone was mentioned by Manetho, de Is. s, G2,t Vide Horn. Odyss. v. 272.CHAP. IX. TIN AND OTHER METALS. 215THE USE OF TIN AND OTHER METALS.It is difficult to explain how, at that early period,so great a value came to be attached to tin, thatthe Phoenicians should have thought it worth whileto undertake a voyage of such a length, and attendedwith so much risk, in order to obtain it ;even allowing that a high price was paid for thiscommodity in Egypt, and other countries, where thedifferent branches of metallurgy were carried togreat perfection. It was mixed with other metals,particularly copper, which was hardened by an alloyof tin; and was employed, according to Homer, forthe raised work on the exterior of shields *, as inthat of Achilles ; for making greaves t ; and bindingvarious parts of defensive armour t ; as well asfor household § and ornamental purposes ; and,which is very remarkable, the word kassiteroSyused by the poet to designate it, is the same as theArabic name kasdeer \\ , by which the metal is stillknown in the East, being probably derived from theancient Phoenician.Horn. II. xviii. 563. 374.+ Horn. II. xviii. 612. " Ttv^t ^t oi Kvrj^i^ac eavov Kaaninpoio."T Horn. n. xviii. i?^. " XaX/cov ^'cv irvpi fSaWiv arrtipia, KaaaiTspov reKai ■)(^pv(TOv TijiriVTa, Kai apyvpov."§ No copper vessels have yet been found, even of Roman time,washed with tin, and few only with silver. Several gilt have been metwith in Egypt, Greece, and Italy. Dioscorides mentions tinned boilers,HQ Xt^rjra KiKaaaiTipwfievov j3aX\t" lib. i. C. 38. He is supposed to havebeen physician to Antony and Cleopatra, or to have lived in the timeof Nero. Vide also PHn. xxxiv. 17., on the tinning of copper vessels.II It Mill be observed that the accent in the Greek is over the samepart of the word, Kuaairipog. It is, I trust, unnecessary to observe thatthe ancient Greeks pronounced according to accent, as they now do inGreece, or to point out the origin of those marks.p 4216 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.We have no means of ascertaining the exactperiod when the Phoenicians first visited our coastsin search of tin ; some have supposed about theyear 400 or 450 before our era : but that this metalwas employed many ages previously, is shown fromthe bronze vessels* and implements discovered atThebes, and other parts of Egypt. It cannot,however, be inferred that the mines of Britain wereknown at that remote period, since the intercoursewith India may have furnished the Egyptians withtin ; and the Phoenicians probably obtained it fromSpain t and India, long before they visited thosedistant coasts, and discovered the richness of ourproductive mines, t Ezekiel, indeed, expressly saysthat the Syrians received tin, as well as other metals,from Tarshish ; which, whether it was situated,as some suppose, in Arabia § or on the Indian coast,traded in the productions of the latter country ;and the lamentation ll of the prophet on the fall ofTyre, though written as late as the year 588 beforeour era, relates to a commercial intercourse withthat place, which had been established, and continuedto exist, from a much earlier period. ^Bronze is made of copper and tin ; brass of copper and zinc.f The mines of Spain and Portugal produce very little tin. Thereare some in Saxony and Bohemia. Those of Malacca are very productive.:}: In the year 1791 about 3000 tons of tin were taken from the minesof Cornwall," of which 2200 tons were sold in the European market for72/. each, the remaining 800 being sent to India and China at 62/. a ton.Univ. Diet, of Arts and Sciences, Tin.§ Bruce supposed it to be Mocha.II Ezek. xxvii. 12. " Tarshish was thy merchant by reason of themultitude of all kind of riches; with silver, iron, //«, and lead, theytrailed in thy fairs."1 The gold of Ophir being mentioned by Job is one of many proofsof an early intercourse with India. Job xxii. 24.CHAP. IX. EARLY USE OF TIN. ^17It is probable that the Phoenicians supplied theEgyptians with this article, even before it wasbrought from Spain and Britain. The commercialintercourse of the two nations dated at a mostremote epoch * j the produce and coasts of Arabiaand India appear to have been known to thePhoenicians, long before any other people ; andsome have even supposed that they migrated fromthe Red Sea to the shores of SyriaThat the productions of India already cameto Egypt, at the early period of Joseph's arrivalin that country, is evident from the spices whichthe Israelites t were carrying to sell there ;and the amethysts, hgematite§, lapis lazuli, andother objects || found at Thebes of the timeof the third Thothmes, and succeeding Pharaohs,argue that the intercourse was constantly keptup.The first mention of tin, though not the earliestproof of its use, is in connection with the spoilstaken by the Israelites from the people of Midian,in the year 1452 bec, where they are commandedby Moses to purify *' the gold and the silver, thebrass, the iron, the tin, and the lead," by passingit through the fires Its combination with othermetals is noticed by Isaiah, in the year 76O beforeour era, who alludes to it as an alloy mixed withHerodot. i. 1. f Hcrodot. loc. cit.t Gen. xxxvii. 25.§ This kind of iron ore is found also in Spain, Italy, Germany, andEngland.II I might, perhaps, add siderite![Numb. xxxi. 22. Tin in Hebrew is called l)cdecl, "jm.218 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX,a more valuable substance* ; and Ezekiel showsthat it was used for this purpose in connection withsilver.Strabo, Diodorus, Pliny and other writers, mentioncertain islands discovered by the Phoenicians,which, from the quantity of tin they produced,obtained the name Cassiterides ; and are supposedto have been the cluster now known as the ScillyIsles, and to have included part of the coast ofCornwall itself. 1^ The secret of their discovery wascarefully concealed, says Strabo §, from all otherpersons, and the Phoenician vessels continued to sailfrom Gates (Cadi) in quest of this commodity,without its being known from whence they obtainedit ; though many endeavours were made by theRomans at a subsequent period to ascertain thesecret, and to share the benefits of this lucrativetrade.So anxious, indeed, were the Phoenicians toretain their monopoly, that on one occasion whena Roman vessel pursued a trader bound to thespot, the latter purposely steered his vessel on ashoal, preferring to suffer shipwreck, provided heinvolved his pursuers in the same fate, to thedisclosure of his country's secret. His artificesucceeded ; the Roman crew, exposed to additionalrisk in consequence of being unprepared for theIsaiah, i. 23. " I will purge away thy dross, and take awayall thy tin."f Ezek. xxii. 18. 20. " They are brass, and tin, and iron, and lead,in the midst of the furnace ; they are even the dross of silver.":|; Beckniann and Boreas are also of this opinion.^ Strabo, lib.iii. ad fin. p. 121.CHAP. IX. TIN ; WHERE FOUND. ^IQsudden catastrophe, were all lost with their founderedvessel, and the Phoenician, having the goodfortune to escape with his life, was rewarded fromthe public treasury for his devotion, and the sacrificehe had made. *Pliny mentions a report of " white lead," or tin,being brought from certain islands of the Atlantic ;yet he treats it as a " fable," and proceeds to statethat it was found in Lusitania and Alicia, andwas the same metal t known to the Greeks in thedays of Homer by the name cassiteron t ; butDiodorus and Strabo, after noticing the tin ofSpain and the Cassiterides, affirm that it was alsobrought to Massilia (Marseilles) from the coast ofBritain. §Spain, in early times, was to the Phoenicianswhat America, at a later period, was to the Spaniards; and no one can read the accounts of theimmense wealth derived from the mines of thatcountry, in the writings of Diodorus and otherauthors, without being struck by the relativesituation of the Phoenicians and ancient Spaniards,and the followers of Cortes or Pizarro and theinhabitants of Mexico or Peru.*' The whole of Spain," says Strabo, "aboundswith mines . . . and in no country are gold, silver,copper, and iron in such abundance or of suchStrabo, loc. cit.t Beckniann, in his History of Inventions (vol. iv. p. 10. 20.), doubtsthe Stannum of Pliny, or the Cassiteron of Homer, being tin. Pliny'saccount of Stannum is obscure.J Plin. XXXV. 16. He places the Cassiterides off the coast of Celticlib. iv. 22.§ Strabo, lib.iii. p. 101. and Diodor. v. 38.2^0 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.good quality : even the rivers and torrents bringdowngold in their beds, and some is foundin the sand : " and the fanciful assertion of Poisonous,regarding the richness of the country inprecious metals, surpassed the phantoms createdin the minds of the conquerors of America.The Phoenicians purchased gold, silver, tin,and other metals from the inhabitants of Spain andthe Cassiterides, by giving in exchange earthenwarevessels, oil, salt, bronze instruments, and otherobjects of little value, in the same manner as theSpaniards on their arrival at Hispaniola ; and suchwas the abundance of silver, that after loadingtheir ships with full cargoes, they stripped the leadfrom their anchors, and substituted the same weightof silver. *METALLURGY.A strong evidence of the skill of the Egyptiansin working metals, and of the early advancementthey made in this art, is derived from theirsuccess in the management of different alloys ;which, as M. Goguett observes t, is further arguedfrom the casting of the golden calf, and stillmore from Moses being able to burn the metal andreduce it to powder ; a secret which he could onlyDiodor. lib. v. 35.f Goguet, Origine des Lois, des Arts, et des Sciences, tome ii. liv. 2.ch.iv. p. 145.X Goguet is wrong in supposing that the smelting of tin is one of themost difficult operations in metallurgy, tome ii, liv. ii. ch.iv. p. 146.Tin melts more readily than lead : the latter requires a heat of cosFahr., the former only of 420°.CHAP. IX. BURNING THE GOLDEN CALF. 221have learnt in Egypt. It is said in Exodus *,that " Moses took the calf which they had made,and burnt it in the fire, and ground it to powder,and strewed it upon the water, and made thechildren of Israel drink of its" an operation which,according to the French savant *' is known by allwho work in metals to be very difficult."Commentators' heads," he adds, " have beenmuch perplexed to explain how Moses burnt andreduced the gold to powder. Many have offeredvain and improbable conjectures, but an experiencedchemist has removed every difficulty upon the subject,and has suggested this simple process. In theplace of tartaric acid, which we employ, the Hebrewlegislator used natron, which is common in the East.What follows, respecting his making the Israelitesdrink this powder, proves that he was perfectlyacquainted with the whole effect of the operation.He wished to increase the punishment of their disobedience,and nothing could have been more suitable; for gold reduced and made into a draught,in the manner I have mentioned, has a most disagreeabletaste."GOLD WORKING GILDING.The use of gold, for jewellery and various articlesof luxury, dates from the most remote ages.Pharaoh having *' arrayed "t Joseph "in vesturesof fine linen, put a gold chain about his neck ; "and the jewels of silver and gold borrowed fromExod. xxxii. 20.f This custom, of conferring rank by presenting a suitable dress (orkkweh), still continues in the East.2^2THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.CHAP. IX.GOLD WORKING.the Egyptians by the Israelites * at the time oftheir leaving Egypt, (out of which the golden calfwas afterwards made,) suffice to prove the greatquantity of precious metals wrought at that timeinto female ornaments. It is not from the Scripturesalone that the skill of the Egyptian goldsmithsmay be inferred ; the sculptures of Thebesand Beni Hassan afford their additional testimony ;and the numerous gold and silver vases, inlaidwork, and jewellery, represented in common use,show the great advancement they had alreadymade, at a remote period, in this branch of art.The engraving of gold, the mode of casting it, andinlaying it with stones, were evidently known atthe same time; they are mentioned in the Bible t,and numerous specimens of this kind of work havebeen found in Egypt.The origin of the sign signifying gold has beenNo. 374 n.fgaie articles of jewellery.c 4Goldsmiths. Thebes.The hieroglyphics read " goldsmith," or " worker in gold."Exod. iii. 22. and xii. 35.j- Exod. xxxii. 2, 3.4: Exod. xxxii. 4. Aaron " fashioned it with a graving tool, afterhe had made it a molten calf." On engraving and setting stones, I'ideExod. xxviii, 9. and II.224 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.happily explained by the ingenious Champollion ;as the bowl* in which the metal was washed, thecloth through which it was strained, and thedropping of the watei\ united into one character,at once indicative of the process and the metal.Much cannot, of course, be expected from theobjects found in the excavated tombs, to illustratethe means employed in smelting the ore, or todisclose any of the secrets they possessed in metallurgy; and little is given in the paintings, beyondthe use of the blow-pipe, the forceps t, and theirmode of concentrating heat, by raising cheeks ofmetal round three sides of the fire, in which thecrucibles were placed. Of the latter, indeed, thereis no indication in these subjects, unless it be inthe preceding woodcut t ; but their use is readilysuggested, and some which have been found inEgypt are preserved in the museum of Berlin.They are nearly five inches in diameter at themouth, and about the same in depth, and presentt- dNo. 375. Blowpipe, and small fireplace with cheeks to confine and reflect the heat. Thebes.Or the frame over which the cloth was laid. Vide woodcut,No. .374. a. fi.^. a.f Bronze forceps, tongs, and tweezers have been found, retainingtheir spring perfectly.X Woodcut, No. 374-. r.CH. IX. CRUCIBLES. WORKING OF METALS. '2^5the ordinary form and appearance of those usedat the present day.From the mention* of earrings and bracelets, andjewels of silver and gold, in the days of Abraham, itis evident that in Asia, as well as in Egypt, the artof metallurgy was known at a very remote period ;and workmen of the same countries are noticed byHomer t as excelling in the manufacture of arms,rich vases, and other objects inlaid or ornamentedwith metals. His account of the shield of Achilles tproves the art of working the various substances ofwhich it was made, copper, tin, gold, and silver, tohave been well understood at that time ; and theskill required to represent the infinity of subjectshe mentions, was such as no ordinary artisan couldpossess ; and unless similar works had been alreadymade, the poet would not have ventured on thedescription he has given.The ornaments in gold, found in Egypt, consistof rings, bracelets, armlets, necklaces, earrings,and numerous trinkets belonging to the toilet ;many of which are of the early times of Osirtasen I.and Thothmes III., the contemporaries of Josephand of Moses. Gold and silver vases, statues, andother objects of gold and silver, of silver inlaid withgold, and of bronze inlaid with the precious metals,were also common at the same time ; and besidesthose manufactured in the country from the pro-gen.xxiv. 47. 53.f Horn. II. xxiii. 74L A silver cup, the work of the Sicilians,Od. iv. 618., &c. Vide II. ii. 872. vi. 236., the armour of Glaucus.% Horn. 11. xviii. 474.VOL. III. QTHE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. IX.duce of their own mines*, the Egyptians exactedan annual tribute from the conquered provinces ofAsia and Africa, in gold and silver, and in vasesmade of those materials.I have frequently had occasion to notice theelegance of the Egyptian vases, whether of gold orother materials. Many other objects were equallygraceful in their form, and the devices which ornamentedthem ; and among these I may cite thegolden baskets in the tomb of Remeses, which inNo. 376 Golden baskets represented in the tomb of king Rameses III. Thebes.their shape call to mind our European breadbaskets.At Beni Hassan, the process of washing the ore,smelting, or fusing the metal with the help of theblow-pipe, and fashioning it for ornamental purposes,weighing it and taking an account of thequantity so made up, and other occupations ofthe goldsmith, are represented ; but, as might besupposed, these subjects merely suffice, as theywere intended, to give a general indication of thegoldsmith's trade, without attempting to describethe means employed, tDiodorus mentions the silver mines of Egypt which produced3,200 myriads of mine, but I am not aware of their position. VideDiodor. 'i, 49., and supra. Vol. I. p. 113. and 234.t Vide wood cut, No. 374.CHAP. IX. GOLD MINES OF EGYPT. ^^7The gold mines of Egypt, though mentioned byAgatharcides and later writers, and worked even bythe Arab Caliphs, long remained unknown, andtheir position has only been ascertained a few yearssince, by M. Linant and Mr. Bonomi. They lie inthe Bisharee desert, or, as Edreesee and Aboolfedacall it, the land of Big * or Bona, about seventeenor eighteen days' journey to the south-eastwardfrom Derow; which is situated on the Nile, a littleabove Kom Ambo, the ancient Ombos.Those two travellers met with some Cuficfunereal inscriptions there, which from their datesshow that the mines were worked in the years339 Ash. (951 A.D.), and 378 ash. (989 a.d.);the former being in the fifth year of the CaliphMostukfee Billah, a short time before the arrivalof the Patentes in Egypt, the latter in the fourteenthof El Azeez, the second of the Fatemitedynasty.They continued to be worked till a much laterperiod, and were afterwards abandoned, the valueof the gold, as Aboolfeda states t, barely covering theexpences ; nor has Mohammed Ali, who sent toexamine them and obtain specimens of the ore,found it worth while to re-open them.The matrix is quartz ; and so diligent a searchdid the Egyptians establish, throughout the wholeof the deserts east of the Nile, for this preciousmetal, that I never remember to have seen a veinBigah iS.^s:^-'. or Beggar is the name which the Bishareeh Arabs givethemselves. *f Aboolfeda's Description of Egypt, s. 68.Q 2228 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.of quartz in any of the primitive ranges there, whichhad not been carefully examined by their miners ;certain portions having been invariably picked outfrom the fissures in which it lay, and broken intosmall fragments. At a spot near the quarriesof Breccia Verde, on the road from Coptos toKossayr, the working of quartz veins has beencarried on to such an extent, and on so grand ascale 5 the houses of the miners are so numerous ;the consequence of the place so strongly argued,by the presence of a small stone temple bearingthe name and sculptures of Ptolemy Evergetes I. ;and the length of time the workmen inhabited it,so distinctly proved by the large mounds of brokenpottery found there, (from which the valley hasderived the name of Wadeee Foakheer), that Icannot suppose their labours to have been confinedto the mere cutting of tazzi, sarcophagi, fonts,vases, columns, and similar objects from thebreccia quarries, which, too, are distant threemiles from this spot ; and the number of onethousand three hundred and twenty huts, which Icounted in the different windings of the AVadeeFoakheer, containing far more workmen than thequarries would require, appears conclusive respectingthe object they had in view, and suggests thatthey had succeeded in finding gold here also,though probably in far less quantities than in themines of the more southerly district.The gold mines are said by Aboolfeda to besituated at El Allaga (or Obligee) ; but Eshuranib(or Eshuanib), the principal place, is about threeCHAP. IX. GOLD MINES THEIR POSITION. 229days' journey beyond Wadeee Allaga, according toMr. Bonomi, to whom I am indebted for the followingaccount of the mines. *' The direction ofthe excavations depends," as Diodorus states, ** onthat of the strata in which the ore is found, andthe position of the various shafts differ accordingly.As to the manner of extracting the metal, somenotion may be given by a description of the ruinsat Eshuranib, the largest station, where sufficientremains to explain the process they adopted. Theprincipal excavation, according to M. Linant'smeasurement, is about 180 feet deep : it is anarrow oblique chasm, reaching a considerableway down the rock. In the valley, near the mostaccessible part of the excavation, are several huts,built of the unhewn fragments of the surroundinghills, their walls not more than breast high, perhapsthe houses * of the excavators or the guardiansof the mine ; and separated from them by theravine or course of the torrent, is a group of houses,about three hundred in number, laid out very regularlyin straight lines. In those nearest the mineslived the workmen who were employed to breakthe quartz into small fragments, the size of a bean,from whose hands the pounded stone passed to thepersons who ground it in hand-mills, similar tothose now used for corn in the valley of the Nile,made of a granitic stone ; one of which is to befound in almost every house at these mines, eitherentire or broken.Similar huts are met with at all the quarries and mines of thesedeserts.Q 3230 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX,*' The quartz thus reduced to powder was washedon inclined tables, furnished with two cisterns, allbuilt of fragments of stone collected there ; and nearthese inclined planes are generally found little whitemounds, the residue of the operation. Besides thenumerous remains of houses in this station, are twolarge buildings, with towers at the angles, built ofthe hard blackish granitic, yet luminous rock, thatprevails in the district. The valley has many trees,and in a high part of the torrent bed is a sort ofisland, or isolated bank on which we found manytomb-stones, some written in the ancient Cuficcharacter, very similar to those at E'Souan."Such is the description Mr. Bonomi has beenkind enough to send me of the gold mines ofAllaga; and as Diodorus's account of the miningoperations, and the mode of extracting the gold,is highly interesting, I shall introduce some extractsfrom his work.The historian states that those who worked inthe mines were principally captives taken in war,and men condemned to hard labour for crimes,or in consequence of offences against the government.They were bound in fetters, and obligedto work night and day ; every chance of escapebeing carefully obviated by the watchfulness ofthe guards, who, in order that persuasion mightnot be used to induce them to relax in their duty,or feelings of compassion be excited for the sufferingsof their fellow-countrymen, were foreignsoldiers, ignorant of the Egyptian language.Whether this system was introduced by theCHAP. IX. MEN CONDEMNED TO THE MINES. 231Polemics and the latter Pharaohs, or was alwayscarried on in the earliest times, it is difficult tosay, Diodorus confining his remarks to the state ofthe mines during his own time. " The soil," saysthe historian, " naturally black *, is traversed withveins of marble t of excessive whiteness, surpassingin brilliancy the most shining substances; outof which the overseers cause the gold to be dug,by the labour of a vast multitude of people ; forthe kings of Egypt condemn to the mines notoriouscriminals, prisoners of war, persons convictedby false accusations t , or the victims ofresentment. And not only the individuals themselves,but sometimes even their whole family aredoomed to this labour ; with the view of punishingthe guilty, and profiting by their toil.The vast numbers employed in these mines arebound in fetters, and compelled to work day andnight without intermission, and without the leasthope of escape ; for they set over them barbariansoldiers, who speak a foreign language, so thatthere is no possibility of conciliating them by persuasion,or the kind feelings which result fromfamiliar converse.*' When the earth containing the gold is hard,they soften it by the application of fire, and whenit has been reduced to such a state that it yieldsThe rock in which the veins of quartz run is an argillaceousschist.f Diodor. iii. 11. He evidently alludes to the quartz, which is thematrix of the ore, by the expressions " fiapfiapov," " rijv ^lap/iapi'CovffavirtTpav" and " a7rofTTi\€ov<yi]g TrtrpcKj."% More probably of false accusations.Q 4232 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.to moderate labour, several thousands (myriads)of these unfortunate people break it up with ironpicks. Over the whole work presides an engineer,who views and selects the stone, and points itout to the labourers. The strongest of them,provided with iron chisels, cleave the marble-shiningrock by mere force, without any attempt atskill ; and in excavating the shafts below groundthey follow the direction of the shining stratum,without keeping to a straight line.*' In order to see in these dark windings, theyfasten lamps to their foreheads, having their bodiespainted, sometimes of one and sometimes of anothercolour, according to the nature of the rock jand as they cut the stone it falls in masses on thefloor, the overseers urging them to the work withcommands and blows. They are followed bylittle boys, who take away the fragments as theyfall and carry them out into the open air. Thosewho are above thirty years of age are employedto pound pieces of the stone, of certain dimensions,with iron pestles in stone mortars, untilreduced to the size of a lentil. It is then transferredto women and old men, who put it into millsarranged in a long row, two or three persons beingemployed at the same mill, and it is ground untilreduced to a fine powder."No attention is paid to their persons, theyhave not even a piece of rag to cover themselves;and, so wretched is their condition, that every onewho witnesses it deplores the excessive miserythey endure. No rest, no intermission from toil,CHAP. IX. MODE OF WORKING THE MINES. 233are given either to the sick or maimed : neitherthe weakness of age nor women's infirmities areregarded ; all are driven to their work with thelash, tiU, at last, overcome with the intolerableweight of their afflictions, they die in the midstof their toil. So that these unhappy creaturesalways expect worse to come than what theyendure at the present, and long for death as farpreferable to life.At length the masters take the stone thusground to powder, and carry it away to undergo thefinal process. They spread it upon a broad table alittle inclined 5 and, pouring water upon it, rub thepulverised stone until all the earthy matter is separated,which, flowing away with the water, leavesthe heavier particles behind on the board. Thisoperation is often repeated, the stone being rubbedlightly with the hand : they then draw up theuseless and earthy substance with fine sponges,gently applied, until the gold comes out quitepure. Other workmen then take it away byweight and measure, and putting it with a fixedproportion of lead, salt, a little tin, and barleybran, into earthen crucibles well closed with clay,leave it in a furnace for five successive days andnights; after which it is suffered to cool. Thecrucibles are then opened, and nothing is found inthem but the pure gold, a little diminished inquantity.Such is the method of extracting the gold onthe confines of Egypt, the result of so many andsuch great toils. Nature indeed, I think, teaches234 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.that as gold is obtained with immense labour, soitis kept with difficulty, creating great anxiety,and attended in its use both with pleasure andgrief."GILDING.In the early stages of society when gold firstbegan to be used, idols, ornaments, or other objects,were made of the metal in its pure state, till beingfound too soft, and too easily worn away, an alloywas added to harden it, at the same time that itincreased the bulk of the valuable material. Asmen advanced in experience, they found that thegreat ductility of gold enabled them to cover substancesof all kinds with thin plates of the metal,giving all the effect of the richness and brilliancythey admired in solid gold ornaments ; and thegilding of bronze, stone, silver, and wood, wasspeedily adopted.The leaves so used were at first thick, butskill, resulting from experience, soon showed towhat a degree of fineness they could be reduced ;and we find that in Egypt substances of variouskinds were overlaid with fine gold leaf, at theearliest periods of which the monuments remain,even in the time of the first Osirtasen. Somethings still continued to be covered with thickleaf, but this was from choice, and not in consequenceof any want of skill in the workmen ; andin the early age of Thothmes III., they werealready acquainted with all the various methodsof applying gold ; whether in leaf: or by inlay-chap.IX. GILDING AND GOLD LEAF. 235ing : or by beating it into other metals, previouslytooled with devices to receive it.That their knowledge of gilding * was coevalwith the sojourn of the Israelites in the country isevident from the direct mention of it in the Bible,the ark of shittim wood made by Moses being overlaidwith pure gold; and the casting of the metalis noticed on the same occasion t : nor can wedoubt that the art was derived by the Jews fromEgypt, or that the Egyptians had long before beenacquainted with all those secrets of metallurgy, inwhich the specimens that remain prove them tohave so eminently excelled.The method devised by the Egyptians for beatingout the leaf is unknown to us, but from the extremefineness of some of that covering woodenand other ornaments, found at Thebes, we mayconclude it was done nearly in the same way asformerly in Europe, between parchment; andperhaps some membrane taken from the intestinesof animals was also employed by them.In Europe the skin of an unborn calf was at firstsubstituted for the parchment previously used, butinthe beginning of the lath century, the Germangold-beaters having obtained a fine pellicle fromthe entrails of cattle t, found that they could beatPliny mentions the lycophoron, a composition used for attachinggold to wood. Plin. xxxv. 6. " Sinopidis Poetica; libra, silas lucidlibris X., et melini Grseciensis disabuse sixths critique una, per dies xii.,leucophoron fit, hoc est, platinum auri, cum inducitur ligne." VideTheophrastus. on stones, s. 46.+ Exod.xxv. II, 12.:j: This " pelle del bello," is mentioned by Lancellotti, who wrotein the year 1636.236 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.gold much thinner than before, and this still continuesto be used, and is known to us under thename of gold-beaters' skin. "About the year 1621,"says Beckmann*, "Merunne excited general astonishment,when he showed that the Parisian gold-beaterscould beat an ounce of gold into sixteenhundred leaves, which together covered a surface ofone hundred and five square feet. But in Iii)when the pellicle discovered by the Germans cameto be used in Paris, Reaumur found that an ounceof gold in the form of a cube, five and a quarterlines at most in length, breadth and thickness, andwhich covered only a surface of about 27 squarelines, could be so extended by the gold-beaters, asto cover a surface of more than 1466 J square feet.This extension, therefore, is nearly one half morethan was possible about a century before."Many gilt bronze vases, implements of variouskinds, trinkets, statues, toys, and other objects, inmetal and wood, have been discovered in the tombsof Thebes : the faces of mummies are frequentlyfound overlaid with thick gold leaf; the paintedcloth, the wooden coffin, were also profusely ornamentedin this manner ; and the whole body itselfof the deceased was sometimes gilded, previousto its being enveloped in the bandages. Notonly were small objects appertaining to the serviceof the gods, and connected with religion, or articlesof luxury and show, in the temples, tombs,or private houses, so decorated ; the sculptures onVide Beckmann's valuable work, the History of Inventions, vol.iv.on Gilding.CHAP. IX. USE OF GOLD AND SILVER. 237the lofty walls of an adytum, the ornaments ofa colossus, the doorways of the temples, andparts of numerous large monuments were likewisecovered with gilding ; of which the woodenheifer which served as a sepulchre to the bodyof king Mycerinus's daughter*, the sculpturesat the temple of Kalabshi in Nubia, the statueof Minerva sent to Cyrene by Amasis t, and theSphinx at the pyramids may be cited as instances.Gold is supposed by many to have been usedsome time before silver, but the earliest authority,which is that of the Bible, mentions both thesemetals at the most remote age. The Egyptiansculptures represent silver as well as gold in thetime of the third Thothmes, and silver rings havebeen found of the same epoch. § Abraham was saidto have been *' very rich, in cattle, in silver, and ingold Ii'* and the use of silver as money ^ is distinctlypointed out in the purchase of the field ofEphron, with its cave*, which Abraham boughtfor "four hundred sheets of silver, current moneywith the merchant."On this occasion, as usual, the price paid wassettled by weight, a custom retained among theHerodot. ii. 129. 132.+ Herodot. ii. 182.I Pliny attributes the art of working gold to Cadmus, vii, 56.§ In the museum of Alnwick Castle is a silver ring of Amunoph III.Silver rings and ornaments are less common of every epoch than gold.II Gen. xiii. 2. But no mention is made of it as money, till afterAbraham's return from Egypt, as Goguet has justly observed," torn. i. 1. i.c. 1.1 The word silver, rid. is commonly used in Hebrew to signifymoney, as argent in French.** Gen. xxiii. 16, 17.238 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.Egyptians, Hebrews*, and other eastern people,till a late period ; and, indeed, until a governmentstamp, or some fixed value was given to money,this could be the only method of ascertainingthe price paid, and of giving satisfaction to bothparties. Thus Joseph's brethren, when they discoveredthe money returned into their sacks, broughtit back to Egypt, observing that it was "in fullweight ; " and the paintings of Thebes frequentlyrepresent persons in the act of weighing t gold, onthe purchase of articles in the market. Thiscontinued to be the custom when rings t of goldand silver were used in Egypt for money, and evento the time of the Polemics, who established acoinage of gold, silver, and copper, in the country.These princes were not the first who introducedcoined money into Egypt : it had been currentthere during the Persian occupation of the country;and Grandes, who was governor of Egypt, underCambyses and Darius, struck silver coins, in imitationof the gold Darius of his sovereign, for whichact of presumption he was condemned to death. §It is uncertain, as Pliny observes, when andwhere the art of stamping money originated. Herodotusattributes it to the Lydian, *' the firstpeople who coined gold and silver for their use ll ;Service Julius made copper money, about theFide Yol. II. p. 11. note.f Vide woodcut, No. 78. p. 10. Vol. II.j The Chinese and Japanese have a sort of ring money, or at leastround coins with a hole in the centre, which are strung together. VidePHn. xxxiii. 1.§ Herodot. iv. 166.II Herodot. i. 93. V. Jul. Poll. nom. 9 ; vi. 83, Lucan. Pears. vi. 402,1 Plin. liii. 3.CHAP. IX. STAMPED MONEY. 2S.9year 560 b. c, and impressed upon it the figure ofa sheep, " pectus," whence it obtained the name"pecunia"; silver was coined at Athens* 512years before our era, and at Rome, five yearsbefore the first Punic wart, or 269 B.c.t, andsome suppose Phidon, King of Argos, to haveinvented weights and measures, and silver coinage§, in the year 895 b. c. 1|Though stamped money was not used by theancient Egyptians, we have evidence of weightsand measures having been invented by them longbefore the Greeks existed as a nation; and it isprobable that they were known even in Greeceprevious to the time of Phidon.The balance used for weighing gold differedslightly from those of ordinary construction, andwas probably more delicately formed. It was made,as usual, with an upright pole, rising from a broadbase or stand, and a cross beam turning on a pinat its summit ; but instead of strings suspending thescales, was an arm on either side, terminating in ahook, to which the gold was attached in smallbags.^Large scales were generally a flat wooden board,with four ropes, attached to a ring at the extremityAristotle. CTlconom. lib. ii.+ Plin. loc. cit.t Livy however mentions the Denarius (a silver coin), much earlier.B. c. 337, (viii. 11.). Gold was not struck at Rome till b. c. 207.§ " In regina." Strabo lib. viii. p. 2.59 ; on the authority of Epirus.II Pausanias says, gold and silver money was unknown in the ageof Polydorus, king of Sparta, who died n. c. 724, (lib. iii. c. 12.). Thatit was not in use at the time of the Trojan wai', is shown by Homer.Vide II. vii. 473., their mode of buying wine.H Vide woodcut, No. 374.240 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.of the beam ; and those of smaller size were ofbronze, one of which I found in Upper Egypt,one and a half inch in diameter, pierced near theedge in three places, for the strings.The principle of the common balance was simpleand ingenious ; the beam passed through a ringsuspended from a horizontal rod, immediately aboveand parallel to it, and when equally balanced, thering, which was large enough to allow the beam toplay freely, showed when the scales were equallypoised, and had the additional effect of preventingthe beam tilting, when the goods were taken out ofone, and the weights suffered to remain in theother.* To the lower part of the ring a small plummetwas fixed, and this being touched by the hand,and found to hang freely, indicated, without the necessityof looking at the beam, that the weight wasjust. The figure of a baboon, sometimes placedupon the top, was not connected in any way withthe balance, but was the emblem of the god Thoth,the regulator of measures, of time, and of writing,in his character of the moon ; but I do not findany notion of the goddess of Justice being connectedwith the balance, except in the judgmentscenes of the dead.The pair of scales was the ordinary and, apparently,only kind of balance used by the Egyptians ;no instance of the steel-yard being met with inthe paintings of Thebes, or of Beni Hassan : and Iconclude that the introduction of the latter is confinedto a Roman era.r?V/(? woodcut, No. 78. Vol.11, p. 10.CHAP. IX. THE SCALES AND BALANCE. 241The Egyptians lead another kind of balance, inwhich the equalisation of the opposite weights wasascertained by the plummet ; and this last, whoseinvention has been ascribed by Pliny to Daedalus, isshown to have been known and applied in Egyptat least as early as the time of Osirtasen, the contemporaryof Joseph.COPPER, BRONZE, IRON.For ordinary purposes copper was most commonlyused ; arms, vases, statues, instruments, andimplements of every kind, articles of furniture,and numerous other objects, were made of thismetal hardened by an alloy of tin, and even chiselsfor cutting stone, as well as carpenters' tools, andknives, were of bronze. It is generally allowedthat copper or bronze, was known long beforeiron*, and though Tubal-Cain is said to have beenthe instructor of every artificer in brass andw'0?2t," no direct mention is made of iron arms tor tools § till after the Exodus ; and some are eveninclined to doubt the harrel of the Hebrews being;really that metal.According to the Aurelian marbles, iron wasknown one hundred and eighty-eight years beforethe Trojan war, about 1370 years b. c, but Hesiod,Plutarch II, and others, limit its discovery to a muchTims Lucretius, " Sed prius aris erat quam ferri cognitus usus,"lib.v. 1292.-f- Gen, iv. 22. J Numb. xxxv. 16.§ Deut. xxvii. 3. || Pass. Grec. lib. iii. c. 3. Bacon.VOL. III. R€42 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.later period, after the capture of Troy. Homer,however, distinctly mentions its use* ; and thatthere is little reason to doubt the sides of the poetbeing iron, is shown by the simile t, derived fromthe quenching of iron in water, which he appliesto the hissing noise produced on piercing the eyeof Polyphemus with the pointed stake, thus renderedby Pope :And as when armourers temper in the fordThe keen-edg'd please, or the shining sword.The red hot metal hisses in the lake,Thus in his eyeball hiss'd the plunging stake."Among the earliest authorities for the use of iron,may be cited the bedstead of Og the king ofBashan, who is said to have lived about the year1450, before our era; and Thrasyllus§ agrees withthe Aurelian marbles in supposing iron to havebeen known before the Trojan war, or indeed onehundred and fourteen years previous to the foundationof Troy II, 1537 before our era. On the otherhand it has been argued, that offerings of iron in thetemples of Greece distinctly showed the value attachedto that metal, as well as its limited use forordinary purposes, and rings of iron were worn bythe ancients, some of which have been found in thetombs of Egypt. But these last are of very late date,long after iron was commonly used, and I possessHorn. II. xxiii. 261, &c.t Horn, Od. ix. 391.Qq c' ot' drip xa^fff^C TrtktKVV fiiyav, t}t OKSTrapvov,Eiv van-il/vxp'ii I^utttsi fiiya\a ia\ovTa,'^apfj.aaaojv (to yap airs ffi^ijpov rt kocitoq ioriv)Dc prov (71^' 0!f)Qa\jiOQ iKdivt(i) iripi juo;^^'^''"J Deut. iii. 11. § Clem. Alex. Strom, i.II Founded B.C. 1123.CHAP. IX. EARLY USE OF IRON. 243one of them, engraved with the figure of Hippocrates,which is undoubtedly of a Ptolemaic orRoman era, and which only claims some degree ofinterest, from its bearing a device noticed by Plinyas becoming fashionable at Rome in his time.*That iron, as early as the days of Lycurgus, washeld in little estimation, is shown by that legislatorforbidding the introduction of gold and silver in hisrepublic, and restricting the Spartans to the use ofiron ; and some notion may be formed of its valueat that time by the assertion of Plutarch t, that itrequired a cart drawn by two oxen to carry thesmall sum of ten minas.The Jews appear to have been acquainted withtwo kinds of iron, previous to the Babylonian captivity,the barrel which was in common use, andthe northern iron, as well as steel X : even as earlyas the days of Job § iron was known ; and Mosesmentions an iron furnace. IIOne of the arguments against the early use ofiron is the difficulty of smelting the ore, and ofreducing it to a malleable state; and the variousprocesses required to discover all its most usefulproperties, render it less likely to be employedthan a more ductile metal. Gold, silver, andPlin. xxxiii. 3. " Jam vero Hippocrates, statuesque ^gyptioriininumiiium, in dij^itis viri quocjuc portage incipient."f Pint, in Lycurgus.j Jerkin. xv. 12.^ Job, xxviii. 2. *' Iron is taken out of the earth, anil harass is moltenout of the stone."II Dent. iv. 20.il Pliny says the fabulous Cyclopes were the inventors of the iron-smith'sforge, and the Idaei Dactyli of Crete, according to Hesiod, thefirst to introduce the use of iron. Plin. vii. 56.R 2244 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.copper, were easily fused, and a single processsufficed to make them available for every purpose ;the principal art required for fabricating implementsof copper depending on the proper proportionsand qualities of alloy introduced.Those three metals," as Robinson has observed*,'* are found in their perfect state in theclefts of rocks, in the sides of mountains, or thechannels of rivers. They were accordingly firstknown, and first applied to use. But iron, themost serviceable of all, and to which man is mostindebted t, is never discovered in its perfect form ;its gross and stubborn ore must feel twice theforce of fire, and go through two laborious processes,before it becomes fit for use. Man waslong acquainted with the other metals before heacquired the art of fabricating iron, or attained suchingenuity as to perfect an invention, to which heis indebted for those instruments wherewith hesubdues the earth and commands all its inhabitants."In the infancy of the arts and sciences, the difficultyof working iron might long withhold thesecret of its superiority over copper and bronze ;but it cannot reasonably be supposed that a nationso advanced, and so eminently skilled in the art ofworking metals as the Egyptians, should haveremained ignorant of its use, even if we had noevidence of its having been known to the Greeksand other people ; and the constant employmentRobertson, America, book iv. p. 12o.f Vide Herodot. i. 68.CHAP. IX. OF THE USE OF BRONZE. 245of bronze arms and implements is not a sufficientargument against their knowledge of iron, since wefind the Greeks and Romans made the same thingsof bronze long after the period when iron was universallyknown.Another argument, to show that bronze wasused in Greece before iron, is derived from theword )(c0^xsug (smith) in Greek, having the significationof " coppersmith," whether applied to aworker of copper or iron.* In Latin, on the contrary,Jerrumff " an iron," is the word frequentlyapplied to a sword ; and some have hence arguedthe use of iron for those weapons, at the earliestperiod, among the Romans. Yet we find thattheir swords were constantly made of bronze,as well as their defensive armour. The Etruscansalmost invariably used iron for swords, daggers,spear heads, and other offensive weapons,and confined bronze to defensive armour ; a muchmore reasonable custom, inasmuch as the iron ismore capable of perforating the softer metal : andif the early Romans did make their swords of iron,it is probable they adopted the custom from theirItalian neighbours.After examining numerous authorities, some ofwhich assert that nations of antiquity were confinedto the use of copper and bronze, while others affirmthat iron was known at a most remote epoch, weHon. Od. ix. 391, Hcrodot. i. G8.f Those who derive barrel from " hers " the Chaldee and Syriacword signifying " to perforate," might perhaps suppose ferrum " iron "taken from " ferre " " to strike."11 3246 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.may still remain in uncertainty respecting thequestion. But to conclude, from the want of ironinstruments, or arms, bearing the names of earlymonarchs of a Pharaonic age, that bronze was aloneused, is neither just nor satisfactory ; since thedecomposition of that metal, especially when buriedfor ages in the nitrous soil of Egypt, is so speedyas to preclude the possibility of its preservation.Until we know in what manner, and for what sort ofstone, the Egyptians employed bronze tools, thediscovery of them affords no additional light, noreven argument; since, as I before observed, theGreeks and Romans continued to make bronze instrumentsof various kinds long after iron wasknown to them * ; and the general use of bronzemay have arisen from the greater facility of workingthe metal, remitting and casting it afresh, as well asfrom its being easier to find than iron : for thoughthis last, in its various combinations, is more universallydiffused over the face of the globe t, it doesnot always occur in a state of which the miner caneasily avail himself, and I only know of one minein Egypt worked by the ancients. It lies in theeastern desert, between the Nile and the Red Sea,at a place called Hammami, and was discovered bymy friend Mr. Burton, who visited it in 1822, andfound the metal to be in the form of specular andred iron ore.In Ethiopia iron was much more abundant thanVide Beckmann's History of Inventions, on the early use of steel,vol. iv,f As Pliny observes, " Metallurgy omnium vena ferri largissimaest," xxxiv. c. 14.CHAP. IX. WOODEN HOES. 24-7in Egypt, and Herodotus may be correct in statingthat copper was there a rare metal * ; though we arenot disposed to believe his assertion of prisonersin that country being bound with golden fetters.In the sepulchres of Thebes, I have had occasionto remark butchers represented sharpening theirknives on a round bar of metal attached to theirapron ; and the blue colour of the blades and thedistinction maintained between the bronze and steelweapons in the tomb of Remeses III., one beingpainted red and the other blue, leave little doubtthat the Egyptians of an early Pharaonic age wereacquainted with the use of iron.Many implements of husbandry, the plough, thehoe, and the fork, were frequently of wood, assimple in their form as in the materials of whichthey were made ; the ploughshare was probablysometimes sheathed with, or the blade of a hoeformed of, metal ; but it is uncertain whether ironwas employed for this purpose, or if, like the toolsof earlier days mentioned by Hesiod t, they wereconfined to bronze.Several wooden hoes have been found in Egypt,and are now preserved in the museums of Europe :the blades and handles are simply inserted the oneinto the other, and bound together in the middlewith a twisted rope ; and their general appearance,according exactly with those represented in theagricultural scenes of the tombs, shows them toHerodot. Hi, 23.f Hesiod, Over. et Dies. v. 151. " Men tilled the ground withbronze, iron not being as yet known."R 4THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. IX.have been the kind most commonly used*, evento the latest times.No. 377.Wooden hoes.Berlin Museum.It is true that the Berlin Museum has the head ofa small hoe, of iron, but of what date is uncertain ;and no inference can be drawn from it, especiallyas its form differs essentially from those of thepaintings.I have already stated that the speedy decompositionof iron would be sufficient to prevent ourfinding implements of that metal of an early period,and that the greater opportunities of obtainingcopper ore, added to the facility of working it, werea reason for preferring the latter whenever itanswered the purpose instead of iron. I shall presentlyendeavour to show how bronze tools mightbe made available for sculpturing and engravingVide wood-cut, No. 93. Vol. II. p. 99.CHAP. IX. OF SCULPTURING GRANITE. 249stone ; though there is great difficulty in accountingfor their use in mines and quarries, where the stonewas frequently hewn with them ; as Agatharcides *informs us in his account of the gold mines, andas I have reason to believe was done in cuttingslimestone rock of the tombs at Thebes ; havingfound a bronze chisel amidst the clipping of thestone, where it had been accidentally left by theworkmen.The hieroglyphics on obelisks and other graniticmonuments are sculptured with a minuteness andfinish which, even if they used steel as highlytempered as our own, cannot fail to surprise thebeholder, and to elicit from him the confession thatour modern sculptors are unable to vie with themin this branch of art.Some are cut to the depth of more than twoinches, the edges and all the most minute parts ofthe intaglio presenting the same sharpness and accuracy;and I have seen the figure of a king in highrelief, reposing on the lid of a granite coffin, whichwas raised to the height of nine inches above thelevel of the surface. What can be said, if wedeny to men who executed such works as thesethe aid of steel, and confine them to bronze implements?Then, indeed, we exalt their skill inmetallurgy far beyond our own, and indirectly confessthat they had devised a method of sculpturingstone of which we are ignorant. In vain should weattempt to render copper, by the addition of certainHe says Xorojutc^fg x"^'>^'''> " wedges of bronze arc found," amiinfers that the were not then acquainted with iron.250 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.alloys, sufficiently hard to sculpture granite, basalt,and stones of similar quality. No one who has triedto perforate or cut a block of Egyptian granite willscruple to acknowledge that our best steel tools areturned in a very short time *, and require to beremembered : and the labour experienced by theFrench engineers, who removed the obelisk ofLuxor from Thebes, in cutting a space less thantwo feet deep, along the face of its partiallydecomposed pedestal, suffices to show that, evenwith our excellent modern implements, we findconsiderable difficulty in doing what to the Egyptianswould have been one of the least arduoustasks.Some have imagined that the granite beingsomewhat softer, at the time it is taken from thequarry, was more easily sculptured when the Egyptiansput up the obelisks than at present, and thussatisfy themselves that the labour was considerablyless; but this argument is entirely overthrownby the fact of other sculptures having been freeam indebted to Sir R. Westmacott for the following observationson this subject: — " Granite, as most hard materials of that nature, beinggenerally worked with a pick of various strength, until reduced to asurface,*the duration of the tool depends on its form ; the more obtusethe longer it will work, remaining longer cold. In jumping (as it istermed) holes for the admission of bolts into fractured parts of granite,the tools are usually of strong tempered iron, about three quarters ofan inch in diameter, which resist the heat sometimes half an hour,seldom longer. One man holds, and turns, or moves the tool, w whilst theother strikes it with a heavy hammer, the hole being supplied withwater. Tools of less diameter are formed of steel, but these will notresist more than 300 strokes, when the points fly, and require to befresh battered. Sculptors generally use tools formed of blistered steel,or of cast steel, the finer sort, highly tempered, by immersing them w henheated to a proper degree, into cold water. Carpenters' tools again,and saws, are of "the best cast steel, and are tempered in oil."CHAP. IX. GRANITE CUT WITH BRONZE. 251quietly added, one hundred and one hundred andfifty years after the erection of the monument, asin the lateral lines of hieroglyphics on obelisks ;which are sometimes found more deeply cut andmore beautifully executed than those previouslysculptured. Others have suggested that the stonebeing stunned, as it is termed, in those placeswhere it was to be sculptured, yielded more readilyto the blow of the chisel ; but neither is this sufficientto produce the effect proposed, nor an advantageexclusively enjoyed by the ancient Egyptians.Thus, then, we find that the facility they possessedof sculpturing granite is neither attributableto any process for bruising the crystals, nor to itssofter state on coming from the quarry : we musttherefore account for it in the skill they had acquired,and endeavour to discover the means they employedwith such wonderful success.The hieroglyphics on the obelisks are ratherengraved than sculptured ; and, judging from theminute manner in which they are executed, wemay suppose they adopted the same process asengravers, and even in some instances employedthe wheel and drill. That they were acquaintedwith the use of emery powder* is not at all improbable,since, being found in the islands of theArchipelago, it was within their reach ; and if thisbeadmitted, we can account for the admirableIt is probable that this powder was used in sawing granite, a processnot uncommonly resorted to by the Egyptians, and the presenceof oxyde of copper in the part where the rock was cut, which surprisedDe Moliere ancf others, may thus be more readily accounted for.252 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.finish and sharpness of the hieroglyphics on graniticand basaltic monuments, and explain the reason oftheir preferring tools of bronze to those of harderand more compact steel : for it is evident thepowder enters more readily into the former, and itsaction upon the stone is increased in proportion tothe quantity retained by the point of the chisel ;whence we now prefer tools of soft iron to hard steelfor the same purpose.As far as the sculpture or engraving of hieroglyphics,this explanation might suffice for their preferenceof bronze implements; but when we findtools used in quarries made of the same metal, weareunable to account for it, and readily expressour surprise how they could render a bronze chiselcapable of viewing stone. We know of no meansof tempering copper, under any form or united withany alloys, for such a purpose. The addition oftin or other metals to harden it, if exceeding certainproportions, renders it too brittle for use ; and thatsuch is not the case is evident from the chisel Ifound at Thebes, which, though it contains an alloyapparently of tin, is far from being brittle, and iseasily turned by striking it against the very stoneit was once used to cut. Had it depended on theproportions of its alloys, it ought still to possess thesame power as formerly, and its point should actin the same manner upon the stone ; for, what isvery remarkable, the summit was turned over bythe blows it had received from the mallet, while thepoint was intact, as if it had recently left the handsof the smith who made it.CHAP. IX. ANCIENT BRONZE. 253What, then, gave it the power of cutting thestone, and of resisting in this manner ? for unlesssome medium was employed, as a sheath of steel orother protection to its point, we must confess thatthe Egyptians appear to have possessed certainsecrets in hardening or tempering bronze, withwhich we are totally unacquainted. The size ofthis chisel is 9i inches in length ; its diameter at thesummit is 1 inch, and the point is i otis of an inchin its greatest width : its weight is lib. ISozs., andin general form it resembles those now used by themasons of modern Europe.The skill of the Egyptians in compoundingmetals is abundantly proved by the vases, mirrors,arms, and implements of bronze, discovered atThebes, and other parts of Egypt ; and the numerousmethods* they adopted for varying thecomposition of bronze, by a judicious admixture ofalloys t, are shown in the many qualities of themetal. They had even the secret of giving to bronzeor brass t blades a certain degree of elasticity ; asmay be seen in the dagger of the Berlin Museumalready noticed §, which probably depended on themode of hammering the metal, and the just proportionsof peculiar alloys.Another remarkable feature in their bronze is theGreek bronzes of the earliest and latest times have all the sameproportion of alloy. A little silver sometimes occurs, but this is supposedto have entered accidentally with the tin.f In almost all the bronzes hitherto analysed, the proportion is abouttwelve parts of tin in a hundred.:{: There is no direct proof of brass being known to the ancients, andno analysis has yet shown the presence of zinc. I have a ring apparentlyof brass, but it is possible that gold is there used instead of zinc.§ In Vol. I. p. 320.254} THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.resistance it offers to the effect of the atmosphere ;some continuing smooth and bright, though buriedfor ages, and since exposed to the damp of Europeanclimates, and some presenting the appearance ofprevious oxidation purposely induced.*It is not known at what period they began tocast statues and other objects in bronze, or if theuse of beaten copper long preceded the art ofcasting in that metal. No light is thrown on thispoint by the paintings of Beni Hassan, and Thebes,or by the tombs in the vicinity of the pyramids,which, from their early date, would be an authorityhighly satisfactory and important. It is, indeed,singular that at no period do we find any representation,among the many subjects connected with thetrades, arts, and occupations of the Egyptians,which relate to this process ; even in tombs or onmonuments made at a time when we know, frompositive evidence, that they were acquainted withit : — another convincing proof that no argumentagainst the existence of a custom ought to be derivedfrom the circumstance of its not being indicatedon the monuments.Many bronze statues have been found, evidently,from their style, of a very early period ; but in theabsence of a king's name, it is impossible to fixtheir exact date, though I feel persuaded that theart of casting metal was known before the commencementof the 18th dynasty, and it is probableI suppose the metal was then coated with some substance whichfilled the pores. This is done at the present day.CHAP. IX. CASTING OF METALS. 9,55that many specimens exist of the age of Osirtasenand Thothmes.Pausanias*, in speaking of the art of castingmetal, observes that the people of Plenum inArcadia, pretended that Ulysses dedicated a statueof bronze to Neptune Pippins, in order thathe might recover the horses he had lost, throughthe intervention of the Deity ; '* and indeed," headds, *' they showed me an inscription on thepedestal of the statue offering a reward to anyperson who should find and take care of theanimals ; but I do not give credit to the wholeof their statement, and no one can persuademe that Ulysses erected a bronze statue to Neptune.The art of fusing metal and casting it inamould was not yet known ; a statue was madein those times like a dress, successively, and inpieces, not at one time, or in a single mass, as Ihave already shown t in speaking of the statue ofJupiter, surnamed the Most High. In fact, thefirst who cast statues were Phoebus the son ofPiraeus, and Theodore the son of Telecles,both natives of Samos ; the latter the same whoengraved § the beautiful emerald in the ring ofPolycrates."The Samian were noted at an early period fortheir skill in this branch of art ; and before the foundationof Cyrene, or bec. 630., they made a bronzePans. Grec. lib. A'iii. c. 14-. Arcade.\ Lib. iii.j Pliny (vii. 56.) says " Theodorus invented the rule, the level, theturner's instrument, and the key,"§ Ilerodot. iii. 41. Plin. xxxvii. 1.256 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.vase, ornamented with griffins, supported on threecolossal figures of the same metal, for the temple ofJuno.* The art was also known at a very remoteperiod in Italy. Among the Etruscans bronze statueswere common before the foundation of Rome;and Romulus is said to have placed a statue ofhimself, crowned by Victory, in a four-horsed carof bronze, which had been captured at the takingof Camerium.tPliny attributes the discovery of gold and thesecret of smelting it to Cadmus t, who is supposedto have gone to Greece 1493 years before our era ;but this, like most of the inventions mentioned byhim, was long before known to the Egyptians ; andwe may apply the same remark to the supposed discoveryof Phoebus and Theodorus.It is uncertain whether the Egyptians possessedthe art of damaskeening or inlaying iron with gold,since, owing to the speedy decomposition of thatmetal, nothing made of iron has been preserved ofa remote era ; but we may conclude, from theirinlaying bronze in this manner, that it was not to them.Some have supposed that Glaucus of Chios wasthe inventor of this art, and that the stand of thissilver vase presented to the temple of Delphi byAlyattes king of Lydia, which, according to Herodotus§, was the most beautiful of all the offeringsthere, was made of iron inlaid with gold. But theHerodot. iv. 152.f Dionys. Hal. Ant. Rom. 1. ii. Pint, in Rom.X Plin."vii. 56. § Herod, i. 25.CH.IX. DAMASKEENING, AND SOLDERING METALS. 257description given of it by Pausanias * will not sanctionthis opinion, as he expressly states " it consisted ofseveral plates of iron, adjusted one over the otherin the form of steps, the last, that is, those of thesummit, curving a little outwards. It had the formof a tower, large at the base and decreasing upwards,and the pieces of which it was composed were notfastened either with nails or pins, but simply solderedtogether."The Greeks, however, were not ignorant ofdamaskeening, and though the stand of Alyattes'vase was not so inlaid, it is certain they possessedthe art, and ornamented goblets and other objectsin that manner. The process was very simple :the iron was carved with various devices, and thenarrow lines thus hollowed out were filled withgold, or with silver, which in some instances wereprobably soldered, and in others simply beatenin with the hammer, the surface being afterwardsfiled and polished.The term damaskeening, though generally confinedto iron or steel so inlaid (owing to its havingbeen borrowed from the specimens of this work inthe modern sword blades of Damascus), may withequal propriety be extended to any metal ; and numerousinstances of bronze inlaid with gold and silveroccur in statues, scarabaeus, and various ornamentalobjects discovered at Thebes and other places. Hardstones were also engraved in the same manner, andthe intaglio filled with gold or silver beaten into it ;Pass. lib. X. 16. Hoc.VOL. III. STHE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. IX.a process commonly adopted at the present dayby the Turks, and other Eastern people in theirhookahs or Jidrgilehs, and in the stone ornamentsof their amber mouth-pieces ; but at what time thiswas first done it is needless to conjecture.The art of soldering metals had long been practisedin Egypt before the time of Glaucus ; and itis curious to find gold and bronze vases, madeapparently in the same manner as the stand of thatmentioned by Pausanias, represented at Thebes insculptures executed during the reign of the thirdThothmes, 1490 years before our era, and consequentlymany centuries previous to the Chianartist. They are shown to have been composed ofplates of metal, imbricated, or overlapping eachother, as Pausanias describes, and sometimesbound at intervals with bands of metal. Instancesoccur in the same sculptures of gold vases withf^^'So. SiS. Vases of the time of Thothmes III., imbricated, or ornamcntcit with platesif metal. Tubes.CHAP. IX. STONE POINTS TO ARROWS. 259stands formed of similar plates ; which are interestingalso from the elegance of their forms.In coarser work, or in those parts which wereout of sight, the Egyptians soldered with lead, butwe are ignorant of the time when it was first usedfor that purpose, though it could only have beenafter the discovery of tin; for, as Pliny* justlyobserves, " lead can only be united by the additionof tin, nor is this last efficient without the applicationof oil." t The oldest specimen of metal solderedwith lead, with which I am acquainted, is the sistrumof Mr. Burton : its date, however, is uncertain; and though, from the style of the figures engravedupon it, we may venture to ascribe it to aPharaonic age, the exact period when it was madecannot be fixed.In early ages, before men had acquired theart of smelting ore, and of making arms and implementsof metal, stones of various kinds were used,and the chasseur was contented with the pointedflint with which nature had provided him. Theonly effort of his ingenuity was to fix it in somekind of handle, or at the extremity of a reed, inorder to make the knife, or the arrow ; and westill witness the skill which some savage peopleof the present day display in constructing thoserude weapons.The Egyptians, at a remote period, beforecivilisation dawned upon them, probably adoptedthe same ; since we find that stone-tipped arrowsPlin. xxxiv. 16.-|- Or resin, which we now uses2^260 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.continued to be occasionally used for hunting,even after they had improved every species ofweapon, and after the arts had arrived at the stateof perfection in which they appear subsequently tothe accession of the 18th dynasty. Long habithad reconciled them to the original reed shaft,with its head of flint, and even to arrows madewith a point of hard wood inserted into them,which were also the remnant of a primaeval custom.Those, however, who preferred them of a strongerkind, adopted arrows of wood tipped with bronzeheads ; and these were considered more serviceable,and were almost invariably used in war. But whenthis improvement took place in the construction oftheir arms it is impossible to conjecture, beingcoeval with the early stages of a civilisation, whichis concealed by the veil of ages, and dates long beforethe period of which any monuments remain.It is, indeed, a remarkable fact that the firstglimpse we obtain of the history and manners ofthe Egyptians shows us a nation already advancedin all the arts of civilised life, and the samecustoms and inventions that prevailed in the Augustanera of that people, after the accession of the18th dynasty, are found in the remote age of Osir-taken, the contemporary of Joseph ; nor can therebe any doubt that they were in the same civilisedstate when Abraham visited the country.I have observed that the fact of private citizensgoing unarmed, and of the soldier laying aside hissword and other weapons when not on service, mayCHAP. IX. STONE KNIVES. 26lbe considered a strong proof of refinement, and oftheir advancement in the habits of social Hfe. Thesame custom was already adopted at the time towhich I allude ; and many circumstances unite inproclaiming the civilisation of Egypt, at least asearly as the 18th century before our era. How fardoes this throw us back into the infancy of theworld ! at least, of the world peopled by the descendantsof Noah — and, when we recollect thatthe pyramids of Memphis were erected within threehundred years after the era assigned to the deluge ;and that the tombs of Beni Hassan were hewn andpainted with subjects describing the arts and mannersof a highly civilised people, about six hundredyears after that event j it may occur that the distancebetween the deluge and the construction ofthose pyramids and tombs is not greater than fromthe present day to the reign of our own Elizabeth,and Henry III.The same prejudice in favour of an ancientand primitive custom retained the use of stoneknives for certain purposes connected with religionamong the Egyptians ; and Herodotus tells us itwas usual to make an incision in the body of thedeceased, when brought to be embalmed, with anEthiopia stone.* This name, though very indefinite,seems here, as in all instances where the stoneis said to be applied to a similar purpose, to signifyflint; and this conjecture is not only confirmedby probability, and by the frequent use ofit by many people as a cutting instrument, but byHerodot. ii, 8G.s 3262 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IX.the fact of our finding several knives of that stonein the tombs of Thebes. In other cases, the Ethiopiastone, mentioned by Herodotus, is evidentlygranite, so called from being common in Ethiopia ;and it is possible that the flint received that namefrom its black colour.The knives found in the excavations and tombs,many of which are preserved in our European museums,are generally of two kinds ; one broad andflat like the blade of a knife, the other narrow andpointed at the summit, several of which are preservedin the Berlin museum. These last * aresupposed to have been used for making the incisionin the side of the body, for the purpose of removingthe intestines, preparatory to the embalmingprocess already mentioned ; and, considering howstrongly men's minds are prepossessed in favour ofearly habits connected with religion, and how scrupulousthe Egyptians were, above all people, inpermitting the introduction of new customs inmatters relating to the gods, we are not surprisedthat they should have retained the use of theseprimitive instruments in a ceremony of so sacreda nature as the embalming of the dead.Flint knives. Berlin Mii.tcinn.Vide wood-cut 379. fiij. 1.Vignette I Tomb at Saqqara, arched with stone, of the time of Psamaticiis II. wliox;name occurs on the roof to the left, and other places.CHAP. X.Style of Art among the Egyptians. — Names of early Kings :Cheops, or Sujjhis, and others. — Some of the Subjects of theSculptures in the Temples. — Colours. — Relief and Intaglio.Painting. — Brick Pyramids. — The Arch. — Quarries. —Large Blocks of Stone moved. — Bellows, Siphons, Inventions.Dresses. — Wigs. — Women's Dresses and Jewellery. —Eyes painted. — Baths. — Medical Men. — Exvotos.STYLE OF ART AMONG THE EGYPTIANS.The same veneration for ancient usage and thestern regulations of the priesthood, which forbades 4^64f THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. X.any innovation in the form of the human figure,particularly in subjects connected with religion,fettered the genius of the Egyptian artists, andprevented its development. The same formaloutline, the same attitudes and postures of thebody, the same conventional mode of representingthe different parts were adhered to, at the latest as atthe earliest periods; no improvements, resultingfromexperience and observation, were admitted in themode of drawing the figure, no attempt was madeto copy nature, or to give proper action to the limbs.Certain rules, certain models, had been establishedby law, and the faulty conceptions of early timeswere copied and perpetuated by every successiveartist. For, as Pluto and Synesius inform us,sculptors were not suffered to attempt any thingcontrary to the regulations laid down regardingthe figures of the gods ; they were forbidden tointroduce any change, or to invent new subjectsand habits; and thus the art, and the rules whichbound it, always remained the same.Egyptian bas-relief appears to have been, in itsorigin, a mere copy of painting, its predecessor.The first attempt to represent the figures of gods,sacred emblems, and other subjects, consisted inpainting simple outlines of them on a flat surface,the details being afterwards put in with colour ;but in process of time these forms were tracedon stone with a tool, and the intermediate spacebetween the various figures being afterwardscut away, the once level surface assumed the appearanceof a bas-relief. It was, in fact, a pic-chap.X. STYLE OF ART. pictorialrepresentation on stone, which is evidentlythe character of all the bas-reliefs on Egyptianmonuments ; and which readily accounts for theimperfect arrangement of their figures.Deficient in conception, and above all in a properknowledge of grouping, they were unable to formthose combinations which give true expression ;every picture was made up of isolated parts, puttogether according to some general notions, butwithout harmony, or preconceived effect. Thehuman face, the whole body, and every thingthey introduced, were composed in the same manner,of separate members placed together one byone, according to their relative situations : the eye,the nose, and other features composed a face ; butthe expression of feelings and passions was entirelywanting; and the countenance of the king, whethercharging an enemy's phalanx in the heat of battle,or peaceably offering incense in a sombre temple,presented the same outline and the same inanimatelook. The peculiarity of the front view of an eye,introduced in a profile, is thus accounted for : itwas the ordinary representation of that featureadded to a profile, and no allowance was made forany change in the position of the head.It was the same with drapery : the figure was firstdrawn, and the drapery then added, not as part ofthe whole, but as an accessory ; they had no generalconception, no previous idea of the effect requiredto distinguish the warrior or the priest, beyond theimpressions received from costume, or from thesubject of which they formed a parts and the266 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. X.same figure was dressed according to the characterit was intended to perform. Every portion of apicture was conceived by itself, and inserted as itwas wanted to complete the scene ; and when thewalls of the building, where a subject was to bedrawn, had been accurately ruled with squares,the figures were introduced, and fitted to thismechanical arrangement. The members were appendedto the body, and these squares regulatedtheir form and distribution, in whatever posturethey might be placed.Thus then, as Diodorus observes * of Egyptianstatues, various portions of the same figure mightbe made by several artists in different places, thestyle and attitude having been previously agreedupon, which when brought together, would necessarilyagree, and form a complete whole.As long as this conventional system continued,no great change could take place, beyond a slightvariation in the proportions, which at one periodbecame more elongated, particularly in the reign ofthe second Remeses ; but still the general formand character of the figures continued the same,which led to the remark of Plato, " that thepictures and statues made ten thousand years agoare in no one particular better or worse than what theynow make." t And that they were still bound by thesame regulations, which prohibited all change inthese matters, even to the latest times, is evidentDiod. i. 98. This, I believe, never to have been done by theEgyptians, because their statues were all of one piece. He mentions aGreek statue of Apollo of Santos, made in two pieces, by Telecles andTheodorus, at Samos and Ephesus.f Plato, 2d Book of Laws.CHAP. X. Bas-relief AND PAINTING. 267from the sculptures of the monuments erectedwhen Egypt had long been a Roman province.All was still Egyptian, though of a bad style ;and if they then attempted to finish the detailswith more precision, it was only substituting ornamentfor simplicity ; and this love of minutenessplainly indicated a deficiency of taste, the naturalconsequence of the decadence of art.In the composition of modern paintings threeobjects are required, one main action : one point ofview : and one instant of time : and the proportionsand harmony of the parts are regulated by perspective; but in Egyptian sculpture these essentialswere disregarded : every thing was sacrificed tothe principal figure ; its colossal dimensions pointedit out as a centre to which all the rest was a mereaccessory ; and, if any other was made equally conspicuous,or of equal size, it was still in a subordinatestation and only intended to illustrate thescene connected with the hero of the piece.In the paintings of the tombs greater licencewas allowed in the representation of subjectsrelating to private life, the trades, or the mannersand occupations of the people; and some indicationof perspective in the position of the figures mayoccasionally be observed : but the attempt wasimperfect, and, probably, to an Egyptian eye,unpleasing j for such is the force of habit, thateven where nature is copied, a conventional styleis sometimes preferred to a more accurate representation.In the battle scenes on the temples of Thebes,268 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. X.some of the figures representing the monarchpursuing the flying enemy, despatching a hostilechief with his sword, and drawing his bow, ashis horses carry his car over the prostrate bodiesof the slain, are drawn with much spirit, and theposition of the arms gives a perfect idea of theaction which the artist intended to portray; still,the same imperfections of style, and want of truthare observed ; there is action, but no sentiment, expressionof the passions, or life in the features ; itis a figure ready formed, and mechanically variedinto movement ; and whatever position it is madeto assume, the point of view is the same : the sameprofile of the human body with the anomaly of theshoulders seen in front, and attached as a separatethough component part of the whole figure.Limited to such a conventional mode of drawing,it was in vain for the Egyptian artists to aspire tothat degree of excellence attained by the Greeks,unfettered by prejudice, and allowed to imitate thebeauties of nature ; much less could they arrive atthat degree of feeling which formed taste, andcalled forth the poetry of the mind : their imaginativepowers were checked ; they were forced toremain contented with the models already beforethem ; and no new conceptions were elicited, orrequired.In the representation of animals, they appearnot to have been restricted to the same rigidstyle ; but genius once cramped can scarcely be expectedto make any great effort to rise, or to succeedin the attempt ; and the same union of partsCHAP. X. FIGURES OF ANIMALS. 269into a whole, the same preference for profile areobservable in these as in the human figure. Seldomdid they attempt to draw the face in front, eitherof men or animals ; and when this was done, it fellfar short of the profile, and was composed of thesame juxtaposition of parts. It must, however, beallowed, that in general the character and formof animals, were admirably portrayed ; the partswere put together with greater truth ; and the samelicence was not resorted to as in the shouldersand other portions of the human body. Nor willI deny that great life and animation are given tothe antelope, and many wild beasts, in the huntingscenes of the Theban tombs, or refuse my assent tothe observation of Madame de Steel*, " Les sculpteursEgyptians saisissaient avec bien plus de geniela figure des animaux que celle des hommes."The mode of representing men and animals inprofile is primitive, and characteristic of the commencementof art : the first attempts made by anuncivilised people are confined to it ; and untilthe genius of artists bursts forth, this style continuesto hold its ground. From its simplicity it isreadily understood j the most inexperienced perceivethe object intended to be represented; andno effort is required to comprehend it. Hence itis that, though few combinations can be made undersuch restrictions, those few are perfectly intelligible,the eye being aware of the resemblance to the simpleexterior ; and the modern uninstructed peasant ofCorne, vol.i. p. 127.270 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. X.Egypt who is immediately struck with and understandsthe paintings of the Theban tombs, if shownan European drawing, is seldom able to distinguishmen from animals ; and no argument will inducehim to tolerate foreshortening, the omission ofthose parts of the body concealed from his viewby the perspective of the picture, or the introductionof shadows, particularly on the humanflesh.Bas relief may be considered the earliest style ofsculpture. It originated in those pictorial representations,which were the primeval records ofa people anxious to commemorate their victories,the accession or the virtues of a king, and otherevents connected with their history. These werethe first purposes to which the imitative powersof the mind were applied ; but the progress wasslow, and the infant art (if it may be so called)passed through several stages, ere it had the powerof portraying real occurrences, and imitatingliving scenes. The rude drawing of a spear, asword, a bow, or other weapon, supplied at first theplace of the action itself, of which it was a species ofhieroglyphic ; but in process of time, the outlines ofa warrior and a prostrate foe were attempted, andthe valour of the prince who had led them to victorywas recorded by this simple group.As their skill increased, the mere allegorical representationwas extended to that of a descriptivekind, and some resemblance of the hero's person wasattempted ; his car, the army he commanded, andthe flying enemies, were introduced; and what wasCHAP. X. ORIGIN OF SCULPTURE. Syiat first scarcely more than a symbol, assumed themore exalted form and character of a picture. Of asimilar nature were all their historical records, andthese pictorial illustrations were a substitute forwritten documents. Sculpture, indeed, long precededletters, and we find that even in Greece, todescribe, draw, engrave, and write, were expressedby the same word, y^atpeiv.The want of letters, and the inability to describean individual, his occupations, or his gloriousactions, led them in early ages to bury with thebody some object which might indicate the characterof the deceased. Thus, warriors were interredwith their arms*; artisans with the implementsthey had used ; the oar was placed over the sailor ;and paternal, and other utensils connected with hisoffice, or the emblems of the deity in whose servicehe had been employed, were deposited in thesepulchre of a priest. In those times we find noinscription mentioned ; a simple mound was raisedover a chief, sometimes with a a-ru'Kos or rough stonepillar, placed upon it, but no writing: and when, at alater period, any allusion to the occupations ofthe deceased was attempted, a rude allegoricalemblem, of the same nature as the early historicalrecords before alluded to, was engraved on thelevelled surface of the stone.Poetry and songs also supplied the want ofwriting, to record the details of events ; and traditionhanded down the glorious achievements of a• Virgil Mn.v'i. 233., at the tomb of Miseries :Suaque anna vero, rcnnimque, tiibaiiiquc."272 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. X.conqueror, and the history of past years, with theprecision and enthusiasm of national pride. Thepoetry was recited to the sound of music, whencethe same expression often implied the ode and thesong ; and as laws were recorded in a similar manner,the word vofjiog signified, as Aristotle observes,both a law and a song.Sculpture dates long before architecture. Asimple hut, or a rude house, answer every purposeas a place of abode, and a long time elapses beforeman seeks to invent what is not demanded bynecessity.Architecture is a creation of the mind: it hasno model in nature, and it requires great imaginativepowers to conceive its ideal beauties ; tomake a proper combination of parts ; and to judgeof the harmony of forms altogether new, and beyondthe reach of experience. But the desire inmanto imitate, and to record what has passed beforehis eyes, in short, to transfer the impression from hisown mind to another, is natural in every stage ofsociety : and however imperfectly he may succeedin representing the objects themselves, his attemptsto indicate their relative position, and to embodythe expression of his own ideas, are a source of thehighest satisfaction.As the wish to record events gave the first, religiongave the second impulse to sculpture. Thesimple pillar of wood or stone*, which was originallyLucan mentioning the statues of the gods of Massilia, says,Simulacra mist decorumArte parent, coecisque extant inforniia francis."And Tacitus describes those of the Germans as " e stipitibus et impolitebore." De Mor. Germ.CHAP. X. EARLY STATUES. 273chosen to represent the deity, afterwards assumedthe human form, the noblest image of the powerthat created it ; and the memorial of the primitivesubstitute for a statue is curiously preserved in theGreek name «<wv, implying a column and an idol.Pausanias * thinks that " all statues were in ancienttimes of wood, particularly those made inEgypt ;" but this must have been at a period soremote as to be far beyond the known history ofthat country ; though it is probable that when thearts were in their infancy, the Egyptians were confinedto statues of that kind ; and they occasionallyerected wooden figures in their temples, even tillthe times of the latter Pharaohs.Long after men had attempted to make out theparts of the figure, statues continued to be veryrude ; the arms were placed directly down the sideto the thighs, and the legs were united together ;nor did they pass beyond this imperfect state inGreece, until the age of Daedalus. The Egyptians,at the latest periods, continued to follow the imperfectmodels of their early artists, and grace andfeeling were for ever prevented from forming afeature of their sculpture : and though they madegreat progress in other branches of art, thoughthey evinced considerable taste in the forms oftheir vases, their furniture, and even in some architecturaldetails, they were for ever deficient in thecombination of ideal beauty with the natural positionof parts in the human figure.One great impediment to the advancement of thePausanias, lib. ii. c. xix.VOL. III. T274 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. X.statuary's art in Egypt, was the unvarying posture ofthe figures, which were always in a state of repose,or in a position that only required the limbs to bestraight, without any attempt at action, or, indeed,any indication of life : they were really statues ofthe person they represented, not the person ** livingin marble," in which they differed entirely fromthose of Greece. No statue of a warrior was sculpturedin the varied attitudes of attack and defence,no wrestlers, no discobolus, no pugilist exhibitedthe grace, the vigour, or the muscular action of aman ; nor were the beauties, the feeling, and theelegance of female forms displayed in stone : allwas made to conform to the same invariable model,which confined the human figure to a few conventionalpostures.A sitting statue, whether of a man or woman,was represented with the hands placed upon theknees, or held across the breast ; a kneelingfigure sometimes supported a small shrine or sacredemblem ; and when standing, the arms were placeddirectly down the sides to the thighs, one footbeing advanced beyond the other, as if in theattitude of walking, but without any attempt to separatethe legs.*' The feet," says Winkelmann*, '* of the Egyptiandiffer from those of the Greek statues, in beingmore flat and broad, and in having the toes perfectlystraight, with the joints as little indicated asin the fingers, and a gradual diminution in theirlength ; nor is the little toe curved or bent under,Winkelmann,!. p. 110,CHAP. X. NO CHANGES PERMITTED. 275as in those of the Greeks." This last remarkis just, and their mode of representing it accordswith what they saw in nature ; but the length ofthe toes of an Egyptian foot do not undergo agradual diminution, the second being invariablymade longer than any other, which too agrees withthe natural form.The reason of this uniformity I have alreadyexplained ; and it is probable that, if their geniushad not been cramped by superstitious prejudice,the Egyptians would have excelled in painting andsculpture ; and the imitation of the human figurehave kept pace with their advancement in otherpoints.No accidents, arising from the consequencesof invasion, or from any other cause, were evercapable of changing their fixed reverence for prescribedforms ; nor do we find, after the Greek,and Roman conquests, that any deviation fromestablished custom was tolerated ; or that anyinnovation was introduced from communicationwith those foreigners, however superior their art,and however evident its resemblance to the originalswhich nature daily presented to their eyes. Afterthe accession of the Polemics, Greek art becamewell known in Egypt, and every opportunity wasgiven to their artists to improve from the bestmodels : but no change was effected by this intercoursewith the Greeks ; and when Adrian wisheddivine honours to be paid to his favourite Antinomianstatues to be erected to his memory, no form wasadmitted but that which religious usage had established,and Egyptian models prescribed.T 2'276 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. X.Though the general character of painting andsculpture continued the same, and a certain conventionalmode of representing the human figure wasuniversally adopted throughout the country, whichwas followed by every artist through successive ages,from the earliest Pharaonic era until the religion ofEgypt was supplanted by the final establishment ofChristianity, it is reasonable to suppose that severalstyles were introduced, and that the genius ofartists varied considerably during that lengthenedperiod. Plato's assertion is therefore to be takenin a limited and general sense, signifying that theEgyptians followed the same conventional forms,and that no nearer approach to the beau ideal ofthe human figure was made at one period thananother. This is perfectly true ; but every eyeaccustomed to Egyptian drawing readily perceivesthe difference between subjects executed duringthe Augustan age of art, the reigns of Relapsesthe Great and his father Osirei, and those of aPtolemaic epoch. Truth may be wanting, as itnecessarily must be where nature is not copied ;but there are a grace and a boldness in the outline,as well as in the execution of the sculptures of theformer period, which at once indicate the work ofsuperior genius.The hieroglyphics on the obelisks of that epochproclaim the same fact, and, in architecture, thetemples erected by the great Remeses, far surpassin elegance and grandeur, in harmony of proportionand simplicity of style, the monuments of anyprevious or subsequent era. It cannot, however,be denied that, in the time of Osirtasen and atCHAP. X. OLDEST SCULPTURES. ^77the commencement of the 18th dynasty, Egyptianart flourished greatly, and monuments of that age,also, claim our admiration for taste, simplicity, andsymmetry of details. And if some fanciful innovationswere introduced in the buildings of the thirdThothmes, they are attributable to momentarycaprice, and not to be looked upon as a change inthe architecture of that period. This I shall haveoccasion to mention hereafter.The paintings at Beni Hassan are certainly farinferior to those of the age of Remeses, or of theearly part of the 18th dynasty ; but the style ofthe hieroglyphics on some other monuments ofthe Osirtasen epoch, as the obelisk of Heliopolis,show that sculpture had greatly advanced at thatremote period : and if historical bas-reliefs hadbeen preserved, we might discover still more toprove the skill of the artists of the same era.Few paintings or sculptures remain of an ageprior to the accession of Osirtasen I., whom I supposeto have been the contemporary of Joseph, andto have ascended the throne about the year 1740.The tombs in the vicinity of the pyramids, andthose I discovered hewn in the rock near Qasre'Syad, the ancient Chenoboscion, are certainly anteriorto the grottoes of Beni Hassan ; and the styleof the masonry as well as the names of the kingsfound there, show that the former were the placesof sepulture of individuals, who lived in the timeof Suphis, and his immediate successors. They,therefore, date about the year 2090 and 2050,B. c, upwards of a century before the arrivalT 3^278THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. X.of Abraham in Egypt, if, as I suppose, the patriarchcame to that country during the reign ofApappus.It is evident that the tombs, built of stone, whichstand in the area before and behind the greatpyramid*, were erected after it had been commenced,if not completed, as their position ismade to conform to that monument ; and thatthose hewn in the rock at the same place were notof an older period, is shown by the style of thesculptures, and the names of the same kings.Among these we evidently perceive Suphis, or asMlItminiJ^623 456 78a, the name of Shofo, or Suphis.5, 6, the name of Memphis ; 7, S, (Memphis, or) Pthah-ei, the abode of Pthah.No. 380. Frcnn the Tombs near the Pyramids.the hieroglyphics write it, Shofo, or Khof, a nameeasily converted into Suphis or Cheops, by adding?,the Greek termination, t But it is difficult,as I have already observed t, to refer them to theirproper epoch, or to fix their relative position in thelist of kings. Nor can we decide whether the twofirst names here introduced, are both of Suphis,or if the second is of the founder of the otherIt is remarkable that Memphis is styled the land of the pyramid.Its Egyptian name in the hieroglyphics is Menofri, in Coptic Memfi,Mani, Member, Panoufi, or Mei, being probably corrupted from ," the abode of good," or as Plutarch calls it, " the haven ofgood men." It was also called Pthah-ei', the abode of Pthah. Videwood-cut. No. 328., figs. 5, 6, 7, 8.f As I have observed in Vol. I. p. 41. note 4.i Vol. I. p. 19.CHAP. X. SUPHIS AND OTHER KINGS. 2/9pyramid, whose name xS'e/z-Suphis signifies thebrother of Suphis ; though they certainly appear tobe of different kings, who lived about the sameepoch.They occur again at Mount Sinai, and theformer has the banner or square title, given in thewood-cut *, which would satisfactorily decide thisquestion, if it should ever be found with the othername. For these square banners, as I have alreadyshown in a former work, relate to the kings andnot to the deities : and though the learned and ingeniousChampollion expressed a different opinionin his " Precis," t he was afterwards convinced ofthis fact, which is now universally admitted.The other names in these tombs are of the sameremote period ; and though there is no positiveproof of their relative antiquity, we may concludethey belonged to the immediate successors of Suphisand his brother. It is remarkable that in someVide wood-cut, No. 380. /g. 1. b.t Materia Hero. Extracts from Hieroglyphical Subjects, p. 7. : —One more remark I have to offer, which, I confess, is not at all consonantwith the ideas of Dr. Young and M. Champollion ; that thesquare beneath the hawk, containing sometimes a bull and arm, sometimesother devices, does not refer to the god in whose honour themonument was raised, but to the king, whose name always follows it ;and to this I have been led by the following circumstance : — wherevera king has erased the name of a predecessor, and inscribed his own inits stead, the hieroglyphics in this square have also been erased andchanged : they cannot, therefore, refer to the god to whom the buildingwas erected ; otherwise the dedication, and other sculptures containinghis name would «/5o be altered throughout the same monument; weshould likewise find all the different names of kings in the same temple,preceded by a square containing the same devices, as relating to thedeity of that temple, which is not the case." I have also shown (inp. 8.) that the K{)aTi[w>^ AnoWwv is Phrah, or Pharaoh, the king inthe character of the sun. Fide Egypt and Thebes, p. 5.|. Precis du System Hieroglyphics, p. 152.T 4<THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. X.iriiz)iriEDirmDrty!rd b1 ^^2fc £ fTilTTluED[uT*)m-5^IIuNo. 381. Names of Ancient Kings.Fig. 1, 2, at the tombs near the Pyramids. 3, at Saqqara and Mount Sinai. 4, atE'Sioot. 5, 6, at Chenoboscion. a has been cut over rf. a, 6, c, seem to have reigned insuccession. 7, at Lady Megara, near Mount .Sinai 8, 9, on the Kossayr road. Thecharacters b. b. in fig. 1. signify " priest."CHAP. X. NAMES OF EARLY KINGS. 281instances they are preceded by, and in others destituteof, regal titles, and sometimes they appear tohave the word 'priest' prefixed to them, like thoseat Chenoboscion. Three of the names, however,are so arranged, that we may suppose they indicatethe order in which the kings ruled, though thearrangement is different in another part of thesame tomb, where the name of Suphis, or of ,intervenes between two of them.*At Saqqara other tombs of the same earlyperiod occur, and some of the grottoes of E'Siootprobably date long before the accession of Osir-taken. The former have a name, which, like mostof these, bears in its simplicity the character of greatantiquity, and in the latter is that of another ancientmonarch ; but neither of them can be tracedin the chamber of kings at Karnak.The most interesting, after those at the pyramids,are the names in the grottoes of Chenoboscion, notonly from their antiquity "which," as I have observedt, *' may vie with that of any other catacombor monument in Egypt, if we except the pyramidsand the tombs in their vicinity," but from theirbeing placed in chronological order, and from thecircumstance of a king having erased one of them,and introduced his own name in its steady Thetitle applied to them is not 'king,' 'but priest,'though the name is enclosed in an oval, the symbolWood-cut, No. 38\.,Jig. 1. a and c, and Jig. 2., where b comes betweena and c.f Figs. 3 a and 4.i Egypt and Thebes, p. 401, 402.§ Fig. 5., a and c, and d cut over by a.THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. X.of royalty ; and that they really had the rank andappellation of king is shown by the same namesoccurring elsewhere with the usual royal prefix,and even the square title.The first* of these is the name to which Ialluded as having been erased to admit that ofanother monarch : it reads Remai, or " the belovedof the sun." The other is Papist, a name whichoccurs in Egyptian history, being borne, accordingto Manetho, by the father of the priest Amenophiswho lived in the time of the shepherds, tSeveral tablets § and monumental records of kingPapi have been preserved ; and on the rocks of theKossayr road, his name occurs in the same inscriptionwith that of Remai, who is elsewhereshown to have reigned sixteen years. It is remarks382 — Figures of kings wearing the crown of Upper and of Lower Egypt, with the^ names Remai and Papi. Kossayr Road.Vide Wood-cut No. 381./g. 5 a.+ Vide Wood-cut, No. 381./?. 5d.i Joseph, contra Ap. i. 26. Vide Cry's valuable collection o( AncientFragments," p. 176.There is one in the British Museum.CHAP. X. KINGS OF UPPER AND LOWER EGYPT. Sablesthat the two princes appear seated on theirthrones in the hall of assembly, wearing, one thecrown of the upper, the other that of the lowercountry * : showing either that they were contemporarysovereigns, one ruling at Thebes, and theother at Memphis, or that Papi was the phoneticnomen of Remai, and that they were the samemonarch.The former is a point which has been longcontested in Egyptian history. Manetho evidentlyalludes to contemporary dynasties, when he speaksof the kings of the Thebaid and the rest of Egyptuniting in a common cause against the shepherds t ;and some chronologers have endeavoured to accountfor the long list of Egyptian kings, bysupposing that they ruled at the same time in differentparts of the country. This opinion was suggestedby the learned Sir John Marshal j but,though correct, as far as it applies to the early epochsof their history, there is sufficient evidence to provethat from the time of Osirtasen, the sovereignty ofUpper and Lower Egypt continued to be vested inone person, whether the royal residence was atThebes, Memphis, or Sais ; and even if Papi haserased the name of his contemporary Remai, hemay only have reunited the two crowns, which hadbeen previously separated ; for that Menes was solemonarch of all Egypt appears to have been universallyallowed ; and the division of the kingdom wasVide wood-cut, No. 382. ; also wood-cut, No. 381., fgs. 5 and 8.t Vide Cry, p. 171.284 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. X.perhaps owing to the preference of his son Athothesfor the new capital founded by his father, whichcaused the court to be transferred to Memphis.In noticing these ancient names, it is necessaryto repeat a remark I have previously had occasion tomake*, that the custom of affixing a prcenoynen to thephonetic nomen was not introduced in early times,and that Menes and many other kings had merelyone oval, containing their name, preceded by thetitle 'king,' Mord of the world,' or other regalprefix. Remai and Papi might therefore be differentkings, each with a single oval ; and, if theyreally are the same person, we have probably herethe first instance of the introduction of a nomen ;for there can be no doubt of the great antiquity ofthese names, from the appearance of the grottoesand monuments, where they occur, and the manycollateral facts connected with the succeedingmonarchs.It may not be irrelevant to suggest that the hieroglyphicsforming the name of Papi may also readPap, or Aphopht, the Apophis, or Apappus, ofManetho and Eratosthenes. The era at which helived, about a century after the time of Suphis,well accords with that of Pcipi ; and if this be admitted,we have evidence of the style of sculptureat another fixed period, the arrival of Abraham inEgypt.Both the names of Papi and Reverend are foundin the chamber of kings at Karnak.Vide Mater. Hierogl. Extracts, p. 9.-|- Aphoph is "a giant" in Coptic. It is translated " Maxims."Vide Vol. I. p. 28. 30.37.42.CHAP. X. EARLY STATE OF ART. scihave entered thus into detail upon the antiquityof these kings, with a view to ascertain aperiod, when the art of painting and sculpturewas in a less advanced state than under the kingsof the 18th dynasty. In the tombs near thepyramids, and those of Chenoboscion, we find thesame agricultural and other scenes represented,which usually occur in the sepulchral chambers ofthe Theban necropolis, and this gives an opportunityof judging of the comparative state of artat those two periods, which are separated by aninterval of from five to six hundred years. Themode of treating those subjects is certainly veryinferior even to that of the Osirtasen era, particularlyat Chenoboscion j but some allowance mustbe made for sculptures executed by provincialartists, who had not attained the excellence ofthose of Thebes and Memphis. And the sameapology may be offered for he paintings of BeniHassan.At the tombs of the pyramids we likewise observean inferiority of style, compared with theelegance and taste of the 18th dynasty; and theepochs of Suphis, of Osirtasen, of the early partof the 18th dynasty, and of Osirei and Remesesthe Great, may be looked upon as the four knowngradations, through which the arts passed frommediocrity to excellence.After the reign of Remeses the Great the artsremained stationary ; the peaceful or inactivereigns of his successors offered little encouragementto sculpture, and few opportunities were286 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. X.given to artists to improve, or even to exercisetheir talents. The ambition, the warlike spirit,or the indignation of the third Remeses, rousedby the rebellion of the conquered provinces ofAsia, which had been subdued and rendered tributaryby his victorious predecessor, once moreawakened the dormant genius of his country ; and,as it frequently happens that great military events,as well as internal convulsions, produce great developmentof talent, we are not surprised thatthe success which attended his arms should havebenefited the arts. The same remark applies,and in a greater degree, to the glorious era ofOsirei and his son ; and at no period of Egyptianhistory did the arms of the Pharaohs attain greatercelebrity, or the arts reach a higher degree of perfectionthan in the reign of the Great Remeses.As soon as the third Remeses had returned fromhis successful expedition into Asia, sculpture andpainting were called upon to commemorate thetriumphs he had gained, and to record the victoriesof his country on the walls of the splendid edificesof Thebes. The sculptures in the palace-templeof Medeenet Haboo, erected by this monarch,display a degree of spirit which is onlysurpassed in those of his great namesake and predecessor; and so little do they fall short of the styleof that period, that few who have not entered intothe real feeling of Egyptian drawing, can observein what their inferiority consists.In order that the reader may form some idea ofthe nature of the subjects represented on the wallsCIJAP. X. SUBJECTS OF THE SCULPTURES. 287of the Egyptian temples, and the profusion ofpainted sculptures with which they were ornamented,I shall introduce a description of thepalace-temple of Remeses III. at Medeenet Haboo,from my * Egypt and Thebes.' **' On the east, or north-east wall (of the innerarea), Remeses is borne in his shrine or canopy,seated on a throne, ornamented with thefigures of a lion and a sphinx, which is precededby a hawks Behind him stand two figures ofTruth t and Justice, with outspread wings. TwelveEgyptian princes, sons of the king, bear theshrine ; officers || wave flabella around the monarch; and others, of the sacerdotal order, attendon either side, carrying his arms and insignia. Fourothers follow ; then six of the sons of the king, behindwhom are two scribes and eight attendants ofthe military class, bearing stools and the steps ofthe throne.** In another line are members of the sacerdotalorder, four other of the king's sons, fan-bearers,and military scribes ; a guard of soldiers bringingup the rear of the procession. Before the shrine,in one line, marli six officers bearing sceptresand other insignia ; in another, a scribe readsaloud the contents of a scroll he holds unfolded inEgypt and Thebes, p. 61 . et seq.f The emblem of the king as Phrah (Pharaoh).j This refers to the double character of this goddess, my authorityfor whose name I have given in my Materia Ilierog. p. 45.§ They are always distinguished by a badge appended from theirhead-dress, inclosing, probably, the lock of hair, usually denoting son orchild.\\ Probably the Ptcrophori.288 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. X.his hand, preceded by two of the king's sons andtwo distinguished persons of the military andpriestly orders. The rear of both these lines isclosed by a pontiff*, who, turning round towardsthe shrine, burns incense before the monarch ; anda band of music, composed of the trumpet, drum,double-pipe, and other instruments, with choristers,forms the van of the procession.The king, alighted from his throne, officiates aspriest before the statue of Amun Them, or Amunregenerator ; and, still wearing his helmet, he presentslibations and incense before the altar, whichis loaded with flowers, and other suitable offerings.The statue of the god, attended by officers bearingfla bel lat, is carried on a palanquin, covered withrich drapery, by twenty-two priests ; behind it followothers, bringing the table and the altar of thedeity. Before the statue is the sacred bull, followedby the king on foot, wearing the cap of thelower country." Apart from the procession itselfstands the queen, as a spectator of the ceremony ;and before her, a scribe reads a scroll he has unfolded.A priest turns round to offer incense tothe white bull ; and another, clapping his hands,brings up the rear of a long procession of hieraphori,carrying standards, images, and other sacred emblems; and the foremost bear the statue of theking's ancestors.This part of the picture refers to the coronationNot the " eldest son of the king," as M, Champollion supposes.-j- Vide Herodot. ii. 151.j The larger of these are, in fact, umbrellas ; the smaller ones fansor fly-flaps. Flabella of a similar kind are carried before the pope atthe present day-chap.X. THE CEREMONY OF CORONATION. 289of the king, who, in the hieroglyphics, is said tohave * put on the crown of the upper and lowercountries \ which the birds, flying to the foursides of the world, are to announce to the gods ofthe south, north, east, and west.* Such appears tobe the meaning of this ceremony t, rather than thetriumph of the king ; and the presence of Remeses,wearing for the First time the above mentionedcrown, and the great analogy between this andpart of the text of the Rosetta stone, fully justifythis opinion.In the next compartment, the president of theassembly reads a long invocation, the contents ofwhich are contained in the hieroglyphic inscriptionabove ; and the six ears of corn t which the king,once more wearing his helmet, has cut with a goldensickle, are held out by a priest towards the deity.The white bull and images of the king's ancestorsare deposited in his temple, in the presence ofAmun Them, the queen still witnessing the ceremony,which is concluded by an offering of incenseand libation, made by Remeses to the statue of thegod.In the lower compartment, on this side of thetemple, is a procession of the arks of Amunre,Maut, and Khonso (the Theban triad) which theking, whose ark is also carried § before him, comesI am indebted for the construction of this part of it to M. champion'slettCA".f I hope to have an opportunity, at some future period, of giving acopy of this interesting subject, which the contracted dimensions of thiswork prevent my doing.{ A fit emblem for an agricultural people.§ Conf. Rosetta stone.VOL. III. U290 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. X.to meet. In another part, the gods Attaint and Hatpour alternate emblems of life and power over theking ; and, on the south wall, he is introduced byseveral divinities into the presence of the patrondeities of the temple.In the upper part of the west wall, Remesesmakes offerings to Pthah Sokari and to Kneph ; inanother compartment, he burns incense to the arkof Sokari ; and, near this, is a tablet relating to theofferings made to the same deity. The ark is thenborne by sixteen priests, with a pontiff and anotherof the sacerdotal order in attendance.The king after wards joins in another procession,formed by eight of his sons and four chiefs, behindwhom two priests turn round to offer incense to themonarch. The hawk, the emblem of the king, orof Horus, precedes them ; and eighteen priestscarry the sacred emblem of the god Nofri Atmoo,which usually accompanies the ark of Sokari.On the south wall, marches a long processioncomposed of hieraphori, bearing different standards,thrones, arks, and insignia, with musicians whoprecede the king and his attendants. The figureof the deity is not introduced, perhaps intimatingthat this forms part of the religious pomp of thecorresponding wall : and, from the circumstance ofthe king here wearing the silent, it is not impossibleit may also allude to his coronation.The commencement of the interesting historicalsubjects of Medeenet Haboo is in the south-westcorner of this court, on the inner face of the tower.Here Remeses standing in his car, which his horsesCHAP. X. HISTORICAL SUBJECTS. 291at full speed carry into the midst of the enemy'sranks, discharges his arrows on their flying infantry.The Egyptian chariots join in the pursuit ; and abody of their allies assist* in slaughtering those whooppose them, or bind them as captives. The righthands of the slain are then cut off as trophies ofvictory.The sculptures on the west wall are a continuationof the scene. The Egyptian princes and generalsconduct the ' captive chiefs' into the presence ofthe king. He is seated at the back of his car, andthe spirited horses are held by his attendants onfoot. Large heaps of hands are placed before him,which an officer counts, one by one, as the othernotes down their number on a scroll ; each heapcontaining three thousand, and the total indicatingthe returns of the enemy's slain. The number ofcaptives, reckoned 1000 in each line, is also mentionedin the hieroglyphics above, where the nameof the Reboo points out the nation against whomthis war was carried on. Their flowing dresses,striped horizontally with blue or green bands on awhite ground, and their long hair and aquilinenose, give them the character of an Eastern nationin the vicinity of Assyria and Persia, as theirname reminds us of the Rhibii of Ptolemy, whomhe places near the Caspian, and the north bank ofthe Oxus. . A long hieroglyphic inscription isplaced over the king ; and a still longer tablet, The same whom this monarch is represented as having vanquishedin another battle scene of this temple.U 2292 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. X.Clipping a great part of this wall, refers to theexploits of the Egyptian conqueror, and bears thedate of his fifth year.*' The suite of this historical subject continues onthe south wall. The king, returning victorious toEgypt, proceeds slowly in his car*, conducting intriumph the prisoners he has made, who walk besideand before it, three others being bound to theaxle. Two of his sons attend as fan-bearers, andthe several regiments of Egyptian infantry, with acorps of their allies, under the command of threeother of these princes, marching in regular step,and in the close array of disciplined troops accompanytheir king. He arrives at Thebes, and presentshis captives to Amunre and Maut, the deitiesof the city, who compliment him as usual, on thevictory he has gained, and the overthrow of theenemy he has ' trampled beneath his feet.'On the north wall the king presents offerings todifferent gods, and below is an ornamental kind ofborder ; composed of a procession of the king'ssons and daughters. Four of the former, his immediatesuccessors, bear the asp or basilisk, theemblem of majesty, and have their kingly ovalsadded to their names*' If the sculptures of the area arrest the attentionof the antiquary, or excite the admiration of thetraveller, those of the exterior of this building areno less interesting in an historical point of view,and the north and east walls are covered with a profusionof the most varied and instructive subjects.Vide Plate I. Vol. I. p. 106.CHAP. X. DEFEAT OF THE Reb. 293*' At the north east extremity of the end wall atrumpeter assembles the troops, who salute theking as he passes in his car. In the first compartmenton the east side, Remeses advances at aslow pace in his chariot, attended by fan-bearers,and preceded by his troops. A lion, running atthe side of the horses, reminds us of the accountgiven of Osymandyas, who was said to have beenaccompanied in war by this animal : and anotherinstance of it is met with at E'Dayr, in Nubia,among the sculptures of the second Remeses.Second compartment. — He continues hismarch*, his troops leading the van, and a trumpetersummons them to form for the attack.Third compartment. — The Reboo await theEgyptian invaders in the open field ; the king pressesforward in his car, and drawing his bow, gives thesignal for the attack. Several regiments of Egyptianarchers, in close array, advance on different points andharass them with showers of arrows. The chariotsrush to the charge ; and a body of Asiatic allies tmaintain the combat hand to hand, with the Reboo,who are at length routed, and fly before their victoriousaggressors. Some thousands are left dead on thefield, whose tongues and hands, being cut off, arebrought by the Egyptian soldiers as proofs of theirsuccess. Three thousand five hundred and thirty-thisevidently denotes the distance marched by the Egyptiansbefore they reached the enemy's country'.\ They are the Sha . a maritime people, whose features and high-furredcaps particularly denote their Asiatic origin ; and a large amulet,suspended from their neck, reminds us of a custom very usual amongthe nations of the east. Vide Vol. I. p. 287. wood-cut, No. \\.fg.2.and p. 365. wood-cut. No. Q2.Jig. 3. a, b, and c.X The Turks, at the present day, cut off the right ear.u 329 i THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. X.five hands and tongues form part of the registeredreturns ; and two other heaps, and a third oftongues, containing each a somewhat larger number,are deposited under the superintendence of thechief officers, as trophies of victory. The monarchthen alights from his chariot, and distributes rewardsto his troops.*' In the next compartment, the king's militarysecretaries draw up an account of the number ofspears, bows, swords, and other arms taken fromthe enemy, which are laid before them : and mentionseems to be made in the hieroglyphics of thehorses that have been captured.Remeses then proceeds in his car, having hisbow and sword in one hand, and his whip in theother, indicating that his march still lies throughan enemy's country. The van of his army is composedof a body of chariots ; the infantry in closeorder, preceding the royal car, constitute thecentre ; and other similar corps form the flank andrear.They are again summoned by sound of trumpetto the attack of another Asiatic enemy* ; and, inthe next compartment, the Egyptian monarch givesorders for the charge of the hostile army, which isdrawn up in the open plain. Assisted by their allies,the Shairetana, a maritime people armed with roundbucklers and spears, they fall upon the undisciplinedThis people are called Fekkaros by M. Champollion. I am ignorantof the force of the first character, and of his reasons for adoptingthe F. May they not be the Tochari ? — "a large tribe," according toPtolemy, on the north-east of Bactria, and at no great distance fromthe Rhibii. If any of the sculptures of Thebes refer to the rebellion ofthe Bactria, they are here.CHAP. X. THE enemy's WAGONS. 295troops of the enemy, who, after a short conflict arerouted, and retreat in great disorder. The womenendeavour to escape with their children on the firstapproach of the Egyptians, and retire in plaustra*drawn by oxen.t The flying chariots denote thegreatness of the general panic, and the conquerorspursue them to the interior of the country. Here,while passing a large morass, the king is attackedby several lions t, one of which, transfixed withdarts and arrows, he lays breathless beneath hishorse's feet ; another attempts to fly towards thejungle, but, receiving a last and fatal wound,writhes in the agony of approaching death. § Athird springs up from behind his car, and the heroprepares to receive it and check its fury with hisspear.Below this group is represented the march ofthe Egyptian army, with their allies, the Sharesthe Slip . . . ., and a third corps, armed withclubs, whose form and character are but imperfectlypreserved. ||They were used in Egypt from the earliest times, and are mentionedin Genesis xlv. 19., &c. Strabo also speaks of them, lib. xvii. They arethe more remarkable here, as putting us in mind of a custom, very prevalentamong some eastern nations, of posting their wagons in "the rearwhen going to battle. The Tartars of later times were noted for thiscustom.f With the hump of Indian cattle. They seem to have been formerlyvery common in Egypt also, as they are at present in Kordofan andSenna.X One modern author has supposed this to represent a lion chase,another has discovered in it the lion of Osymandyas, which assisted himin battle. We have frequently known sportsmen shoot their own dogs,but nothing justifies a similar opinion with regard to the king on thisoccasion.§ The position of the lion is very characteristic of the impotent furyof the disabled animal. Of the third little is seen but part of the foresaw: the attitude of the king supplies the rest.II Vide supra, Vol. I. p. 287.u 4THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. X.*' The enemy, having continued their rapid retreat,take refuge in the ships of a maritimenation*, to whose country they have retired forshelter. The Egyptians attack them with a fleetof galleys and bearing down their opponents,succeed in boarding them and takingseveral prisoners. One of the hostile gallies isupset ; and the slingers in the tops, with thearchers and spearmen on the prows, spread dismayamong the few who resist. The king, tramplingon the prostrate bodies of the enemy, and aided bya corps of bowmen, discharges from the shore acontinued shower of arrows ; and his attendantsstand at a short distance with his chariot andhorses, and await his return. Below this scene, theconquering army leads in triumph the prisoners ofthe two nations they have captured in the navalfight, and the amputated hands of the slain are laidin heaps before the military chiefsIn the next compartment, the king distributes rewardsto his victorious troops, and then proceedingto Egypt, he conducts in triumph the captiveReboo and Tokkari, whom he offers to the Thebantriad, Amun, Maut, and Khonso.*' In the compartments above these historicalscenes, the king makes suitable offerings to thegods of Egypt ; and, on the remaining part of theeast wall, to the south of the second propylon,another war is represented.*' In the first picture, the king alighted from hisThe Shairetana ; part of the same people who joined the Egyptiansas allies in this war. Time expression 'maritime people' may implymerely that they lived near a large lake.CHAP. X. FORTIFIED TOWNS. 297chariot, armed with his spear and shield, andtrampling on the prostrate bodies of the slain, besiegesthe fort of an Asiatic enemy, whom heforces to sue for peace. In the next, he attacks alarger town surrounded by water. The Egyptiansfell the trees in the woody country which surroundsit, probably to form testudo and ladders forthe assault. Some are applied by their comrades tothe walls ; and, while they reach their summit, thegates are broken open, and the enemy are drivenfrom the ramparts, or precipitated over the parapetby the victorious assailants, who announce bysound of trumpet the capture of the place.*' In the third compartment, on the north face ofthe first propylon, Remeses attacks two large towns,the upper one of which is taken with but little resistance,the Egyptian troops having entered it andgained possession of the citadel. In the lower one,the terrified inhabitants are engaged in rescuingtheir children from the approaching danger, byraising them from the plain beneath to the rampartsof the outer wall. The last picture occupiesthe upper or north end of the east wall, where theking presents his prisoners to the gods of thetemple. The western wall is covered by a largehieroglyphical tablet, recording offerings, made inthe different months of the year, by Remeses III."This may serve to give an idea of the profusionof sculpture on the walls of an Egyptian temple.The whole was coloured ; and this variety servedas a relief to the otherwise sombre appearance ofmassive straight walls, which formed the exterior298 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. X.of Egyptian temples. All the architectural detailswere likewise painted ; and though a person unaccustomedto see the walls of a large building sodecorated, might suppose the effect to be far frompleasing, no one who understands the harmony ofcolours will fail to admit that they perfectly understoodtheir distribution and proper combinations,and that an Egyptian temple was greatly improvedby the addition of painted sculptures.In a work of so limited a scale as the present, itis impossible to give an adequate notion of a largetemple, whose details are so made up, or to givethe general effect of this kind of clair-ohscur ; butan idea may be conveyed of some of the parts,from the capitals of the columns, which I haveintroduced in the frontispiece of this volume.The introduction of colour in architecture wasnot peculiar to the Egyptians : it was common to theEtruria, and even to the Greeks. For thoughthe writings of ancient authors afford no decidedevidence of the practice in Greece, and the passagesadduced in support of it from Vitruvius*,Pliny t, and Pausanias, are neither satisfactory,nor conclusive, the fact of colour having been foundon the monuments of Attica and Sicily is so wellVitriol. iv. 2. " Tabellas ita formulas, uti nunc fount triglyphi,contra tignoruin praecisiones in fronte fixeriint, et seas cera ccendea Vide also lib. vii. c. 9. and c. 3., where he shows the badtaste of the Romans in their mode of painting their houses.•f- Plin. xxxvi. 23. " In Elide aedes est Minerva, in qua frater PhidiasPanniers, tectorium inquit late et croco subactum." Vide also lib.XXXV. c. 8. where he again mentions Linnaeus ; and, after saying Phidiaswas originally a painter, adds that Linnaeus assisted in painting thefigure of Olympian Jupiter.X Pausan. lib. v. Elis. c. xi. He mentions the works of the brother ofPhidias, whom he calls Parents.CHAP, X. GREEK MONUMENTS PAINTED. Seqauthenticated, that no doubt can be entertained ofcertain parts, at least, of Greek temples, of theoldest and even of the best periods, having beenpainted.In the temple of Theseus at Athens, vestiges ofcolours are seen on the ground of the frieze, on thefigures themselves, and on the ornamental details.*The Parthenon presents remains of painting on somemembers of the cornice, and the ground of thefrieze, above the interior of the peristyle, containingthe reliefs of the Panathenaic procession, wasblue. The propel aea of the Acropolis, the Ionictemple on the Missus, and the Thoracic monumentof Socrates also offer traces of colour ; andvestiges of red, blue, and green, have been discoveredon the metres of a temple at Serious inSicily, by Messrs. Angell and Harris, who excavatedand examined the site of that ancient cityin 1823. In one of these, the figure of Minervahas the eyes and eyebrows painted t; her drapery,and the girdle of Perseus are also ornamented withcoloured devices, and the whole ground of thisand two other of the metres is red.Red and blue seem to have been generally usedfor the ground ; and these two, with green, werethe principal colours introduced in Greek architecture,many members of which were also gilt, as theshields, gutta, and other prominent details ; butVide Transactions of The Institute of British Architects, on thepolychromy of Greek architecture, translated iron the German of Rulerby W. R. Hamilton Esq. p. 85. et seq.f Vide the Sculptured Metres of Serious, by Messrs. Harris andAngell, p. 49.300 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. X.there is, as yet, no proof of the flesh of statues orbas-reefs having been painted, and many supposethat the shafts of columns were always white, thecoloured parts being confined to the entablatureand pediment.In Egyptian buildings, indeed, it sometimeshappened, that the shafts of columns were merelycovered with white stucco, without any ornament,and even without the usual line of hieroglyphics ;and the same custom of coating certain kinds ofstone with stucco was common in Greece. TheEgyptians always put this layer of stucco, or paint,over stone, whatever its quality might be, andwe are surprised to find the beautiful granite ofobelisks and other monuments concealed in a similarmanner ; the sculptures engraved upon them beingalso tinted either green, hie, red, or other colour,and frequently one and the same throughout.Whenever they employed sandstone, it wasabsolutely necessary to cover it with a surface ofa smoother and less absorbent nature, to preventthe colour being too readily imbibed by so porous astone ; and a coat of calcareous composition waslaid on before the paint was applied. When thesubject was sculptured, either in relief or intaglio,the stone was coated, after the figures were cut,with the same substance, to receive the final colouring; and it had the additional advantage ofenabling the artist to finish the figures and otherobjects, with a precision and delicacy in vain tobe expected on the rough and absorbent surfaceof sandstone.CHAP. X. EGYPTIAN COLOURS. 301The Egyptians mixed their paint with water,and it is probable, that a little portion of gumwas sometimes added, to render it more tenaciousand adhesive. In most instances we find red,green, and blue adopted ; an union which, for allsubjects, and in all parts of Egypt, was a particularfavourite : when black was introduced, yellow wasadded to counteract or harmonise with it ; and inlike manner they sought for every hue its congenialcompanion.In the examination of the colours used for paintingthe walls, while at Thebes, I was led to theconjecture *, that the reds and yellows were ochres ;the blues and greens metallic, and prepared fromcopper; the black, a lampblack; and the white afinely levigated and prepared lime, I have sincebeen favoured with an analysis of those brought byme from Thebes, which my friend Dr. Ure hashad the kindness to make, and which I am happyin being able to introduce.*' The colours are green, blue, red, black, yellow,and white : 1st. The green pigment, scraped fromthe painting in distemper, resists the solvent actionof muriatic acid, but becomes thereby of a brilliantblue colour, in consequence of the abstraction of asmall portion of yellow ochreous matter. The residuaryblue powder has a sandy texture ; and whenviewed in the microscope is seen to consist of smallparticles of blue glass. On fusing this vitreous matterwith potash, digesting the compound in diluted muriaticacid, and treating the solution with water ofEgypt and Thebes, p. 4;43.302 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. X.ammonia in excess, the presence of copper becomesmanifest. A certain portion of precipitate fell,which being dissolved in muriatic acid, and tested,proved to be oxide of iron. We may hence conclude,that the green pigment is a mixture of a littleochre, with a pulverulent glass, made by vitrifyingthe oxides of copper and iron with sand and soda.The vitreous green coat upon the small Osirisfigures, so numerous in the Egyptian tombs of theearliest times, is a similar composition.The green colour washed from the stone with asponge, and afterwards evaporated, consists of blueglass in powder, mixed with a little ochre, and particlesof colourless glass, to which it owes itsbrighter hue.2. The blue* pigment scraped from the stoneis a pulverulent blue glass of like composition,without the ochreous admixture, brightened witha little of the chalky matter used in the distemperpreparation.3. The red pigment obtained by washing thecoloured stone in the tombs of the kings with a wetsponge, and evaporating the liquid to dryness, whentreated with water, evinces the presence of glutinousgummy matters It dissolves readily, in a greatmeasure, in muriatic acid, and affords muriate ofiron and alumina. It is merely a red earthy bole.It is remarkable how much the Egyptian method of making thiscolour resembled in principle that of our smalt. It agrees with the falsecydnus of Theophrastus (s. 98.), invented by an Egyptian king, which,he says, was laid on thicker than the native (or lapis lazuli). PUnyconfounds the two, xxxvii. 9.■\ The Egyptian colours contain gum ; but the quantity in thesespecimens was owing to my having added it to form them into cakes.CHAP. X. STYLE OF THE SCULPTURES. 3034. The black pigment washed off the stone in thesame manner with a sponge, is not affected by digestionin rectified petroleum, and contains, therefore,no bitumen. It softens in hot water immediately,and dissolves readily into a black liquid, which evidentlycontains a gummy or mucilaginous matter.When exposed to a red heat, upon a slip of platinum,it takes fire, and burns with a fleeting white flame.The remaining matter is difficult to incinerate, evenunder the blowpipe, and then leaves a bulky grey ash.This residuum dissolves, with very little effervescence,in hot muriatic acid. When ammonia isdropped into this solution it causes a bulky precipitate,which does not re-dissolve in excess ofsolution of potash. These phenomena show thepigment in question to be bone black (mixed witha little gum). By another experiment, I found init traces of iron.5. The white pigment scraped from the stonein the tombs of the kings, is nothing but a verypure chalk, containing hardly any alumina, and amere trace of iron.6. The yellow pigment is a yellow iron ochre."SCULPTURES IN RELIEF AND IN INTAGLIO.The oldest Egyptian sculptures on all large monumentswere in low relief, and, as usual, at everyperiod, painted ; obelisks and every thing carvedin hard stone*, some funereal tablets and othersmall objects, being in intaglio. This style continuedin vogue until the time of Remeses II.,Some few granite monuments are in relief, but they are rare.SOi THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. X.who began to introduce intaglio generally on largemonuments, and even his battle scenes at Karnakand the Memnonium are executed in this manner.The reliefs were little raised above the level of thewall ; they had generally a flat surface, the edgessoftly rounded off, in effect, far surpassing theintaglio ; and it is to be regretted that the bestepoch of art, when design and execution Vv^erein their zenith, should have abandoned a style sosuperior, which, too, would have improved in proportionto the advancement of that period.Intaglio continued to be generally employed,until the accession of the 26th dynasty, whenthe low relief was again introduced ; and in themonuments of Psamaticus and Amasis are numerousinstances of the revival of the ancient style.This was afterwards universally adopted, andno return to intaglio on large monuments wasattempted, either in the Ptolemaic or Romanperiods.The intaglio introduced by Remeses may, perhaps,be denominated intaglio relie'vato, or relievedintaglio. The sides of the incavo, which are perpendicular,are cut to a considerable depth, and fromthat part, to the centre of the figure (or whatever isrepresented) is a gradual swell, the centre beingfrequently on a level with the surface of the wall.On this all the parts of dress, features, or devices,are delineated and painted, and even the perpendicularsides are ornamented in a corresponding-manner,by continuing upon them the adjoiningdetails.CHAP. X. SCULPTURES OF THE 26tH DYNASTY. 305In the reign of Remeses III. a change was madein the mode of sculpturing the intaglios, which, asI have already observed *, consisted in carving thelower side to a great depth, while the upper faceinclined gradually from the surface of the wall tillit reached the innermost part of the intaglio ; itwas principally done in the hieroglyphics, in orderto enable a person standing immediately beneath,and close to the wall on which they were sculptured,to distinguish and read them ; and the detailsupon the perpendicular sides, above mentioned,had the same effect.It was a peculiarity of style not generally imitatedby the successors of Remeses III., and hieroglyphicsbearing this character may serve to fixthe date of monuments, wherever they are found, tothe age of that monarch. After his reign no greatencouragement appears to have been given to thert arts; the subjects represented on the few monumentsof the epoch intervening between hisdeath, and the succession of the 26th dynasty, areprincipally confined to sacred subjects, in which nodisplay of talent is shown ; and the records ofSheshonk*s victories at Karnak are far from partakingof the vigour of former times, either instyle, or in the mode of treating the subject.After the accession of the 26th dynasty some attemptwas made to revive the arts, which had beenlong neglected ; and independent of the patronageof government, the wealth of private individuals wasliberally employed in their encouragement. PublicVide Vol. I. p. 85. ; and Materia Hicrogl. p. 95.VOL. III. XTHE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. X.buildings were erected in many parts of Egypt,and beautified with rich sculpture ; the city ofSajfs, the royal residence of the Pharaohs of thatdynasty, was adorned with the utmost magnificence; and extensive additions were made to thetemples of Memphis, and even to those of thedistant Thebes.The fresh impulse thus given to art was not withouteffect ; the sculptures of that period exhibitan elegance and beauty, which might even inducesome to consider them equal to the productionsof an earlier age ; and in the tombs of the As-sashes,at Thebes, are many admirable specimensof Egyptian art. To those, however, who under *stand the true feeling of this peculiar school, it isevident, that though in minuteness and finish theyare deserving of the highest commendation, yet,in grandeur of conception and in boldness of execution,they fall far short of the sculptures ofOsirei, and the second Remeses.In forming an opinion of the different styles ofEgyptian sculpture, it is frequently difficult foran unpractised eye to decide upon their peculiarmerits, or their respective ages ; and in nothing,perhaps, has this been more fully demonstrated,than in the Isiac table, now at Turin. Everyone,acquainted with Egyptian art, must be struckat first sight with the very modern date and Romanorigin of this monument ; and the positionof the hieroglyphics shows that the maker of itwas ignorant of the subject he was treating. Ishould, therefore, not have thought it necessaryCHAP. X. FALL OF THE ARTS. 307to notice so palpable a forgery, had not the learnedWinkelmann censured bishop Warburton for ajudicious remark, in which he is borne out byfact, and for which he deserves great credit.*' I cannot help," says Winkelmann*, " here noticingan error of Warburton, who advances, thatthe famous Isiac table of bronze, inlaid with figuresin silver, is a work made at Rome. His opinion isdestitute of foundation, and lie only appears to haveadopted it, because it suited his own system. Beit as it may, this monument has all the characterof the most ancient Egyptian style."Justice must be done to the judgment of Warburton,and a remark of this kind, made by a personof Winkelmann's reputation, is of too great weightto pass unnoticed.The invasion of Cambyses, as I have alreadystated, struck a death blow to the arts in Egypt.Sculptors, painters, and artisans of every description,were taken from their country, and sent toPersia by the victors to embellish the monumentsof their enemies with the records of their ownmisfortunes ; and in spite of the encouragementafterwards given by the Polemics, the spark ofgenius, then so nearly extinguished, could notbe rekindled, and Egypt was doomed to witnessthe total decadence of those arts for which shehad been long renowned.The sculptures of the Ptolemaic periods are coarseand heavy, deficient in grace and spirit, and totallywanting in the character of the true Egyptian school,Winkelmann, Hist, de I'Art. lib. ii. c. 1. s. 40.X 2thos THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. X.at the same time that they partake of nothing Greekeither in form or feeling ; for the Egyptians neverborrowed any notions, on those points, from theforeigners with whom they had so long an intercourse,throughout the period of Greek and Romanrule. The sculptures executed in the time of theCaesar are still more degraded in every respect jand so low did they fall at this period, thatmany do not claim a rank above those of thehumblest village tombstone. Still the architecturecontinued to be grand and majestic, and manyof the monuments of a Ptolemaic and Roman eramerit a better style of sculpture.Architecture," as I have elsewhere observed*,more dependent on adherence to certain rulesthan the sister art, was naturally less speedily affectedby the decline of taste and ingenuity of its professors; and as long as encouragement was held outto their exertions, the grandest edifices mightbe constructed from mere imitation, or from theknowledge of the means necessary for their execution.But this could never be the case withsculpture, which had so many more requisites thanprevious example or long established custom ; norcould success be attained by the routine of mechanism,or the servile imitation of former models."It is remarkable that the architecture, even ofthe early time of Osirtasen, far excelled the sculptureof that day ; and the grace and simplicity ofthe grottos at Beni Hassan, which call to mindin their elegant columns the Doric character, mustEgypt and Thebes, p. 163.CHAP. X.GROTTOS OF BENI HASSAN.be highly admired, even though seen amidst thegrandeur of the monuments of Remeses. Thesecolumns are 3 ft. 4 in. in diameter, and 16 ft. 8J in.high*; they have sixteen faces or grooves, eachabout eight inches wide, and so slight and elegantthat their depth does not exceed half an inch. Oneof the faces, which is not hollowed into a groove, isleft for the introduction of a column of hieroglyphics.The roofs of some of the grottos of Beni Hassan,are cut into a slight segment of a circle, in imitationof the arch, which, as I have had occasionto observe, was probably known in Egypt atthis early period ; and it is remarkable, that thewalls are stained and sprinkled with colour, to givethem the appearance of red granite. This is thegeneral character of the larger and northernmostgrottos ; the others differ, both in the form andstyle of the columns, and in their general appearance; but the transverse section of one of themwill suffice to show the elegance of their depressedpediment, — which extends, in lieu of architrave,No. 383. Section of otic of the southern grottos of Beni Hassan.Vide wood-cut, No. '.iM.yigs. 2, 3.X 3THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. X.over the columns of the interior, — and the simplicityof their general effect.The most favourite Egyptian capitals were thosein form of the full blown water plant, supposed bysome to be the papyrus, which was emblematic ofthe lower country*, and the unopened bud of thesame, or of the lotus ; and that this last gave theoriginal idea of the Doric capital is not improbable,since, by removing the upper part, and bringingdown the abacus, it presents the same appearance asthe early Greek style, tFig. 1. Columns in the portico of the northern grottos of Beni Hassan.2. Columns of the interior.3. Horizontal section of fig. 2, showing the grooves.4. One of the grooves on a larger scale.5. An Egyptian capital, which seems to have been the origin of the Doric : fig. P.Vide Capitals of Columns, Frontispiece of this Volume.\ Vide wood-cut, No. .384-.y?g5. 5, 6.CHAP. X.PAINTING,PAINTING.Of painting, apart from sculpture, and of theexcellence to which it attained in Egypt, we canform no accurate opinion, nothing having comedownto us of a Pharaonic period, or of that epochwhen the arts were at their zenith in Egypt ; butthat, already in the time of Osirtasen, they paintedon board, is shown by one of the subjects at BeniHassan, where two artists are engaged in a picture,representing a calf, and an antelope overtaken by adog. The painter holds his brush in one hand, and hispalette or saucer of colour in the other j but, thoughNo. 385.a 2 3Artists painting on a board, and colouring a figure.Beni Hassan.the boards stand upright, there is no indication ofa contrivance to steady or support the hand.Mention is made of an Egyptian painting byHerodotus, who tells us that Amasis sent a portraitof himself to Cyrene*, probably on wood ; and some,of uncertain period, have been found in the tombsof Thebes. Two of these are preserved in theBritish Museum, but they are evidently of Greektime, and, perhaps, even after the conquest ofHerod, ii. 182.X 4312 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. X.Egypt by the Romans. It is therefore vahi tospeculate on the nature of then* painting, or theirskill in this branch of art; and, though someof the portraits taken from the mummies mayprove that encaustic painting with wax and naphthawas adopted in Egypt, the time when it wasfirst known there is uncertain, nor can we concludefrom a specimen of Greek time, that the same waspractised in a Pharaonic age.Pliny states, in his chapter on inventions*, that*' Gyges, a Lydian, was the earliest painter, inEgypt ; and Euclid, a cousin of Daedalus, accordingto Aristotle, the first in Greece ; or, as Theophrastusthinks, Polygnotus the Athenian." Butthe painting represented at Beni Hassan evidentlydates before any of those artists. Pliny, in anotherplacet, says, " the origin of painting is uncertain :the Egyptians pretend that it was invented bythem 6000 years before it passed into Greece ; avain boast, as every one will allow." It must, however,be admitted, that all the arts were cultivatedin Egypt long before Greece existed as a nation ;and the remark he afterwards makes t, that paintingwas unknown at the period of the Trojan war,can only be applied to the Greeks ; as is shown bythe same unquestionable authority at Beni Hassan,of the remote era of Osirtasen, who lived upwardsof 1700 years before our era, between five and sixhundred years previous to the taking of Troy.Plin. vii. 56.j- Plin. XXXV. 3. He also mentions line drawings as an inventionof the Eg) ptians.J Plin. XXXV. .3., at the end.CHAP. X. MODE OF DRAWING. 313STYLE OF THEIR DRAWING.The skill of the Egyptian artists in drawing boldand clear outlines is, perhaps, more worthy ofadmiration than any thing connected with thisbranch of art ; and I have had occasion to noticethe freedom, with which the figures in the unfinishedpart of Belong's tomb at Thebes aresketched. I have also noticed * the manner inwhich they began those drawings previous to theirbeing sculptured and painted.The walls having been ruled in red squares " theposition of the figures was decided by the artist, whotraced them roughly with a red colour; and thedraughtsman then carefully sketched the outlines inblack, and submitted them to the inspection of theformer, who altered (as appears in some few instanceshere) those parts which he deemed deficient in proportionor correctness of attitude ; and in thatstate they were left for the chisel of the sculptor."Sometimes the squares were dispensed with, andthe subjects were drawn by the eye, which appearsto have been the case with many of those in thetomb here alluded to.In some pictures, we observe certain conventionalrules of drawing, which are singular, and perhapsconfined to the Egyptians and Chinese, an instanceof which may be seen in the frontispiece to myMateria Hieroglyphics.* The subject representsAmunra the god of Thebes seated on his throne, andpresenting the emblem of life to Remeses the Great,who stands before him. The deities Khonso andBubastis are also present. The god being con-egyptand Thebes, p. 107.314 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. X.ordered the principal figure, every means are usedto prevent the intervention of any object, whichmight conceal or break through its outline : theleg therefore of the king, though in reality comingin front, is placed behind his foot ; but as thebase of the throne is of less importance than theleg of the king, the latter is continued in an unbrokenline to the bottom of the picture ; and thesame is observed in his hand, which being anobject of more consequence in the subject thanthe tail of the deity, is not subjected to anyinterruption.The Egyptians had no notion of perspective,either in figures, or in the representation of inanimateobjects ; and those on the same plane, insteadof being shown one behind the other, were placedin succession one above the other, on the perpendicularwall.Of the quality of the pencils they used, for drawingand painting, it is difficult to form any opinion.Those generally employed for writing were a reedor rush, many of which have been found withthe tablets or inkstands belonging to the scribes ;and with these, too, they probably sketched thefigures in red and black upon the stone, or stuccoof the walls. To put in the colour, we maysuppose that brushes of some kind were used ; butthe minute scale on which the subjects are indicatedin the sculptures prevents our deciding the question.Habits among men of similar occupations are frequentlyalike, even in the most distant countries ;and, we find it was not unusual for an Egyptianartist, or scribe, to put his reed pencil behind his ear,CHAP. X.PAINTERS AND SCRIBES.31.when engaged in examining the effect of his painting,or listening to a person on business, as in themodern studio, or the counting-house of an Europeantown.Painters and scribes deposited their writing implementsin a box with a pendent leather top, whichwas tied up with a loop or thong ; and a handle,or strap was fastened to the side to enable themto carry it more conveniently. Their ordinarywooden tablet was furnished with two or morecavities for holding the colours, a tube in theNo. 386.■ A scribe writing on a tablet. c and d are two cases for carrying writingmaterials. Thebes.No. 387. Scribe with his inkstand upon the table. One pen is put behind his ear, andhe is writing with another. Thebes.centre containing the pens or reeds ; and certainmemoranda were frequently written at the back ofit, when a large piece of papyrus, or the woodenslab, were not required.316 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. X.ARCHITECTURE.Of the architecture, plans, and distribution oftheir dwelling-houses, I have already treated in apreceding volume*; and of the great use theymade of crude brick for this purpose ; those burntin a kiln being rarely employed, except in dampsituations The bricks were formed in a simplemould, frequently bearing a government stamp ;and the number of persons employed in their manufactureis readily accounted for by the great demandfor those materials in the construction of dwellinghouses, and ordinary buildings ; stone being confinedprincipally to the temples, and other monumentsconnected with religion ; but this has beenalready noticed ; and I now merely introduce thesubject of crude brick in connection with the arch.I have frequently had occasion to mention theantiquity of the arch, and have shown that it existedof brick in the reign of Amunoph I., asearly as the year 1540 before our erat, and ofstone in the time of the second Psamaticus, b. c.600.§ I have suggested the probability of itshaving owed its invention to the small quantity ofwood in Egypt, and the consequent expence ofroofing with timber, and have ventured to conclude,from the paintings at Beni Hassan, thatvaulted buildings were made in Egypt as early as thereign of Osirtasen, the contemporary of Joseph, wholived between three and four thousand years ago. ||Vol. 11. p. 95. et seq.\ The southern extremity of the quay, near the temple of Luqsor,at Thebes, is built of burnt brick. Crude bricks were common in manyEastern countries, as at Babylon, and other places.X Egypt and Thebes, p. 81. and 126. § Ibid. p. .337.II Supra, Vol. II., p. 117.CHAP. X. BRICK PYRAMIDS. 317The age of the crude brick pyramids of Memphis,and the Arsinoi'te nome is unknown. Herodotustells us the first built of those materials waserected by Asychis, whom he makes the predecessorof Anysis the contemporary of Sabaco, thuslimiting its date to the ninth century before ourera; and, consequently, as I have observed*,making it posterior to those at Thebes, whichwere erected about the period of the 18th dynasty.It is, however, far more probable, that a longperiod intervened between the reigns of Asychis andAnysis t; and that the former lived many ages beforeBocchoris; which is confirmed by another passagein Herodotus, placing him as the immediate successorof Mycerinus the son of Cheops ; and theruinous and crumbled appearance of the brickpyramids of Dishonor, fully justifies the opinion thatthey were erected very soon after the stone ones,near which they stand, and to which the inscriptionof Asychis forbade the spectator to comparetheist They have had chambers, the lower partof whose side walls are still visible; and we maybepermitted to conclude that they were arched,like those at Thebes.If, then, the brick pyramids of Memphis wereerected by the successor of the son of Cheops,and the chambers were, as I suppose, vaulted,the invention of the arch will be carried backnearly roo years prior to the reign of Amunoph,Supra, Vol. I. p. 132.f To prevent further discussion on the reigns of those kings, I didnot suggest this opinion in the historical notice taken from Herodotus(in Vol. I. p. 13:-!.), and have reserved it for the |n-esent occasion, asit bears more particularly on the (question respecting the antiquity ofthe arch. \ Vide\o\.\. p. 131."318 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. X.about 2020 years before our era. This is a conjectureon which I do not wish to insist ; we may,for the present, be satisfied with the fact that thisstyle of building was in common use 8370 yearsago, and rejoice that the name of Amunophhasbeen preserved on the stucco, coating the interiorof a vaulted tomb at Thebes, to announce it, andto silence the incredulity of a sceptic.The appearance and position of other tombs, inthe vicinity of the Ptolemaic temple of Dayrr elMedeeneh at Thebes, had always convinced me thattheir vaulted roofs were of the time of Amunoph andhis immediate successors ; but, however satisfied onthis point myself, I could find no name to sanctionmy opinion, or to justify me in its assertion, untilaccident threw in my way the building in question*,while prosecuting my researches there in 1827 j ^^^I have the satisfaction to learn that another tombhas since been discovered of similar construction,which presents the ovals of the third Thothmes.The pyramids of Gebel Birkel (Napata), andDunkalah (Mere), are of uncertain date, butthere is every reason to believe them, as wellas the small temples attached to their front, of anage long anterior to the Polemics, or, as Mr.Hopkins thinks, " of a far more ancient date thanTirhaka ; " and we there find stone arches, bothround and pointed f, some of which are built witha keystone t, on the same principle as our own.Materia Hierogl. p. 80. f Vide Hopkins's Ethiopia, p. 156.:{: Time keystone is mentioned by Seneca, Epist. 90. Many roundand pointed arches of a late time have been built without it, and theprinciple of the arch does not depend upon it, but on the adjustmentof all the stones.CHAP. X. ANTIQUITY OF THE ARCH. 319At Memphis, too, near the modern village ofSaqqara, is a tomb, with two large vaulted chambers,whose roofs display in every part the name andsculptures of the second Psamaticus. They arecut in the limestone rock ; and in order to securethe roof, which is of a friable nature, they arelined, if I may so call it, with an arch, as ourmodern tunnels. The arch is of stone, and presentsa small and graceful segment of a circle, having aspan of seven feet ten inches, and a height of twofeet eight inches and a half. *Numerous crude brick arches, of different dates,exist in Thebes, besides the small pyramids alreadyalluded to, some of which are of very beautifulconstruction. The most remarkable are the doorwaysof the enclosures surrounding the tombs inthe Assaseef, which are composed of two or moreconcentric semicircles of brick 1:, as well constructedas any of the present day. They are of the time ofPsamaticus and other princes of the 26th dynasty,immediately before the invasion of Cambyses.All the bricks radiate to a common centre : theyare occasionally pared off at the lower part, toallow for the curve of the arch, and sometimesthe builders were contented to put in a piece ofstone to fill up the increased space between theupper edges of the bricks. In those roofs of housesor tombs, which were made with less care, and requiredless solidity, the bricks were placed longitudinally,in the direction of the curve of the vault,Vide Vignette I. of this chapter.f One is introduced into wood-cut No. 388. fig. I .% As of that in wood-cut, No. 119. p. 131. Vol. II.320 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. Xand the lower ends were then cut away considerably,to allow for the greater opening between them ;and many were grooved at the sides, in order toretain a greater quantity of mortar between theirunited surfaces.Though the oldest stone arch, whose age hasbeen positively ascertained, dates only in the timeof Psamaticus, wee cannot suppose that the use ofstone was not adopted by the Egyptians for thatstyle of building, previous to his reign, even if thearches of the pyramids in Ethiopia should provenot to be anterior to the same era. Nor does theabsence of the arch in temples and other largebuildings excite our surprise, when we considerthe style of Egyptian monuments ; and no one whounderstands the character of their architecture couldwish for its introduction. In some of the smalltemples of the Oasis, the Romans attempted thisinnovation, but the appearance of the chambers soconstructed fails to please ; and the whimsical capriceof Osirei, who introduced an imitation of thearch in a temple at Abydus, was not followed byany of his successors.* In this building the rootis formed of single blocks of stone reaching fromone architrave to the other, which, instead of beingplaced in the usual manner, stand upon their edges,in order to allow room for hollowing out an archin their thickness : but it has an effect of inconsistency,without the plea of advantage or utility.Another imitation of the arch occurs in a buildingat Thebes. Here, however, a reason may perhapsVide wood-cut. No. 388. 7?g. 3.CHAP. X.FALSE ARCHES.be given for its introduction, being in the style ofa tomb, and not constructed as an Egyptian temple,nor bound to accord with the ordinary rules of architecture.The chambers, like those of the tombof Saqqara, lie under a friable rock, and are casedwith masonry, to prevent the fall of its crumblingstone y but instead of being roofed on the principleof the arch, they are covered with a number of largeblocks placed horizontally, one projecting beyondthat immediately below it, till the uppermost twomeet in the centre, the interior angles being afterwardsrounded off to form the appearance of a vault.The date of this building is about 1500, b. c.1 11 .^: iX 1 i/.'i V.1 /i/ .teeJNo. 38S. — Fig. 1. Vaulted rooms and doorway of a crude brick pyramid at Thebes.2. All imitation of an arch at Thebes,S. Another at Abydus4. Mode of commencing a quarry.VOL. III. Y322 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. X.consequently many years after the Egyptians hadbeen acquainted with the art of vaulting ; and thereason of their preferring such a mode of constructionprobably arose from their calculating the greatdifficulty of repairing an injured arch, in this position,and the consequences attending the decay ofa single block; nor can any one suppose, fromthe great superincumbent weight applied to thehaunches that this style of building is devoid ofstrength, and of the usual durability of an Egyptianfabric, or pronounce it ill suited to the purpose forwhich it was erected.*STONES HEWN FROM QUARRIES FOR BUILDING, FORSCULPTURE, AND OTHER PURPOSES.The most ancient buildings in Egypt were constructedof limestone, hewn from the mountainsbordering the valley of the Nile to the east andwest, extensive quarries of which may be seenat El Maasarat, Nesleh Shekh Hassan, El ,and other places; and evidence of its beingused long before sandstone is derived from thetombs near the pyramids, as well as those monumentsthemselves, and from the vestiges of oldsubstructions at Thebes Limestone continuedto be occasionally employed for building even afterthe succession of the loth dynasty §; but so soonVide wood-cut, No. 388 ;%. 2.f Vide Egypt and Thebes, p. 322. and 348., the Troici capitis monsof Ptolemy and Strabo.X Limestone blocks are sometimes found in the thickness of thewalls of sandstone temples, of the time of Relapses IL and other kings,taken from older monuments.§ Herodotus says, Amasis, even, used the stone of the quarries nearMemphis, probably of the Maasara hills, for part of the temple of Minervaat Sais, lib. ii. 175. '7(/r Egypt and Thebes, p. 442,CHAP. X. USE OF LIMESTONE. 3'2Sas the durability of sandstone was ascertained, thequarries of SilsiHs* were opened, and those materialswere universally adopted, and preferred fortheir even texture, and the ease with which theywere wrought.The extent of the quarries at Silsilis, is verygreat; and, as I have elsewhere observed, " it is notby the size and scale of the monuments of UpperEgypt alone that we are enabled to judge of thestupendous works executed by the ancient Egyptians: these would suffice to prove the characterthey bore, were the gigantic ruins of Thebes andother cities t no longer in existence. And safelymay we apply the expression, used by Pliny inspeaking of the porphyry quarries, to those of Similis,"they are of such extent, that masses of anydimensions might be hewn from them."In opening a new quarry, when the stone couldnot be taken from the surface of the rock, and itwas necessary to cut into the lower part of itsperpendicular face, they pierced it with a horizontalshaft ; beginning with a square trench, and thenbreaking away the stone left in the centre (as indicatedin the wood-cut by the space b), its heightand breadth depending of course on the size ofthe stones required. They then cut the samearound c, and so on to any extent in a horizontaldirection, after which they extended the workdownwards, in steps, taking away e, and leavingD for the present, and thus descending as far asEgj-pt and Thebes, p. 439.-|- Herodotus (ii. 177), and Pliny (v. 9.), reckon 20,000 cities in Egyptin the time of Amasis.Y 232*THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. X.they found convenient, or the stone continued good.They then returned, and cut away the steps d, f,and all the others, reducing each time one step indepth, till at last there remained at x a perpendicularwall J and when the quarries were of very greathorizontal extent, pillars were left at intervals tosupport the roofIn one of the quarries at El Maasara, the modeof transporting the stone is represented. It isNo. 389. Removing a.slonefrom the cjiiarriesat Kl Alaasara.placed on a sledge, drawn by oxen, and is supposedto be on its way to the inclined plane that led tothe river ; vestiges of which may still be seen alittle to the south of the modern village.Sometimes, and particularly when the blocks werelarge and ponderous, men were employed to dragthem, and those condemned to hard labour in thequarries as a punishment, appear to have beenrequired to assist in moving a certain number ofstones, according to the extent of their offence,ere they were liberated ; and this expression,I have dragged 110 stones for the building ofIsis at Philae," in an inscription at the quarriesof Grassy in Nubia, seems to confirm my conjecture.In order to keep an account of theirprogress, they frequently cut the initials of theirname, or some private mark, with the number,on the rock whence the stone was taken, asCHAP. X. TRANSPORT OF LARGE STONES. 3^5soon as it was removed : thus, c. xxxii., pd. xxxiii.,PD. xxxiii., and numerous other signs occur atthe quarries of Fateereh.The blocks were taken from the quarry onsledges ; and in a grotto behind E*Dayr, a Christianvillage between Antinoe and El Bersheh, isthe representation* of a colossus, which a numberof men are employed in dragging with ropes ; asubject doubly interesting, from being of the earlyage of Osirtasen IL, and one of the very fewpaintings which throw any light on the methodemployed by the Egyptians for moving weights.For it is singular, that we find no illustration ofthe mechanical means of a people who have leftso many unquestionable proofs of skill in thesematters.It is not to be supposed that the colossus washewn in the hill of El Bersheh. This picture, likethe trades, sowing scenes, and other subjects, representedin similar grottoes, only refers to one ofthe occupations of the Egyptians tj nor does iteven follow, that the inmate of the tomb had anyoffice connected with the superintendence of thequarries whence it was brought.One hundred and seventy-two ment, in four rows,of forty-three each, pull the ropes attached to thefront of the sledge ; and a liquid, probably grease,is poured from a vase, by a person standing on theThis curious subject was first discovered by captains Kirby andMangles. From the heard we see the statue is of a private individual.t Vide Egypt and Thebes, p. 142.X The number may be indefinite; and it is probable that more werereally employed than indicated in the painting.Y 33^6 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. X.pedestal of the statue, in order to facilitate its progressas it slides over the ground ; which was probablycovered with a bed of planks, though theyare not indicated in the painting.Some of the persons employed in this laboriousduty appear to be Egyptians, the others are foreignslaves, who are clad in the costume of their country; and behind are four rows of men, who, thoughonly twelve in number, may be intended to representthe set which relieved the others when fatigued.Below are persons carrying vases of the liquid,or, perhaps water, for the use of the workmen,and some implements connected with the transportof the statue, followed by taskmasters with theirwands of office. On the knee of the figure standsa man who claps his hands, to the measured cadenceof a song, to mark the time and ensuretheir simultaneous draught ; for it is evident that,in order that the whole power might be applied atthe same instant, a sign of this kind was necessary ;and the custom of singing at their work * was commonto every occupation! among the Egyptians,as it now is in that country, in India, and manyother places. Nor is it found a disadvantage amongthe modern sailors of Europe, when engaged inpulling a rope, or in any labour which requires asimultaneous effort.The custom of singing or shouting, while treading grapes in thewinepress, is mentioned by Jeremiah, xxv. 30. " He shall give a shoutas they that tread the grapes ;" and Isaiah, xvi. 10, " In the vineyardthere shall be no singing," being common to other people as well as theEgyptians.f Also during the dance. Conf. 1 Sam. xxi. 11. " Did they not singone to another of him in dances ? "CHAP. X. TRANSPORT OF SMALL STONES. 327The height of the statue appears to have beenabout twenty-four feet, including the pedestal,and it was of limestone*, as the colour and thehieroglyphics inform us. It was bound to thesledge by double ropes, which were tightened bymeans of long pegs inserted between them, andtwisted round until completely braced ; and, toprevent injury from the friction of the ropes uponthe stone, a compress of leather or other substancewas introduced at the part where they touched thestatue.It is singular that the position of the ring towhich all the ropes were attached for moving themass, was confined to one place at the front of thestatue, and did not extend to the back part of thesledge, but this was owing to the shortness of thebody; and, when of great length, it is probablethat ropes were fixed at intervals along the sidesin order to give an opportunity of applyinga greater moving power. For this purpose, inblocks of very great length, (as the columns atFateereh, which are about 60 ft. long, and 8 J ft.in diameter,) certain pieces of stone were left, projectingfrom the sides, like the trunnions of a gun,to which several ropes were attached, each pulledby its own set of men.Small blocks of stone were sent from the quarriesby water to their different places of destination,either in boats or rafts ; but those of very largedimensions were dragged by men, overland, inThe word in the hieroglyphics signifies either Limestone or sandstone.Y 4THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. X.9 So "i3 lu i« « g■-•g.sgSg ^3 97^^-2 «c o •" * « (o" o *"i i2 — O 2^^ E <»= 3^ S « " ^-S^ -S =.x: .£ '5 " SS2So3&5»^ lo o o4CHAP. X. THEIR MECHANICAL SKILL. 329the manner, here represented ; and the immenseweight of some shows that the Egyptians werewell acquainted with mechanical powers, and themode of applying a locomotive force with themost wonderful success.The obelisks transported from the quarries ofSyene, at the first cataracts, in latitude 24° 5' 23'',to Thebes and Heliopolis, vary in size from seventyto ninety-three feet in length. They are of onesingle stone ; and the largest in Egypt, which isthat of the great temple at Karnak, I calculate toweigh about 297 tons. This was brought about138 miles from the quarry to where it now stands,and those taken to Heliopolis passed over a spaceof more than 800 miles. The power, however, tomove the mass was the same, whatever might bethedistance, and the mechanical skill which transportedit five, or even one, would suffice for anynumber of miles.In examining the ruins of western Thebes, andreading the statements of ancient writers regardingthe stupendous masses of granite conveyed by thispeople for several hundred miles, our surprise isgreatly increased. We find in the plain of Qoornehtwo colossi of Amunoph III., of a single blockeach*, forty-seven feet in height, which containabout 11,500 cubic feet, and are made of a stonenot known within several days' journey of theplace ; and at the Memnonium, is another of RemesesII. which when entire weighed upwardsOne of these is the vocal Memnon. Vide Egypt and Thebes,p. 33. ct seq. This was broken and repaircil.330 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. X.of 887 tons*, and was brought from E'Sooanto Thebes, a distance, as before stated, of 138miles. This is certainly a surprising weight, andwe cannot readily suggest the means adopted forits transport, or its passage of the river ; but themonolithic temple, said by Herodotus to have beentaken from Elephantine to Butoo, in the Delta, wasstill larger, and far surpassed in weight the pedestalof Peter the Great's statue at St. Petersburg, whichis calculated at about 1200 tons.He also mentions a monolith at Sais, of which hegives the following account : — "What I admire stillmore, is a monument of a single block of stone, whichAmasis transported from the city of Elephantine. tTwo thousand men, of the class of boatmen, wereemployed to bring it, and were occupied three yearsin this arduous task. The exterior length is twenty-onecubits (31:|ft.); the breadth fourteen (22 standthe height eight (12 ft.) ; and, within, it measureseighteen cubits twenty digits (28 ft. 3 in.)in length; twelve (18ft.) in breadth; and five(72 ft.) in height. It lies near the entrance ofthe temple, not having been admitted into thebuilding, in consequence, as they say, of the engineer*,while superintending the operation of draggingit forward, having sighed aloud, as if exhausted withfatigue, and impatient of the time it had occupied ;which being looked upon by Amasis as a badEgypt and Thebes, p. 1 1.-j- The island opposite Syene, immediately below the first cataract.The granite rocks stretch from the interior of the desert to the Nilein this part : the sandstone crosses the river more to the north, a littlebelow Eilethyas. Vide Egypt and Thebes, p. 4-^0. and p. 452.CHAP. X. IMMENSE MONOLITH ^T But. 331omen, he forbade its being taken any further.Some, however, state that this was in consequenceof a man having been crushed beneath it whilemoving it with levers** *Herodotus's measurement is given as it lay onthe ground ; his length is properly its height, andhis height the depth, from the front to the back ;for, judging from the usual form of these monolithicmonuments, it was doubtless like that of thesame king at Tel-et-Mai, given in Mr. Burton'sExcerpt, the dimensions of which are 21 ft. 9 in.high, 13 ft. broad, and 11 ft. 7 in. deep ; and internally19 ft. 3 in., 8 ft. and 8 ft. 3 in.The weight of the Sainte monolith cannot certainlybe compared to that of the colossus ofRemeses ; but when we calculate the solid contentsof the temple of Latona at Butoo, our astonishmentis unbounded ; and we are perplexed toaccount for the means employed to move a masswhich, supposing the walls to have been only 6 ft.thick (for Herodotus t merely gives the externalmeasurement of forty cubits, or 60 ft. in height,breadth, and thickness,) must have weighed upwardsof 5000 tons.§The skill of the Egyptians was not confined tothe mere moving of immense weights ; their wonderfulknowledge of mechanism is shown in theerection of obelisks, and in the position of largestones, raised to a considerable height, and adjustedwith the utmost precision; sometimes, too, inHerodot. 175. f Plate 4.1. % Herodot. ii. 155.§ This is supposing it to be granite, as these uionolithic temples were.3SQ THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. X.situations where the space will not admit the introductionof the inclined plane. Some of the mostremarkable are the lintels and roofing stones of thelarge temples ; and the lofty doorway leading intothe grand hall of assembly, at Karnak, is coveredwith sandstone blocks, 40 ft. 10 in. long, and 5 ft.2 in. square.In one of the quarries at E'Sooan (Syene) is agranite obelisk, which having been broken in thecentre after it was finished, was left in the exactspot where it had been separated from the rock.The depth of the quarry is so small, and theentrance to it so narrow, that itjvas impossible forthem to turn the stone, in order to remove it bythat opening ; it is, therefore, evident that theymust have lifted it out of the hollow in which ithad been cut ; as was the case with all the othershafts previously hewn in the same quarry. Suchinstances as these suffice to prove the wonderfulmechanical knowledge of the Egyptians ; and wemay question whether with the ingenuity andscience of the present day our engineers are capableof raising weights with the same facility as thatancient people.*Pliny mentions several obelisks of very largedimensions, some of which were removed to Rome,where they now stand as tokens of the emptyvanity of man.The Egyptians naturally looked on those morum.Leas, well known in France as an eminent engineer, whoremoved the obelisk of Luxor now at Paris, has paid a just tribute tothe skill of the Egyptians.CHAP. X. OBELISKS. 333ments with feelings of veneration, being connectedwith their religion, and the glorious memory oftheir monarchs j and at the same time perceivedthat, in buildings constructed as their temples were,the monotony of numerous horizontal lines requireda relief of this kind ; but the same feelingsdid not influence others, and few motives can beassigned for their removal to Europe, beyond thedesire of possessing what required great difficultyto obtain, and flattered the pride of a vain people.I will not pretend to say that the ancient Romanscommitted the same strange outrage to tasteas their modern successors, who have destroyedthe effect of the most graceful part of these monuments,by crowning the apex, which should ofcourse terminate in a point, with stars, rays,or other whimsical additions ; and, however habitmay have reconciled the eye to such a monstrosity,every one who understands the beauty of form,and the harmony of lines, must observe and regretthe incongruity of balls and weather-cocks on ourown spires.Pliny* says, that the first Egyptian king whoerected an obelisk was Mitres, who held hiscourt at Heliopolis, the city of the Sun, the deityto whom they were said to have been dedicated.!Many others were raised by different monarchs,and " Raises** made one 99 feet in height, " onwhich he employed 20,000 workmen." " And,Plin. xxxvi. 8.f At Heliopolis ; but in other places to other deities, as at Thebes toAnn, the god of that city.334f THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. X.fearing lest the engineer should not take sufficientcare to proportion the power of the machinery tothe weight he had to raise, he ordered his ownson to be bound to the apex, more effectually toguarantee the safety of the monument"*The same writer describes a method of transportingobelisks from the quarries down the river, by lashingtwo flat-bottomed boats together, side by side,which were admitted into a trench, cut from theNile to the place where the stone lay, laden witha quantity of ballast exactly equal to the weight ofthe obelisk ; which, so soon as they had been introducedbeneath the transverse block, was all takenout ; and the boats rising, as they were lightened,bore away the obelisk in lieu of their previousburden. But we are uncertain if this methodwas adopted by the Egyptians ; and though hementions it as the invention of one Phoenix, hefails to inform us at what period he lived.No insight, as I have already observed, is giveninto the secrets of their mechanical knowledge,from the sculptures, or paintings of the tombs,though so many subjects are there introduced.Our information, connected with this point, isconfined to the use of levers, and a sort of crane ;which last is mentioned by Herodotus, in describingthe mode of raising the stones from onetier to another, when they built the pyramids.He says it was made of short pieces of wood ; —an indefinite expression, conveying no notionPlin. xxxvi. 9. f Herod, li. 125.CHAP. X,MACHINERY.MASONS.either of its form or principle; — and every stonewas raised to the succeeding tier by a differentmachine.Diodorus tells us*, that machines were not inventedat that early period, and that the stone wasraised by mounds or inclined planes ; but we maybeexcused for doubting his assertion, and thus berelieved from the effort of ima":ininff an inclinedplane five hundred feet in perpendicular height,with a proportionate base.It is true, that the occupations of the mason andPart I.No. Sei.4 5Part 1. levelling, and Part 2. squaring a stone.Figs. 2, 4, 6, are using the chisel and mallet.Diodor. i. 63,T/iebei.THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. X.the Statuary are sometimes alluded to in the paintings; the former, however, are almost confined toNo 392 Parti. I^rge sitting colossus of granite, which they are polishing.Part. 2. Standing figure of a king, and, like the former, painted to represent granite.Figs. 8 10. 11. are polishing it ; and figs. C>. and 7, painting and sculpturing the hieroglyphicsat the back. Tithes.CHAP. X. MACHINERY. MASONS. 337the levelling or squaring a stone, and the use of thechisel. Some are represented polishing and paintingstatues of men, sphinxes, and small figures;and two instances occur of large granite colossi,surrounded with scaffolding*, on which men areengaged in chiseling and polishing the stone ; thepainter following the sculptor to colour the hieroglyphicshe has engraved at the back of the statue.The usual mode of cutting large blocks from -the quarries was by a number of metal wedges,which were struck at the same instant alongits whole length ; sometimes, however, theyseem to have been of highly dried wood, whichbeing driven into holes previously cut for themby a chisel, and then saturated with water, splitthe stone by their expansion ; and the troughsfrequently found along the whole line of the holes,where the wedges were inserted, argue strongly infavour of this opinion.Such a method could only be adopted when thewedges were in an horizontal position, upon theupper surface of the stone ; but those put intothe sides were impelled by the hammer only.To separate the lower part of a ponderousmass from the rock, we may suppose they cutunder it, leaving long pieces here and there to supportit, like beams, which traversed its whole depthfrom the front to the back ; and then having introducedwooden rafters into the open spaces whichwere cleared away, they removed the remainderof the stone, and the block rested on the wood.Vide wood-cut, No. 392.VOL. III. 2338 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. X.Some have imagined that they used the samemeans now practised in India, of lighting a firealong the whole length of the mass, in the directionwhere they intended it should split; and thenpouring water upon it cracked the stone in thatpart by its sudden action : but this is very doubtful,and the presence of the holes for the wedgessufficiently proves the method they usually employed.INVENTIONS.Among the remarkable inventions of a remoteera among the Egyptians, may be mentionedbellows and siphons. The former were used atleast as early as the reign of Thothmes III. thecontemporary of Moses, being represented in atomb bearing the name of that Pharaoh. Theyconsisted of a leather bag, secured and fitted intoa frame, from which a long pipe extended, forcarrying the wind to the fire. They were workedby the feet, the operator standing upon them, withone under each foot, and pressing them alternately,while he pulled up each exhausted skinwith a string he held in his hand. In one instancewe observe from the painting, that when the manleft the bellows, they were raised, as if full of air*;and this would imply a knowledge of the valve.It is uncertain when bellows were first invented;the earliest contrivance of this kind was probablya mere reed or pipe ; which we find used byJ'ide wood-cut, No. 39.3. k, o.CHAP. X. Bellows AND SIPHONS.m n o 5No. 393. Bellows. Thebes.a, b, k, 0, the leather case, c, e, I, n, the pipes conveying the wind to the fire, d, m, the fire.k, q, charcoal, k and o, are raised as if full of air.goldsmiths in the age of Osirtasen *, and also at alate period, after the invention of bellows ; and thetubes of these last appear even in the time ofThothmes III. to have been simply of reed, tippedwith a metal point, to resist the action of the fire.In process of time the sack containing the air wasadded, and various improvements succeeded eachother in the form and principle of the bellows ;there are, however, no means of ascertaining theperiod when they assumed their present form ;and the merit of the late invention of woodenbellows is still disputed. Strabo ascribes theIt does not follow from the use of the pipe at Beni Hassan, thatbellows were unknown at that period, because it continued to be usedlong after the time of Thothmes. Vide wood-cut, No. 374.z 2340 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. X.bellows* to Anacliarsis, but with the evident convictionthat these, the double anchor, and thepotter's wheel f, were of an age far anterior to theScythian philosopher ; which is fully proved bythe paintings at Thebes.The ordinary hand-bellows, now used for smallfires in Egypt, are a sort of bag made of the skinof a kid, with an opening at one end (like themouth of a common carpet bag), where the skinis sewed upon two pieces of wood ; and these beingpulled apart by the hands, and closed again, the bagis pressed down, and the air thus forced throughthe pipe at the other end. It is, perhaps, an ancientinvention, but I find no indication of it in thepaintings.The bellows with sides of wood, made at thepresent day, are a more perfect construction thanthese last, or the foot-bellows of the time ofThothmes. They are supposed to have beenknown to the Greeks, though I confess, thetaurinis foUibus aurasAccipiunt redduntque "of Virgil t, is rather calculated to convey the ideaof bellows made of ox leather §, without woodensides.Siphons are shown to have been invented in Egypt,at least, as early as the reign of Amunoph II. 1450years before our era ; and they again occur in theStrabo. vii. p. 209. " lAonvpa" t Seneca, Ep. 90. Plin. vii. 56.X Virgg. George. iv. 171. Vide Herodot. i 68.§ Beckmann says " that bulls' leather," which Virgil mentions, " isunfit for bellows, and that ox or cow leather can only be used for thatpurpose." Vol. I. p. 104-.CHAP. X.BELLOWS AND SIPHONS.paintings of the third Remeses. In a tomb atThebes bearing the name of Amunoph, their useis unequivocally pointed out, by one man pouringa liquid into some vases, and the other drawing itoff, by applying the siphon to his mouth, andthence to a large vase ; and it is not improbable2 1No. 394. Siphons used in the year 1450 b. c. Thebes.1 pours a liquid into vases from the cup b ; and 2 draws it off by the siphons a.that they owed their invention to the necessity ofallowing the Nile water to deposit its thick sedimentin vases, which could not be moved withoutagain rendering it turbid, whether by incliningthe vessel, or dipping a cup into it with the hand. -Julius Pollux says they were used for tastingwine * ; and Heron of Alexandria, the first writerof consequence who mentions them, and who livedunder Ptolemy Evergetes II., shows them to havebeen employed as hydraulic machines, on a grandscale, for draining lands, or conveying water over aJul. Poll. Onom. vi. 2. iiiul x. 20.z 334^ THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. X.hill from one valley to another. Their name,siphon, is evidently oriental, and derived from theword sigh or sis, to *' imbibe," or " draw up withthe breath," analogous to, and the origin of, ourown expression *' to sip."Of the numerous inventions to which the Egyptiansmay lay claim, we learn little from the worksof ancient authors ; but their skill in variousbranches of art are highly extolled by those * whovisited, or were acquainted with, the country.Herodotus t ascribes the origin of geometry to thenecessity of ascertaining every successive year thequantity of land, increased, or diminished, by accidentsarising from the inundation of the Nile ;which is, indeed, not inconsistent with reason : butthe historian is wrong in limiting the date of landsurveying to the age of Sesostris, since it was evidentlyknown long before his time ; and so ancientdid the Egyptians consider it, that they ascribedits invention to Thoth.tArticles pretends that Moeris was the first tolay down the elements of that science, which hesays was perfected by Pythagoras ; but the latterobservation is merely the result of the vanity ofthe Greeks, which claimed for their countrymen,(as in the case of Thales, and many other instances,)the credit of enlightening a people on the veryDiodorus (i. 74.) says that the arts were carried to a higher degreeof perfection and excellence among the Egyptians than any other people ;which he ascribes to the artisans being confined to their own occupationsThe Chinese have shown that, like many other ideas, this isplausible in theory, but bad in practice.f Herodotus. "loi, X ?•"*« in Phaedra.CHAP. X. INVENTIONS. 343subjects which they had visited Egypt for the purposeof studying.The discovery of the pole, the sundial, and thedivision of the day into twelve hours, are said byHerodotus to have been derived by the Greeksfrom the Babylonians. Of the two former we haveno indication in the sculptures, to prove the epochwhen they where known in Egypt ; but there is reasonto believe, that the day and night were divided,each into twelve hours, by the Egyptians, somecenturies before that idea could have been impartedto the Greeks from Babylon. *Sufficient data cannot, of course, be expectedfrom the sculptures of the tombs, and the accidentalintroduction of their occupations, to enable us toform an accurate opinion respecting the extent oftheir knowledge, the variety of their inventions,or the skill of their workmen in different branchesof art. The objects buried with the dead werefrequently mere models of those they used ; andthe pains taken in making them depended on thesums expended by the friends of the deceased,after his death. It was left to their good intentions,or their superstitious feelings, to decide ofwhat quality they should be, or what labourshould be bestowed upon them ; and if the kindregards of a friend frequently induced some toincur considerable expense in providing such objects,many, on the other hand, were less scrubis remarkable that no mention of hours is made in the Bible tillthe time of Daniel. Dan. iii. 6. The Hebrew word is ^^® Sal, as inArabic.z 4344 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. X.populous in the last duties to their departed relative.The former purchased ornaments of the most costlymaterials, as agate*, basalt, granite, alabaster, onyx,jasper, gold, and precious stones ; the latter werecontented with common porcelain, wax, limestone,or wood. But even the best which have beenfound in the tombs, are evidently of inferior quality jand like their vases, and chairs, none have beendiscovered equal in beauty to those represented inthe paintings, with the exception of a few rings andsome female ornaments, which had been actuallyworn by the deceased.The paintings, again, indicate a very small portionof their inventions : many, with which we knowthey were acquainted, are omitted ; and the sameremark applies to some of their most commonoccupations, to the animals they kept, and to theordinary productions of their country. No exactnotion can even be formed of their costume andthe dresses of various grades, either amongmei or women, though so frequently represented ;partly owing to their conventional style of drawingfigures, partly to their want of skill in depictingdrapery ; which, as I have observed, wasmerely added to the figure, without forming partof the subject described ; it is therefore only themost simple portion of their dress which can beunderstood.DRESSES.Ordinary workmen, and indeed all the lowerSo called from Achates a river in Sicily. Theophr. § 38.CHAP. X.THEIR DRESSES.34^5orders, were clad in a sort of apron, or kelt, sometimessimply bound round the loins, and lappingover in front*; and others had short drawers,No. 395.Men's Dresses. 13 a shirt from the work of Prof. Rosellini.extending halfway to the knees The same kindof apron was worn by the higher orders, underVide woodcut, No. 393.f Vide wood-cut, No. 354. /g. 1. a. and/g. 2. es,346 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. X.an ample dress of fine linen, reaching to theankles*, and provided with large sleeves Theapron was generally fastened by a girdle, or by asort of sash, tied in front in a bow or knott : it wassometimes folded over, with a centre-piece fallingdown in front, beneath the part where it overlapped; and some of the poor classes, while engagedin laborious occupations, were contentedwith a roll of linen passed between the legs, fromthe back to the front of the girdle § ; which isfrequently used at this day by the peasants, whendrawing water by the shadows.Herodotus mentions || some Egyptian dresses,which he describes of linen, with a fringe on theborder around the legs, called cala.siris ; overwhich they wore a cloak of white wool, similar,no doubt, to the hornous% of the present day, socommon in Egypt and the coast of Barbary. Inever remember seeing this cloak represented, exceptin the dresses worn by the captives of the *,who appear to have something of the kindover their inner garments.The same custom of edging their dresses withfringes was common to the Israelites, who wereordered to make them *' in the borders of theirgarments ; " "a blue riband*' being " put upon thefringe." These fringes, as already observed, wereVide wood-cut, No. 279. fgs. 5, 6. and pi. 12. Jig. 14.f Vide wood-cut, No. 3-11. and 116. fig. 5.t Vide wood-cut, No. 78. Vol. II. p. 10.§ Vide wood-cut, No. 395. fg. 7. || Herodot. ii. 81.f The porous is a woollen cloak, open in front, and buttoned overthe breast. It has a hood.** Vide woodcut. No. 72. Vol. I. p. 403.ft Numb. XV. 38.CHAP. X. CLOAKS AND SHIRTS. 347only the ends of the threads composing the woof,left m order to prevent the cloth unravelling ; andthe blue riband added by the Israelites, was intendedto strengthen it, and prevent its tearing.I have noticed the woollen cloak*, and theprohibition which Herodotus says was issuedagainst their wearing it, when they entered a temple,or being buried in cloths of that quality ; and Ihave also observed, that though cotton garmentswere sometimes used, the preference was given tolinen, which was considered more conducive tocleanliness and health. With regard to the cala-sirsmentioned by Herodotus, it does not appearthat they were very generally used ; but dressesare occasionally represented in the paintings witha fringe t, and pieces of cloth have been found in thetombs with this kind of border.Some wore a sort of shirt with loose or tightsleeves, open at the neck, where it was tied withstrings t ; and except that it was of linen, insteadof wool, it was not unlike the bight of the moderninhabitants of Upper Egypt.The dresses of the priests and persons of rankconsisted of an under garment, similar to the apronalready mentioned, and a loose upper robe withfull sleeves, secured by a girdle round the loins ;or of the apron, and a shirt with short tight sleeves,over which was thrown a loose robe, leaving theright arm exposed. § Sometimes a priest, whenofficiating in the temple, laid aside the upperVol. I. p. 280.t Vide wood-chit, No. 396. 1. 7. 9. ; and 398. 1.j Vide woodcut, No, 90., fg. 5. Vol. II. p. 46., and No. 387.<^ Vide wood-cut, No. 'HI. Jig. 1.S18THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. X.Dresses of Priests.8, 9, hierogrammat, or sacred scribe.vesture, and was satisfied to wear an ample robebound round the waist, which descended over theapron to his ancles ; and occasionally he put on along full garment, reaching from below the arms tothe feet, and supported over the neck with straps.*Others again, in the sacred processions, were entirelycovered with a dress of this kind, reaching to thethroat, and concealing even the hands and arms.tThe costume of the hierogrammat, or sacred scribe,consisted of a large kelt or apron, either tied infront, or wound round the lower part of the body ;and the loose upper robe with full sleeves, which,in all cases, was of the finest linen : he had some-woodcut,No. 396./g.'t. f Vide woodcut, 'Ho. 396. Jig. 5.CHAP. X.DRESS OF PRIESTS.times one or two feathers on his head, as describedby Clement of Alexandria* and DiodorusThe hieraphori, when bearing the sacred emblems,wore a long full apron reaching to theankles, tied in front with long bands, and a strap,also of linen, passed over the shoulder to supportitt; but they had no upper robe on these occasions.Sometimes a priest who offered incense wasclad in this long apron, and the full robe withsleeves ; sometimes only in the former : and the^o.39T Princes and Children. Thebes.1, head-dress of a prince. 2, and 3, lock of hair worn by children. 4, dress of a sonof Remeses III. 5, head-dress of a prince, Remeses.dresses of the others in like manner varied ondifferent occasions." The Hierogrammat walks first, having feathers on his head, anda book in his hand." Clem. Alex. Str. 5, 6.f Diodor. i. 87. " The sacred scribes wear a purple fillet and hawk'sfeather on their head." Vide woodcut, No. 396. fg. 0.t Vide woodcut, No. 396./g. 6.350 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. X.The princes wore a dress very like that of thesacred scribe, the apron wound round the body,and divided into three different folds, over whichwas a garment with large sleeves j but their distinguishingmark was a peculiar badge at the sideof the head, descending to the shoulder, and frequentlyadorned and terminated with a gold fringe.This, I suppose, to have contained the lock of hair,indicative of youth, which is seen in the statues ofHippocrates, and frequently represented on the headsof children. For though the Egyptians were shaved,and wore wigs and other coverings to the head, childrenwere allowed to leave certain locks of hair*;and if the sons of the king, long before they arrivedat the age of manhood, had abandoned this youthfulcustom, the badge was attached to their headdressas an emblem of their rank as princes ; orreally to show they had not, during the life time oftheir father, arrived at kinghood ; on the sameprinciple that a Spanish prince, of whatever age,continues to be styled an " infant."I have already noticed t those priests who worea leopard skin ; which some have mistaken for thatof the debris or fawn, and improperly ascribed toBacchus. It was generally thrown over their dress jits fore-legs sometimes made to form sleeves forthe arms : and the robes worn beneath it varied atdifferent times. It was usually confined to thehigh-priests, who superintended the sacrifices, andprocessions of the sacred boats or arks ; who pre-videwood-cuts, No. 397. Jig. 3. No. 402. and No. 195./^, 2.t Vol. I. p. 279.CHAP. X. DRESS OF THE KING. 351seated the offerings at the altar of the gods, and atthe funerals of individuals ; or who anointed theking at his coronation : and the same badge was assumedby the monarch when officiating on similaroccasions.The robes of the sovereign varied, of course,according to his immediate occupation. Whenengaged as high-priest, they much resembled thoseworn by the principal functionaries of the sacerdotalorder, with the exception of the apronand head-dress, which were of peculiar form, andbelonged exclusively to his rank as king.This apron was richly ornamented in front withlions' heads, and other devices, probably of colouredleather ; and the border was frequently formed ofa row of ass, the emblems of royalty. Sometimesthe royal name, with an asp on each side, as supporters,was embroidered upon it, the upper partbeing divided into square compartments of differentcolours ; but it is not improbable, that thisformed an appendage to the girdle, rather than tothe apron j and several straps falling down at theside of the centre-piece, show that it was tied infront, and came over the folds of the apron, andeven of the upper robes.The headdress of the king, on state occasions, wasthe crown of the upper or of the lower country, or thepshent, the union of the two. Every king, afterthe sovereignty of the Thebaid and Lower Egypt *had become once more vested in the same person,Vide supra, p. 283.THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. X.No. 398. Dress of the King.2,3, the kings apron. 3, is from a statue of Amunoph III. in the museum at AlnwickCastle. 4, wreath of the crown of Sabaco's statue at the Isle of Argo.put on this double crown at his coronation ; andwe find in the grand representation given of thisceremony at Medeenet Haboo, that the principalfeature of the proclamation, on his ascension to thethrone, was the announcement to the four sides" ofthe world, that *' Remeses had put on the crown ofthe upper and lower country."I have already noticed this interesting subject*,and should not have failed to introduce a copy ofit here, if the size of this work had not been toolimited. I hope, however, to be able, at a futuretime, to present it with several other curious scalpsand Thebes, p. 63. ; and supra, p. 288. 289.CHAP. X. HEAD-DRESS OF THE KING. 353turns, in a form better suited to them, to which Ishall refer the reader.He even wore his crown during the heat ofbattle*, like the kings of olden days in Europe;sometimes merely a wig ; but a helmet t madeapparently of woollen stuff with a thick nap, notvery unlike the modern Persian cap, was generallypreferred ; and, in religious ceremonies, he put ona striped head-dress, probably of linen, whichdescended in front over the breast, and terminatedbehind in a sort of queue bound withriband. tWhen crowned, the king invariably put on thetwo crowns at the same time, though on otheroccasions he was permitted to wear each separately,whether in the temple, the city, or the field ofbattle ; and he even appeared in his helmet § duringthe ceremonies in honour of the gods. On someoccasions he wore a short wig, on which a bandwas fastened, ornamented with an asp, the emblemof royalty. 1 1It may appear singular, that so warm a coveringto the head should have been adopted in the climateof Egypt ; but when we recollect that theyFor the head-dress and costumes of soldiers, vide Vol. I. p, 329,ct seq.f The Egyptian helmet had no crest. I have mentioned the originof crests in Vol. I. p. 331. The Greek crest was copied from the maneof a horse; and in illustration of this we frequently find the scales orcheek-pieces of the helmet made to imitate the ears of that animal, which,when raised and turned up, project from the upper part on either side.Conf. Homer, i. 382., the helmet of Achilles with a horse's taii,"t7r7roi'|OifTpv(pa\tia ;" and Virgg. ^n. x. 369. "critique hirsutus equina."t Vide wood-cut. No. 399. Jig. 13.§ Conf. Herodot. ii. 151. vide Vol. I. p. H*.II Vide woodcut. No. 399, Jig. 1 1.VOL. III. A A354,THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. X.No. 399. Head-dresses.1, a close cap. 2, 3, 4, J, wigs. 0, the crown of the upper and lower country, or9 and 8 united. 10 to H, royal head-dresses 15, beard of a god. 15, of a king.17, of a private individual of rank.always shaved the head, and that the reticulatedtexture of the groundwork, on which the hairwas fastened, allowed the heat of the head toescape, while the hair effectually protected it fromthe sun, it is evident that no better covering couldhave been devised, and that it far surpassed inCHAP. X.WIGS.Sccomfort and coolness the modern turban ; whichis always found by those who are in the habit ofwearing it, to be very agreeable in hot weather,provided all the particulars are attended to, whichthe Turks find so essential, but which those Europeanswho merely put it on for effect, too oftenneglect.The upper portion of the wig was frequently madewith curled, and not with plaited hair, this lastbeing confined to the sides and lower part, asis the case in the wigs preserved in the British andBerlin museums ; but the whole was sometimescomposed of a succession of plaits, commencingfrom the centre of the crown, extending downwards,and increasing in length towards the bottom.No. 400. Front and back of an Egyptian wig in the British Miiscnin.3, shows the appearance of the long plaits, a. a.Some smaller wigs, worn by persons of rank,consisted of short locks of equal length, arrangedin uniform lines; imitations of which appear toA A 2THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. X.have been made in woollen or other stuffs, underthe denomination of false wigs, for the use of thosewho could not afford the more expensive quality ofreal hair.No.401.Wig, about 2| feet in length, seen in front.Berlin Museum.Wigs were worn both within the house andout of doors, like the turban of the presentday ; and a priest might even officiate on someoccasions in his wig. At parties, the headdressof every guest was bound with a chapletof flowers, and ointment * was put upon the top ofthe wig, as if it had really been the hair of theheart ; and one instance occurs of a wreath of leavesplaced round the crown of a king, on a statue ofVide Athen. xv. 13. and Juvenal, Sat. xv. 30.Unguent, et flores, niulta;qus in fronte coronae."t Vklc Vol. II. p. 2 U. 218,CHAP. X. SHAVING THE HEAD AND BEARD. 357Sabaco, in Ethiopia, precisely similar to thoseworn by the Romans.*The Egyptians, says Herodotus, " only let thehair of their heart and beard grow in mourning,being at all other times shaved t ;" which agreesperfectly with the authority of the Bible §, and ofthe sculptures. So particular, indeed, were they onthis point, that to have neglected it was a subjectof reproach and ridicule ; and whenever they intendedto convey the idea of a man of low condition,or a slovenly person, the artists representedhim with a beard. || It is amusing to find thattheir love of caricature was not confined to thelower orders, but extended even to the king ; andthe negligent habits of Remeses VII. are indicatedin his tomb at Thebes, by the appearance of hischin, blackened by an unshorn beard of two orthree days' growth. But it was likewise given asthe test of hardships undergone in a severe campaign; and the warlike character of Remeses theGreat is pointed out in the same manner.The Egyptians did not confine the privilege ofshaving to freeborn citizens, like the Romans,who obliged slaves to wear their beards and hairlong, and only permitted them the use of a cap %Vide supra, p. 352. wood-cut, No, 398,, fg. 4.-f- Diodorus states, that they suffered the hair to grow when on ajourney; but this was probably on accomplishing a vow, Diod.i, 18,t Herodot, ii. 36. and iii. 12.§ Gen. xli. 14. Joseph, when sent for by Pharaoh from prison,shaved himself, and changed this raiment."II Vide wood-cut, No. 115. Vol. II. p. 127.i Livings, xlv. 44. *' Pileatum, capite rash . . . . liberum."A A 3358 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. X.after they had been enfranchised: and thoughforeigners, who were brought to Egypt as slaves,had beards on their arrival in the country, we findthat so soon as they were employed in the serviceof this civilised people, they were obliged to conformto the cleanly habits of their masters ; theirbeards and heads were shaved ; and they adopteda close cap.The priests were remarkable for their love ofcleanliness, which was carried so far, that theyshaved the whole body every three days, and performedfrequent daily ablutions, bathing twice aday and twice during the night.* It was notconfined to their order ; every Egyptian prided himselfon the encouragement of habits, which it wasconsidered a disgrace t to neglect : we can, therefore,readily account for the disgust they felt onseeing the squalid appearance and unrefined habitsof their Asiatic neighbours, whose long beardswere often the subject of ridicule to the Egyptiansoldier ; and for their abhorrence of the beardedand long-haired Greeks ; which was so great, that,according to Herodotus t, *' no Egyptian of eithersex would on any account kiss the lips of a Greek,make use of his knife, his spit and cauldron, ortaste the meat of an animal which had been slaughteredby his hand." The same habits of cleanlinessare also indicated by the " changes of raiment *'Herod, ii, 37. Porphyry says thrice a day, and a nocturnal ablutionoccasionally.t Herod, ii. 37. Plut. de Is. s. 3.I Herod, ii. 41. and 91.CHAP. X. BEARDS SHAVED. 359given by Joseph* to his brethren, when they setout to fetch their father to Egypt.Barbers may be considered the offspring of civilisation; and as a Roman youth, when arrivedat the age of manhood, cut off his beard, andconsecrated it to some deity, as a token of hishaving emerged from a state of childhood, so apeople, until they have adopted the custom ofshaving, may be supposed to retain a remnant oftheir early barbarism.The Romans, at first, like other people, allowedtheir beards to grow, until about 454 years afterthe building of the city (299 bec), when P. TiciniusMena, having brought barbers from Sicily, introducedthe custom at Rome ; and, as Pliny states f,Scipio Africans was the first Roman who shavedevery day." They resembled the Egyptians ratherthan the Greeks in this respect, and in the habit ofallowing the hair of the heart and beard to grow inmourning ; the Greeks, on the contrary, shavingthemselves on those occasions.The prejudice of these last in favour of long hairseems to be retained to the present day ; for thoughthe modern Greeks have adopted a moslem custom,and wear the redjhz of the coast of Barbary, theyhave remained insensible to the comfort and cleanlinessof shaving, and have preferred the incon-Gen. xlv. 22, " To all of them he gave each man changes of raiment ;but to Benjamin he gave three hundred pieces of silver, and five changesof raiment."t Plin. vii. 59.j And in youth : whence children are called " Capillaries " byPetronius Arbiter (Satyr.) Vide Martial. Epigr. Iii, lib. 10.§ Conf. Homer, 11. ii. 11. " (capjjKo/uowi/raf A;^«ioi)e," viii. .53., &c.Apollo was represented with long hair. Vide 1 Cor. xi. 1 4'.A A 4360 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. Xsisterly of covering the head with a close cap*,and cherishing the growth of long hair.With the Egyptians it was customary to shavethe heads even of young children, leaving onlycertain locks t at the front, sides, and back ; andthose of the lower classes were allowed to go outin the sun with the head exposed, without theprotection of a cap ; which is the reason assigned byHerodotus $ for the hardness of the Egyptianskulls, compared with those of other people. *' Ibecame acquainted," says the historian, '* with aremarkable fact, which was pointed out to me bythe people living in the neighbourhood of the fieldof battle, where the Egyptians and the army ofCambyses fought ; the bones of the killed beingstill scattered about, those of the Persians on oneside, and of the Egyptians on the other. I observedthat the skulls of the former were so soft, thatyou could perforate them with a small pebble ; whilethose of the latter were so strong, that with difficultyyou could break them with a large stone. Thereason of which, as they told me, and I can readilybelieve it, is that, the Egyptians being in thehabit of shaving their heads from early youth, thebone becomes thickened : and hence, too, they arenever bald ; for, certainly, of all countries, nowheredo you see fewer bald people than in Egypt.The Persians, on the contrary, have soft skulls, inconsequenceof their keeping the head coveredfrom the sun, and enveloped in soft caps. I alsoThe Greeks ridicule and abhor our unbecoming hats, but there isnot the same objection to them on the score of cleanness.■f As with the Chinese, and modern Egyptians, fide wood-cut 'No, 195. Jig. 2. ' X Herod, iii. 12.CHAP. X. SHAVING THE HEAD. unobservedthe same of those who were killed inthe battle between Amusements and Icarus theLibyan."It was usual for the lower orders to work inthe sun without any covering to the head, as themodern peasants of Egypt, who appear to inheritfrom their predecessors skulls of uncommon hardness; and we see the same class of persons representedin the paintings with and without a cap,whether in the house or in the open field.Herodotus says*, when the Egyptians performtheir vows, they shave the heads of their children,either entirely, or half, or only a third ;and putting the hair and some silver into a pair ofscales, dedicate an equal weight of the latter to theanimal which is sacred to the deity they invoke.This does not, however, imply that they left thewhole head unshaven ; and the hair to which herefers was probably the long pendent locks representedin the Theban sculptures.Persons of all classes occasionally wore caps,some of which were large, others fitting tight tothe head ; but these last were considered far lessbecoming than the wig, and suited rather to thelower orders than to persons of rank. Womenalways wore their own hairs, and they were notshaved even in mourning, or after death.The use of wigs was not confined to the Egyptiansof all people of antiquity ; the Romans,under the emperors, also adopted a sort of peruke,called capiUamentwn or galerus^ though itseems rather to have been worn by women thanHerod, ii. 65. f Vide 1 Cor. xi. G.36^ THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. X-men ; and Juvenal* describes Messalina puttingon a wig of flaxen hair to conceal her own blacklocks, when she left the palace in disguise.The most singular custom of the Egyptians wasthat of tying a false beard upon the chin, whichwas made of plaited hair, and of a peculiar form, accordingto the person by whom it was worn. Privateindividuals had a small beard, scarcely two incheslong; that of a king was of considerable length,square at the bottom ; and the figures of gods weredistinguished by its turning up at the end. Noman ventured to assume, or affix to his image, thebeard of a deity ; but after their death, it was permittedto substitute this divine emblem on thestatues of kings, and all other persons who werejudged worthy of admittance to the Elysium offuturity ; in consequence of their having assumedthe character of Osiris, to whom the souls of thepure returned, on quitting their earthly abode.The form of the beard, therefore, readily distinguishesthe figures of gods and kings, in the sacredsubjects of the temples ; and the allegorical connectionbetween the sphinx and the monarch ispointed out by its having the kingly beard, as wellas the crown, and other symbols of royalty.The dresses of children of the lower classes werevery simple ; and as Diodorus t informs us, theexpenses incurred in feeding and clothing themamounted to a mere trifle. ** They feed them," hesays, " very lightly, and at an incredibly small cost ;Juven. Sat. vi. 120. " Et nigrum flava crimen absconded alertDiodor. i. 80.CHAP. X.DRESSES OF CHILDREN.giving them a little meal of the coarsest and cheapestkind, the pith of the papyrus, baked under the ashes,with the roots and stalks of some marsh weeds, eitherraw, boiled, or roasted ; and since most of them arebrought up, on account of the mildness of the climate,without shoes, and, indeed, without any otherclothing *, the whole expense incurred by the parentsdoes not exceed 20 drachmae (13 shillings)each ; and this frugality is the true reason of thepopulousness t of Egypt." But the children of thehigher orders were often dressed like grown persons,with a loose robe, reaching to the ankles, andsandals, tInfants do not appear to have been swaddled,as among the Jews, Greeks, and Romans. Whentoo young to walk, if taken out by a mother ornurse, they were carried in a shawl, suspended ather back, or before her ; a custom still retainedNo. 402.9. 4 5Women carrying their children in a funeral procession.Thebes.by the women of the Moghrebin Arabs ; and inEthiopia they were carried in baskets, supportedVule wood-cut. No. \95.fig.2. and No, 402.f Pliny might attribute it to the Egyptian women having occasionallyseven children at a birth. He gives his authority, Trogus Vii. 3.).t Hrfe plate 12./g. 1.364 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. X.at the mother's back by a band passing over herforehead.*Sometimes, though nearly or entirely naked, theneck of an Egyptian child was decorated with astring of beads ; and occasionally a bullae or charm,was suspended in the centre, representing thesymbol of truth and justice, which has been supposedalso to indicate the heart, and is usually foundin the balance of the judgment scenes, as a representativeof the good works of the deceased. Asulla of this kind was worn by the youthful deityHippocrates. tIt was probably of gold, or hard stone, like thoseof the Romans ; and others worn by the poorerclasses, as at Rome, and in modern Egypt, wereof leather. They were supposed to prompt thewearer to virtue and wisdom, to keep off the evileye, or to avert misfortune ; and superstitioninduced many to appeal to them in danger, andderive from them omens of forthcoming events.Sometimes a charm consisted of a written piece ofpapyrus tightly rolled up, and sewed into a coveringof linen, or other substance, several of which havebeen found at Thebes ; and emblems of variousdeities were appended to necklaces for the samepurpose.Ladies and men of rank paid great attention tothe beauty of their sandals : but on some occasionsVide wood-cut. No. 73. Vol. I. p. 404.f Vide my Materia Hieroglyphics, Pantheon, plate ll.Jlg. 3.J The Roman and Etruscan children had sometimes three or fourbulls, as we see from statues that have been found. Conf. Virgg. Mn.xii. 942. Plin. (xxxiii. i.) explains who wore the golden bulla, andwho the leathern forum. Vide Juv. Sat. xiii. 33., and Pers. Sat. v,31. &c.CHAP. X.SANDALS.•a uo o3«> c«•a oi "S P «"fllc-j^^■T3»«Ss^Cc '»Si^fii) to^■^5~ cJS2 rts«>*^■2!a-:£.1;THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. X.those of the middle classes who were in the habit ofwearing them, preferred walking barefooted ; and,in religious ceremonies, the priests frequently tookthem off, while performing their duties in thetemple.The sandals varied slightly in form ; those wornby the upper classes, and by women, were usuallypointed and turned up at the end, like our skaits,and many Eastern slippers of the present day.Some had a sharp flat point, others were nearlyround. They were made of a sort of woven, orinterlaced work, of palm leaves and papyrus stalks,or other similar materials ; sometimes of leather ;and were frequently lined within with cloth, onwhich the figure of a captive was painted j thatLNo. 404. Sandals. Berlin Museum.1, from the sculptures. 2, in the Berlin Museum; made of the papyrus.3, figure of a captive on the sole.CHAP. X. SANDALS. DRESSES OF WOMEN. 367humiliating position being considered suited to theenemies of their country, whom they hated anddespised. An idea agreeing perfectly with theexpression which so often occurs in the hieroglyphiclegends, accompanying a king's name, whenhis valour and victories are recorded on the sculptures: *' You have trodden the impure Gentilesunder your powerful feet." *Shoes, or low boots, were also common in Egypt,many having been found at Thebes ; but these Ibelieve to have been of late date, and to have belongedto Greeks ; for, since no persons are representedin the paintings wearing them, exceptforeigners!, we may conclude they were not adoptedby the Egyptians, at least in a Pharaonic age.They were of leather, generally of a green colour ;laced in front by thongs, which passed throughsmall loops on either side ; and were principallyused, as in Greece and Etruria, by women.The dresses of women consisted sometimes of aloose robe or shirt, reaching to the ankles, withtight, or full sleeves, and fastened at the neck likethose of the men, with a string ; over which theywore a sort of petticoat, secured at the waist bya girdle ; and this, in mourning, while bewailingthe death of a relative, was frequently their onlydressSuch was the costume of the lower classes ofwomen ; and, sometimes indeed, as at the presentVide wood-cut. No. 404-./g. 3.f Vule wood-cut, No,403./g.s, 1, 2, 3.:{: Vide pate 14.; and wood-cut No. 64^. Jig. 1.^ Vide wood-cut, No. 7., Vol. I. p. 236. and Herodot. ii. 85.THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. X.No. 405. Dresses of women.The sash in figs. 1, and 'J, though represented at the side, is to be understood as tied infront. In fig. 3, the side hair appears to be fixed by a comb ; and before it, on thecheek, the short hair is arranged in separate plaits. 4, shows the shirt tied at the neck :it is a terra cotta statue.day it consisted mqi-ely of the loose shirt or robe,without shoes or sandals.The higher orders wore a petticoat, or gown,secured at the waist by a coloured sash, or by strapsover the shoulders; and above this was a large looserobe, made of the finest linen, with full sleeves *,and tied in front below the breast : and duringsome religious ceremonies! the right arm was takenout of the sleeve, and left exposed as in the funeralprocessions. The petticoat or gown was ofrichly coloured stuff, presenting a great varietyof patterns, not unlike our modern chintz, theVide a group of women in plate 4. of my Materia Hero. part 2. ;and wood-cut, No. S.Jig. 5.f Vide wood-cut, No. R. /g.?. 1,2, and 3., Vol. I. p. 260.CHAP. X. DRESSES OF WOMEN. 369most elegant of which were selected for the robesof deities and the dresses of queens.Slaves or servants were not allowed to wearthe same costume as ladies, and their mode ofdressing the hair was different. They generallybound it at the back part of the head, into a sortof loop, or ranged it in one or more long plaitsat the back, and eight or nine similar ones were sufferedto hang down at either side of the neck andface.* They wore a long tight gown, tied at theneck, with short close sleeves, reaching nearly to theelbow : and sometimes a long loose robe was thrownover it, when employed to dance, or to presentthemselves on festive occasions.Ladies wore their hair long, and plaited. Theback part was made to consist of a numberof strings of hair, reaching to the bottom ofthe shoulder blades, and on each side otherstrings of the same length descended over thebreast. The hair was plaited in the triple plait,the ends being left loose ; or, more usually, twoor three plaits were fastened together at the 4^''- Head-dress of a lady, from a mummy case.Vule wood-cuts, Nos. 236. and 280,VOL. III. B BSyO THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. X.trinity by woollen string of corresponding colour.Around the head was bound an ornamental fillet,with a lotus bud, by way of Jei^oniere, falling overthe forehead ; and the strings of hair, at the sides,were separated and secured with a comb, or aband, ornamented in various ways according to thefancy of the wearer : and occasionally a roundstud, or pin, was thrust into them at the front.The short hair at the side of the face, which theingenuity of ancient Roman*, and modern Europeanladies, has, by the aid of gum, compelled tolie in an immovable curve upon the cheek, wasinterwoven with several of its longer neighbours ;and these, being bound together at the end withstring, fell down before the earring which theypartially concealed. Many of the mummies ofwomen have been found with the hair perfectlypreserved, plaited in the manner I have mentioned ;the only alteration in its appearance being thechange of its black hue, which became reddenedby exposure to great heat, during the process ofembalming.The earrings, most usually worn by Egyptianladies, were large, round, single hoops t of gold,from one inch and a half, to two inches and one-third,in diameter, and frequently of a still greatersize ; or made of six rings soldered together 1^ :sometimes an asp, whose body was of gold set withprecious stones, was worn by persons of rank, as aThis little accroche occur appears in the busts of several Romanladies, of the time of the empire.t Vide wood-cut. No. 412.,/g. 5. and 272.J Vide wood-cut, No. 412.,/gs. 6 and 7.CHAP. X. EARRINGS. RINGS. 87!fashionable caprice ; but it is probable that thisemblem of majesty was usually confined to membersof the royal family.Earrings of other forms have also been found atThebes, but their date is uncertain ; and it is difficultto say if they are of an ancient Egyptian age,or of Greek introduction. Of these, the most remarkableare a dragon*, and another of fancy shapewhich is not inelegant Some few were of silver,and plain hoops, like those made of gold alreadynoticed, but less massive, being of the thicknessof an ordinary ring : at one end was a small opening,into which the curved extremity of the other caughtafter it had been passed through the part j and otherswere in the form of simple studsWomen wore many rings, sometimes two andthree on the same finger : the left was consideredthe hand || peculiarly privileged to bear those ornaments; and it is remarkable, that its thirdfinger was decorated with a greater number thanany other, and was considered by them, as byus, par excellence, the ring finger % ; though thereis no evidence of its having been so honouredat the marriage ceremony** They even wore aWood-cut, No. 408.^g. 10. not unlike one of the Chinese dragons.t Vide wood-cut. No. 408. /^g-. 21.t. Vide wood-cut, No. 412.^o'. 5.9 Vide woodcut, No. 397./^. 4.II The same witty the Romans (Plin. xxxiii. i.); they wore rings onall but the middle finger. This last was preferred by the Gauls andBritons.H Vide Plin. xxxiii. 1. Of the fingers on which rings were worn.Singular primo digits germ nos surat, qui sunt minimis proxime."** Plin. (xxxiii. i.) mentions the iron ring worn by a person betrothed: " etiam nunc sponsae annulus ferrets mittimus, issue sinegemma." He thinks they had no rings in Homer's time. But inEgypt they were used long before.B B 5237^ THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. X.ring on the thumb ; and I have seen, upon the righthand of a wooden figure, a ring on the thumb, andtwo on the third finger ; and upon the left, oneupon the thumb and Utile finger ; two on the foreand second finger ; and three on the third : as maybeseen in the accompanying wood-cut.No. 407. Hands of a wooden figure of a woman. On thelid of a mummy case in Mr.Salt's collection, now in the British Museum.Some rings were simple ; others were made witha scarabaeus, or an engraved stone ; and they wereoccasionally in the form of a snail, a knot, a snake,or some fancy device. They were mostly of gold ;and this metal seems to have been always preferredto silver, for rings, and other articles of jewellery.Silver rings, however, are occasionally met with ;and two in my possession, which were accidentallyfound in a temple at Thebes, are engraved withhieroglyphics, containing the name of the royalcity.Bronze was seldom used for rings. Some havebeen discovered of brass *, and iron, (of a Romantime, as I before observed) t ; but ivory and blueI am not sure if the alloy in them is zinc. I suspect it to be gold.t Chap. ix. p. 23G. Vide Plin. xxxiii. 3. and xxxiii. i. on iron rings.CHAP. X. RINGS. — > SIGNETS. 373porcelain were the materials of which those wornby the lower classes were usually made. Thescarabaeus was the favourite form both for rings,and the ordinary ornaments of necklaces ; insome, the stone, flat on both faces, turned onpins, like many of our seals at the present day ;and the ring itself was bound round at each end,where it was inserted into the stone, with gold wire.This was common not only to rings, but to signets,and was intended for ornament as well as security.One of the largest signets I have seen, was inthe possession of a French gentleman at Cairo,which contained twenty pounds' worth of gold.It consisted of a massive ring, half an inch inits largest diameter, bearing an oblong plinth, onwhich the devices were engraved *, one inch long,Tenths in its greatest, and Goths in its smallestbreadth. On one face was the name of a king,the successor of Amunoph III., who lived aboutB. c, 1400 ; on the other a lion, with the legendlord of strength," referring to the monarch : onone side a scorpion, and on the other a crocodile.Two cats sitting back to back and looking roundtowards each other, with an emblem of the goddessAuthor between them, seem to have been afavourite device on gold rings j and I have seenthree or four of this pattern, one of which is in mypossession, tThey also had large gold anklets or bangles t,Pliny is wrong in saying, " Non signal orient, aut iEgyptus etiamnunc, literal content solis." xxxiii. i.t Wood-cut, No. iVZ.Jigs. 11, 12.j Vide Plin. xxxiii. 3.B B 3THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. XNo. 408. Rings, signets, bracelets, and earrings.Fig. 1. Bronze bracelet, or bangle, in the museiini of Alnwick Castle.2. Gold bracelet in the Leyden Muse jm, bearing the nrnieof Thothmes III., 1| inch high,and Inclines in diameter. 3. Scarabaeus of amethyst with a sphinx, emblematic the king,trampling on a prostrate enemy ; over it is the expression " Good God, Lord of the world."4. A gold signet, mentioned in the last page. 5, 6, 7. The three other sides of the plinth.8. A gold ring. 9. The engraved face of it. 10. A gold earring, about U inch in diameter.12. A gold ring in my possession four fifths of an inch in diameter 11. Theface of it, of the real size. 13. Gold ring with two ass. 14. A snake bracelet of gold.15. A stone scarabaeus. 16. Gold earring. 17. Gold earring with two pearls, n and i.18, 19,20. Other gold earrings. 21. Gold earring, 1 inch high, and six-tenths broad.22, 23. Ring of porcelain, or blue-glazed pottery. Museum of Alnwick Castle.CHAP. X. NECKLACES. 37^armlets, and bracelets, frequently inlaid with preciousstones, or enamel : some were in the shapeof snakes, and others as simple rings : and wornby men as well as women. Kings are oftenrepresented with armlets and bracelets ; and inthe Leyden Museum is a gold one * bearing thename of the third Thothmes, which was doubtlessonce worn by that monarch ; and, without any greatlicence of imagination we may suppose it to havebeen seen by Moses himself, if Thothmes was thePharaoh who oppressed the Israelites, and intowhose presence the Jewish legislator was so oftensummoned.Handsome and richly ornamented necklaceswere a principal part of the dress, both of mentand women ; and some idea may be formed of thenumber of jewels they wore, from those borrowedby the Israelites at the time of the Exodus, andby the paintings of Thebes. They consisted ofgold, or of beets of various qualities, and shapes,disposed according to fancy : generally with alarge drop, or figure in the centre. Scarabsei,gold, and cornelian bottles, or the emblems ofgoodness and stability, lotus flowers in enamel,amethysts, pearls, false stones, imitations of fish,shells, and leaves, with numerous figures, and devices,were strung in all the variety which theirtaste could suggest ; and the sole museum of Leydenpossesses an infinite assortment of those objects,Vide wood-cut, No. 408. ^g. 2.f Necklaces and bracelets were worn by the Carthaginian, and bymany Europeans, as the Gauls, Sabines and others. Judah's braceletsand signet are mentioned in Genesis, xxxviii. 18.B B 437C THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. X.which were once the pride of the ladies ofThebes.Some wore simple gold chains, in imitation ofstring, to which a stone scarabaeus, set in the sameprecious metal, was appended ; but these probablybelonged to men, like the torques of the Romans.*A set of small cups, or covered saucers, of bronzegilt, hanging from a chain of the same materials,were sometimes worn by women ; a necklace ofwhich has been found, belonging to a Theban lady,• offering a striking contrast in their simplicity tothe gold leaves inlaid with lapis lazuli t, red andgreen stones of another she wore : which served,with many more in her possession, to excite theadmiration of her friends.The devices engraved on scarabaeus, rings, andother objects of ornamental luxe varied accordingto the caprice of in individuals. Rings frequently borethe name of the wearer ; others of the monarch inwhose reign he lived ; others, again, the emblems ofcertain deities ; and many were mere fanciful combinations.The greater number consisted of scarabaeus,mounted upon a gold ring passing throughthem : the scarabaeus itself was of green stone,cornelian, hematite, granite, serpentine, agate,lapis lazuli, root of emerald, amethyst, and othermaterials ; and a cheaper kind was made of limestone,stained to imitate a harder and dearer quality ;or of the ordinary blue pottery.Pharaoh " put a gold cluiin about (Joseph's) neck," Gen. xli. 42.and " a ring upon Joseph's hand." Vide wood cut, No. \Od,fig. M.t Vide wood-cut. No. 409. f^s. B, I a.CHAP. X.« ^i378 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. X.THE TOILET. OINTMENTS.Of the various objects of the toilet, found atThebes, and other places, the principal are bottles,or vases, for holding ointment, and koJil* or collyriumfor the eyes, mirrors, combs, and the smallboxes, spoons, and saucers, already mentioned, tThe ointment was scented in various ways, and Ihave had occasion to noticed some preserved in themuseum at Alnwick Castle, which has retained itsodour several centuries ; and the great || use ofointment by the Egyptians is sufficiently indicatedin the paintings representing the reception of guestsat their parties.With the exception of the little found in thetombs, we have nothing to guide us respecting thenature of Egyptian ointments. Some appear tobe made with a nut oil ^, but it is probable thatanimal, as well as vegetable, grease was employedfor this purpose ; the other ingredients dependingon the taste of the maker, or the purchaser. JuliusPollux** mentions a black kind made in Egypt,and speaks of the sag cas as an ointment of thatcountry. Theophrastus, on the contrary, statesIt has the same name in Hebrew.+ Vol. II. p. 355. et seq. J Vol. II. p. 2 14.^ Theophrastus says, " The Egyptian ointment was not verystrongly scented."II Athenaeus says the revenues of Anthylla were given to the queensof Egypt for the purchase of ointments, another term for pin-money,lib. i. 25. Vide Corn. Nep. in vita Agesilai, and Juv. Sat. xv. 50.^ This agrees with the jSaXapov of Theophrastus. Vide Plin.xiii. 1.** J. Pollux, Onom. vi. xix-ff Theophr. De odorous.CHAP. X. OINTMENTS. 379that Egyptian ointments were colourless ; but wecan readily account for this variance of opinion, bysupposing that they had in view two differentqualities * : which is further proved, by the fact ofour finding them both preserved at Thebes.Ointment was frequently kept in alabaster bottles,or vases, (whence these obtained, among theGreeks, the name of alahastron^ even if made ofother materials) ; sometimes in those of the onyx,or other stone, glass, ivory, bone, or shells §; specimensof all of which have been discovered in thetombs.Strabo 1! says that the common people used theoil of the kikki, or castor-berry for anointing themselves,both men and women ; the general purposeto which it was applied being for lamps : and manyoils, as from the simsim^, olive, almond, flax,selgam (coalesced), seemga, lettuce, and other vegetableproductions, were extracted in Egypt**The custom of anointing the body is usual in hotclimates, and contributes greatly to comfort. Eventhe Greeks, Romans tt, and others, whose limbswere mostly covered with clothes, and protectedPlin, (xiii. 3.) says " Terram omnium ^gyptus accommodationsunguent." They adulterated their ointments. Plin. xiii. 1.t Conf. Matt, xxvi. 7. " An alabaster box of very precious ointment."t Conf. Hor. iv. Od. xi. 17, " Nardi parvis onyx."9 Hor. ii, Od. v. 23, " Unguent de colchis."II Strabo, lib. xvii. p. 567. Herod, ii. 94. Plin. xv. 7.11 Sesamum orientale. ** Plin. xiii. 1.f f Ennius tells us that, even in the time of Tarquin they had thiscustom : —Tarquin corpus bona semina lavit, et unit."Pliny doubts when it was introduced at Home. xiii. 3.380 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. X.from the dryness of the air, found the advantage ofits use ; and those whose skin was much exposed,in consequence of their scanty clothing, as theEthiopians, and other inhabitants of Africa, felt thenecessity of softening and cooling the skin by theapplication of oils or ointments ; and we find thecustom most prevalent among the blacks who wearthe least covering to their body.Their principal care is bestowed upon the hairof the head, which they are not in the habit ofshaving, except some of the upper classes amongthe inhabitants of the large towns ; and the highestambition of the Ethiopians is to obtain a sufficientquantity of grease, whatever kind it may be, tocover their head, and, to run down upon theshoulders, so as to give them a shining gloss,which they delight in displaying as they walk inthe sun. *The Egyptian combs were usually of wood, anddouble ; one side having large, the other smallteeth ; the centre part was frequently ornamentedwith carved work, and, perhaps, inlaid. Theywere about four inches long, and six deep ; andthose with a single row of teeth were sometimessurmounted with the figure of an ibex, or otheranimal.The custom of staining the eyelids and brows,with a moistened powder of a black colour, wascommon in Egypt from the earliest times ; it wasalso introduced among the Jews and Romans, andConf. Virgg, hen. V. 135 "jiiventus,Nudatosque hunters oleo perusal nitescit."CHAP. X. PAINTING THE EYELIDS.No. 410. Combs found at Thebes.1. Comb, with the centre part ornamented.3. Side view of fig. 2.4. An Ibex, supposed to have formed the top of a comb.is retained in the East to the present clay. It isthought to increase the beauty of the eye ; whichis made to appear larger by this external additionof a black ring; and many even suppose thestimulus its application gives to be beneficial to thesight. It is made in various ways. Some useantimony, black oxide of manganese, preparationsof lead, and other mineral substances : others thepowder, or the lamp black of burnt almonds, orfrankincense ; and many prefer a mixture of differentingredients.Mr. Lane* is perfectly correct in stating thatthe expression "painted her face," which Jezebel issaid to have done, when Jehu came to Jezreel, isModern Egyptians, vol. i. p. 43.382 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. X.in the Hebrew, "painted her eyes* ;" the same isagain mentioned in Jeremiah and Ezekiel; andthe lengthened form of the ancient Egyptian eye,represented in the paintings, was probably produced,as Mr. Lane supposes, by this means.Such is the effect described by Juvenal,Pliny § and other writers, who notice the customamong the Romans. At Rome it was considereddisgraceful for men to adopt it, as atpresent in the East, except medicinally ; but, if wemay judge from the similarity of the eyes of menand women in the paintings at Thebes, it appearsto have been used by both sexes among the ancientEgyptians.Many of these Kohl bottles have been found inthe tombs, together with the bodkin used for applyingthe moistened powder. They are of variousmaterials, usually stone, wood, or pottery, sometimescomposed of two, sometimes of four and fiveseparate cells, apparently containing each a mixture,differing slightly in its quality and hue, from theother three. Many were simple round tubes,vases, or small boxes : some were ornamentedwith the figure of an ape, or monster, supposed to2 Kings, ix. 30. nary. In our translation, " She painted herface, and tired her head, and looked out at a window." In the marginput her eyes in painting."f Ezek. xxiii. 40. " For whom thou didst wash thyself, paintedthine eyes, and decked thyself with ornaments." In Jeremiah (iv. 30.),it is in Hebrew " eyes."X Juv. Sat. ii. 93. : —lUe supercilium matilda fuligine tantumObliqua product acu, pingitque tremensAttollens oculis."Plin. Ep. vi. 2.PINS AND NEEDLES.5 6 7No. 411. Boxes, or bottles, for holding the A'oA/, for staining the eyelids.1. In Mr. Burton's collection, c is the bodkin for applying the Ko/il. The others arein the museum of Alnwick Castle.assist in holding the bottle between his arms, whilethe lady dipped into it the pin, with which shepainted her eyes ; and others were in imitation ofa column made of stone, or rich porcelain of thechoicest manufacture.Pins and needles were also among the articles ofthe toilet, which have been occasionally found in thetombs. The former are frequently of considerablelength, with large gold heads ; and some, of a differentform, tapering gradually to a point, merelybound with gold at the upper end, without anyprojecting head, seven or eight inches in length,appear to have been intended for arranging theplaits or curls of hair ; like those used in Eng-384- THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. X.No. 412. Needles, Pins, and Earrings.1, 2, Bronze needles in the Museum of Alnwick Castle, 3 and 3| inches long. 3, Largegold-headed pin, in the Berlin collection. 4, Another of smaller size. 5, Silver earringin my possession, one and four tenths of an inch in diameter. 6, Gold earring in theBerlin Museum, one and one third of an inch in diameter. 7, Another, seen from above.land, in the days of Elizabeth, for nearly the samepurpose.Some needles were of bronze, from three tothree and a half inches in length ; but as few havebeen found, we are not able to form any opinionrespecting their general size and quality, particularlyof those used for fine work, which must havebeen of a very minute kind.One of the principal objects of the toilet wasthe mirror. It was of mixed metal, chieflycopper, most carefully wrought and highly polished; and so admirably did the skill of theEgyptians succeed in the composition of metals,that this substitute for our modern looking-glasswas susceptible of a lustre, which has even beenpartially revived at the present day, in some ofthose discovered at Thebes, though buried in theearth for many centuries.CHAP. X.METAL MIRRORS.The mirror itself was nearly round, insertedinto a handle of wood, stone, or metal, whose formvaried according to the taste of the owner. Somepresented the figure of a female, a flower, a column,or a rod ornamented with the head of Author, abird, or a fancy device ; and sometimes the face ofa typhonian monster was introduced to support theNo. 413. Metal Mirrors.I, 3, 4, Mr. Salt's collection 2, From a painting at Thebes. 4, is about 11 inches high.mirror, serving as a contrast to the features whosebeauty was displayed within it. The same kind ofmetal mirror was used by the Israelites, who doubtlessbrought them from Egypt ; and the brazenlaver made by Moses for the tabernacle, was composed*' of the looking-glasses of the women, whichassembled at the door of the tabernacle of the congregations"*Exod. xxviii. 8. " He made the laver of brass, and the foot of itof brass, of the looking-glasses." The word brass, " nahas," is used inVOL. III. C CTHE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS.CHAP. X.When walking from home, Egyptian gentlemenfrequently carried sticks, varying from threeother Metal Mirrors.No. 414 Fig. 1, In Mr. Salt's collect 415. — In the possession of Dr. Hogg.tion ; with a wooden handle. Fig. 2,in the M museum of Alnwick Castle.2, and 3, show the bottom of the handle,to which something has been fastened.or four, to about six feet in length, some ofwhich were surmounted with a knob, imitatingNo 416. Walking sticks found at Thebes. 2, is of cherry-wood in Mr. Salt'scollection. 3, shows the peg at the side.a flower* ; and others with the more usual pegHebrew, as in Arabic, to denote copper in any form, or with any alloy.The " looking-glass," or mirror, is in Hebrew and Arabic, mirth, orniirah. The roots of these two words, and probably of the Coptic, areWood-cut, No. 41'r./g. 4. and No. 416 a. fig. 1.CHAP. X. WALKING STICKS. 387projecting from one side*, some of which have beenfound at Thebes. One in the possession of Mr.Salt, of the latter form, was of cherry wood, andonly three feet three inches long ; and those Ihave seen with the lotus head were generally aboutthe same length. Others appear to have beenmuch longer ; the sculptures represent them at1 2 3 4No. 417. Priests and other persons of rank walking with sticks. Thebes.least six feet ; and one brought to England by Mr.Maddox was about five feet in length.On entering a house they left their stick in thehall, or at the door ; and poor men were sometimesemployed to hold the sticks of the guestswho had come to a party on foot, being rewardedby the master of the house, for their trouble,with a trifling compensation in money, with theirdinner, or a piece of meant to carry to their family.The name of each person was frequently written onWood-cut, No.417./g. 2. and 416«./g. 2.according to Pliny, (xv. 23.) this tree was introduced into Italyby Lucullus, from Pontius, and thence went to Britain. He says itwould not grow in Egypt, and it is not now found there; but is notaspecies buiigcnous in the north of our island ?X Vide Plate \2.fig. 10. Vol. II.C C 2388 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. X.his Stick*, in hieroglyphics (instances of whichI have seen in those found at Thebes) ; for whichreason a hard wood was preferred, as the acacia,which seems to have been more generally usedthan any other.BATHS. DOCTORS.We have little knowledge of the nature of theirbaths, but as they were forbidden in deep mourningto indulge in them, we may conclude theywere considered as a luxury, as well as a necessarycomfort.The only instance I have met with in the paintingsis in a tomb at Thebes, where a lady is representedwith four attendants, who wait upon her,and perform various duties.One removes the jewellery and clothes she hastaken off, or suspends them to a stand in theapartment ; another pours water from a vase overher head, as the third rubs her arms and bodywith her open hands ; and a fourth seated nearher, holds a sweet scented flower to her nose,and supports her as she sits. The same subject istreated nearly in the same manner on some of theGreek vases, the water being poured over thebather who kneels, or is seated on the ground.Warm as well as cold baths were used by theEgyptians, though for ordinary ablutions coldwater § was preferred ; and both were probablyrecommended and taken medicinally, when occasionrequired.Conf. Num. xvii. 2. " Write thou every man's name uponhis rod." f Diod. i. 72.J Diodorus (i. stays they were even kept for the sacred animals^ Herodot. ii. .37,CHAP. X.THE BATH.The Egyptians paid great attention to health,and ''so wisely," says Herodotus*, "was medicinemanaged by them, that no doctor was per-herodotus.ii. H-i.c c 3390 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. X.mitted to practise any but his own peculiarbranch. Some were oculists, who only studieddiseases of the eye ; others attended solely tocomplaints of the head; others to those of the teeth ;some again confined themselves to complaints ofthe intestines ; and others to secret and internalmaladies : accoucheurs being usually, if not always,women. *They received certain salaries from the publictreasury ; and after they had studied those preceptswhich had been laid down from the experience oftheir predecessors, they were permitted to practise ;and, in order to ensure their attention to the prescribedrules, and to prevent dangerous experimentsbeing made upon patients, they were punishedif their treatment was contrary to the establishedsystem: and the death of a person entrusted to theircare, under such circumstances, was adjudged tothem as a capital offence If, however, every remedyhad been administered according to the sanatorylaw, they were absolved from blame t; and"these provisions," says Diodorus, " were madewith the persuasion that few persons could be capableof introducing any new treatment superior towhat had been sanctioned and approved by the skillof old practitioners."Though paid by government as a body, it wasAs at present in Egypt. Vide Exod. i. 15.-)- Pliny observes, there is no law to punish their ignorance at Rome,and that a physician is the only man who can kill another with impunity'." Nulla praeterea lex, queen puniat inscitiam capital, nullusexemplum vindicate. Discount pericles nostrils, et experiments permortes agent : medicoque tantum hominem occidisse impunity summaest." Plin. xxix. 1.t Diod. i. 82.CHAP. X. DOCTORS* SALARIES AND FEES. 391not illegal to receive fees for their advice andattendance; and demands could be made in everyinstance, except on a foreign journey, and onmilitary service, when patients were visited free ofexpense.*The principal mode adopted by the Egyptiansfor preventing illness was attention to regimen anddiet; " being persuaded that the majority of diseasesproceed from indigestion and excess of eating ; "and they had frequent recourse to abstinence,emetics, slight doses of medicine, and other simplemeans of relieving the system t, which some personswere in the habit of repeating every two orthree days. " Those who live in the corn country,"as Herodotus terms itt, were particular for theirattention to health. " During three successivedays, every month, they submitted to a regularcourse of medicine ;" from the conviction that illnesswas wont to proceed from some irregularityin diet ; and if preventives were ineffectual, theyhad recourse to suitable remedies, adopting a modeof treatment very similar to that mentioned byDiodorus.The employment of numerous drugs in Egypt hasbeen mentioned by sacred and profane writers ; andthe medicinal properties of many herbs which growin the deserts, particularly between the Nile andRed Sea, are still known to the Arabs ; thoughtheir application has been but imperfectly recordedDiod. loc, cit.•j- " Oipantvovai ra ffujfiara /cXuffjuoif, scat vriffreiaig, kcu tfitroiQ." —Diod. loc. cit.t Herodot. ii. 77.C C i392 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. X.and preserved. " O virgin, daughter of Egypt,"says Jeremiah*, *' in vain shalt thou use manymedicines, for thou shalt not be cured." Homer,in the Odyssey, describes the many valuablemedicines given by Polydamna, the wife of Thongs,to Helen while in Egypt, " a country whosefertile soil produces an infinity of drugs, some salutaryand some pernicious ; where each physician,possesses knowledge above all other men;" andPliny makes frequent mention of the productionsof that country, and their use in medicine.He also notices the physicians of Egypt t ; andas if their number § was indicative of the manymaladies to which the inhabitants were subject,he observes, that it was a country productive ofnumerous diseases. In this, however, he does notagree with Herodotus ||, who affirms that, "afterthe Libyans, there are no people so healthy as theEgyptians, which may be attributed to the invariablenature of the seasons in their country." InPliny's time, the introduction of luxurious habitsand excess had probably wrought a change in thepeople ; and to the same cause may be attributedthe numerous complaints among the Romans,*' unknown to their fathers and ancestor'sThe same author tells us, that the Egyptians examinedthe bodies after death, to ascertain the natureof the diseases of which they had died * * ; and we canJeremy. Lxvi. 1 1.f Homer, Od. iv. 229. { Plin. xxvi. 1.§ Herodotus says, " Every place is full of doctors," in Egypt, ii. 84.II Herodot. i. 77. ^ Plin. loc. cit.** Plin. xix. 3. " In egypt, regius corpora niortuoruni ad scrutiniesmorbus insecantibus."CHAP. X. THEIR SKILL KNOWN ABROAD. iJQSreadily believe that a people, so far advanced in civilisationand the principles of medicine, as to assigneach physician his peculiar branch, would have resortedto this effectual method of acquiring knowledgeand experience, for the benefit of the community.It is evident that the medical skill of theEgyptians was well known even in foreign anddistant countries ; and we learn from Herodotus*,that Cyrus and Darius both sent to Egypt formedical men. But though their physicians areoften mentioned by Herodotus and other writers,the only indication of medical attendance occursin the paintings of Beni Hassan, where a doctorand a patient are twice represented.b*. — »No. 418. Doctors and patients. Bari Hassan.Diodorus tells must, that dreams were regardedin Egypt with religious reverence, and the prayersHerodot. iii. 1. and 132.-j- Diodorus' account of learning remedies from dreams, is not quiteconsistent with the positive observations they took so much care tomake. The advocates for animal magnetism may perhaps see it in thispassage of the historian. . . .i. 25.394 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. X.of the devout were often rewarded by the gods,with an indication of the remedies their sufferingsrequired ; but this and magic* were only alast resource, when the skill of the physician hadbeen baffled, and all hopes of their recovery werelost : and a similar superstitious feeling inducedthem to offer ex votes in their temples for thesame purpose.They consisted of various kinds. Some personspromised a certain sum for the maintenanceof the sacred animals, belonging to the deity whoseinterposition they solicited ; which, in the caseof children, was decided by weighing a certainportion of the hair of their head, '* either all, orhalf, or a third t," shaved expressly for the purpose; and as soon as the cure had been effected,they accomplished their vow by giving an equalweight of silver to the curators.These persons occasionally visited different partsof the country, carrying with them the banners oftheir respective deities; and the credulity of the peasantsbeing frequently induced to solicit their aid,and to barter the doubtful assistance of the god forthe real rewards lavished on his artful servants,much money was collected by them. And so profitablewas it, that neither the change of religion,nor the simplicity of Islam, have been able todiscard the custom : and the guardians of thesheikh's tombs, in like manner, send their emissarieswith flags and drums to different parts of theWisdom of Solomon, xvii. 8.f Herodot. ii. 65.CHAP. X.EXVOTOS.country, to levy contributions from the credulous,in return for the promised assistance of their weller,or patron saint.After the cure was effected, they frequentlysuspended a model of the restored part, in thetemple of the god, whose interposition they hadinvoked ; precisely in the same manner as in thesheikh's tombs of modern Egypt, and in the Romancatholic chapels of Italy and other countries, consecratedto the Virgin, or a saint ; and ears, eyes, distortedarms, and other members, were dedicated asmemorials of their gratitude and superstition.No. 419. Exvotos.1, Ivory hand, in Mr. Salt's collection. 2, Stone tablet, dedicated to Amunre, for therecovery of a complaint in the ear : found at Thebes. 3, An ear of terra cotta in mypossession, from Thebes.Sometimes travellers, who happened to pass bya temple, inscribed a votive sentence on the walls,to indicate their respect for the deity, and solicithis protection during their journey ; the completeformula of which contained the adoration ()of the writer, with the assurance that he396 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. X.had been mindful of his wife, his family, and friends ;and the reader of the inscription was sometimesincluded in a share of the blessings it solicited.The date of the king's reign, and the day of themonth were also added, with the profession andparentage of the writer. The complete formula ofthe proskunema was as follows : *' The adorationof Caius Capitoline, son of Flavour Julius, of thefifth troop of Theban horse, to the goddess Isis,with ten thousand names. And I have beenmindful of (or have made an adoration for) allthose who love me, and my consort, and children,and all my household, and for him who reads this.In the year 12 of the emperor Tiberius Caesar,the 15th of Paiini.The Egyptians, according to Pliny *, claimedthe honour of having invented the art of curingdiseases. Indeed, the study of medicine andsurgery appears to have commenced at a veryearly period in Egypt, since Athothes, the secondking of the country, is stated to have writtenupon the subject of anatomy t; and the schools ofAlexandria continued till a late period to enjoythe reputation, and display the skill, they had inheritedfrom their predecessors. Hermes t wassaid to have written six books on medicine, thefirst of which related to anatomy § ; and the variousrecipes, known to have been beneficial, were re-plain.vii. 36.f Vide Vol. I. p. 25.X Hermes and Athothes nuit have been confoumletl, or they may bein this instance the same person. The god Hermes, or Tiioth, generallyimplied intellect. <> Clem. Alex. Strom, vi.CHAP. X. EMBALMING. 397corded, with their peculiar cases, in the memoirs ofphysic, inscribed among the laws already alludedto ; which were deposited in the principal templeof the place, as at Memphis in that of Pthah, orVulcan.The embalmers were probably members of themedical profession, since the knowledge, requiredfor that purpose, appears to be connected with theirpeculiar studies ; and the Bible expressly states,that '* the physicians* embalmed" Jacob. Thispart, however, belongs more properly to the funeralceremonies of the Egyptians, into which I donot here intend to enter; reserving that portion ofmy subject to a future opportunity, and to a work,whose less contracted dimensions will enable meto introduce the paintings connected with it, on amore suitable scale than these pages will permit ;I shall also take advantage of the same opportunityof entering more fully into the mythology of theEgyptians, and the ceremonies connected withtheir religion.Gen. 1. 2.Topographical Plan of the Pyramids of Geese.A, Entrance to the great pyramid.B, Entrance to the second pyramid.C C, Long pits, by some supposed for mixingthe mortar.D, Pyramid of the daughter of Cheops(Herodotus, ii. 126.).E, Pavement of black stones (basaltic trap),the same as found on the causeways of thepyramids of Saqqdra.F, Remains of masonry.G, Round inclosures of crude brick, of Arabdate, at N. E. angle of this pyramid.H, Tombs of individuals, with deep pits.1, The tomb of numbers.K, Two inclined passages, meeting underground,apparently once belonging to asmall pyramid that stood over them.L L, The rock is here cut to a level surface.M, A narrow and shallow trench cut in therock.N, A square space cut in the rock, probablyto receive and support the corner stone ofthe casing of the pyramid.P, Here stood a tomb which has receivedthe title of the Temple of Osiris.Q, Tomb of trades, to west of tombs H.K, A pit cased with stone, of modern date.S, The third pyramid.T, Three small pyramids.U, V, Ruined buildings, whose original useit is now difficult to determine.W W W, Fragments of stone, arranged inthe manner of a wall.X, A few palms and sycamores, with a well.Y, Southern stone causeway.Z, Northern causeway, repaired by the Caliphs.a, Tombs cut in the rock.b, Masonry.c, Black stones.rf rf. Tombs cut in the rock.c, The sphinx./, Pits, probably unopened.g. Pits.A, Stone ruin on a rock.i, Doorway, or passage, through the causeway.h, A grotto in the rock./, Inclined causeway, part of Y.tn, n. Tombs in the rock.o. Some hieroglyphics on the rock.p. Tombs cut in the scarp of the rock.q. Stone wall.r. Steps cut in the rock, near the N. w. angleof the great pyramids,t. Magnetic south, in 1832 and 1836, correspondingto M N ; T N being " truenorth."The names 1. and 2. are of king Ergamenes,mentioned by Diodorus, lib. iii. s, 6., andanother Ethiopian monarch, found atDakkeh.APPENDIX A.PRINCIPAL OBJECTS TO BE VISITED IN A TOUR UP THENILE.In order to render this book more useful to travellers inEgypt, I shall introduce the notes I had drawn up for somefriends, who required a brief statement of the principal objectsworthy of a visit, on the Nile, without having to seek their orderand position in the numerous pages of voluminous books oftravels ; referring the reader, who wishes for a more detailedaccount of them, to my Egypt and Thebes.At Alexandria are Pompey's pillar, with its inscription, of thetime of Diocletian ; the obelisks ; some traces of the ancientstreets •, and, along the coast to the west, the catacombs, ofGreek time ; and, to the east, beyond the French lines, theancient Roman station, where the English and French armiesengaged.Between Alexandria and Cairo, a journey of three days, thesite of Sa'xs, now Sa-el-Hagar ; its large walls, the lake mentionedby Herodotus, and brick houses.Near Cairo, Heliopolis, now Matareeh, its obelisk ofOsirtasen I., remains of the walls and houses ; the station ofEgyptian Babylon, and the most of Amer, at old Cairo; thepyramids of Geese (Vide the plan), of Saqqara, and Dishonor.At Saqqara is a stone arch of the time of Psamaticus II., theoldest known. It is in a tomb, cut in the face of the rock, abouteast south east of the principal pyramid. At Mit-rainy, alarge colossus of Remeses II. ; mounds of Memphis ; somefragments of statues, and remains of building.On east bank, eight miles to the south of Cairo, quarries of Maas-ara,from which the stone used for part of the casing of the pyramidswas taken. Some hieroglyphic tablets, in one of which oxenare represented drawing a stone placed on a sledge. (Videwood-cut, No. 389.) A little beyond the modern village is an400 APPENDIX.inclined road, which leads from the quarries to the river. Thirtymiles further to the south, on the same bank, is Atfeeh ; moundsof Aphroditopolis ; no ruins. False pyramid on opposite bank.Three miles beyond, El Feshn, and on east bank, remains ofcrude brick ; the walls of an ancient village, called El Heebee,and some hieroglyphics.From Benisooefis the road to the Fyoom, which, when the Nile islow, maybe visited conveniently. A brick pyramid at Illahoon,another at El Hawara, and vestiges of the labyrinth. Obeliskat Biggig. Ruins on and near the lake Mceris, and at Qasr Wharton.From Aboogirgeh is the shortest road to Banana (Oxy-inches) ; mounds ; no ruins. Gebel e'Tayr, north end, grottoor rock temple, called Babayn ; convent further to the south.Eight miles below Minyeh, is Tehneh (Acorns), on east bank.A Greek Ptolemaic inscription on the face of the cliff; tombshewn in the rock, with small inscriptions at the doors : Romanfigures in high relief, on the upper part of the rock ; some hieroglyphictablets ; quarries on the top of the mountain ; atank, &c.Same (east bank), seven miles above Minyeh, Kom ahmar,some grottoes, and ruins of an old town. Nine miles further, eastbank, Beni Hassan ; very fine grottoes, with curious paintings ;and about a mile and a half further, a grotto, or rock temple, ofPast (Bubastis, or Diana) ; the Spes Artemis. Cat mummiesin the ravine.Antinoe, now Shekh Abated, few remains of the town ; atheatre, the principal streets, baths, &c. ; outside the town, onthe east, is the hippodrome. The grottoes in the mountain aresculptured, and have some Christian inscriptions. A littleto the north of Antinoe are the remains, apparently, of Best,scarcely worthy of a visit.At El Bersheh, a grotto on the mountain, in which a colossusis represented on a sledge, ( Vide wood-cut, No. 390.) At Osh-mornay, west bank, no longer any remains of HeliopolisMagna. At Gebel Toon, a mountain skirting the desert to thewest, are mummy pits, a tablet of hieroglyphics, and statues inhigh relief At Mellowed, and at Tanoof, (Tanis superior,)APPENDIX. 401mounds, but no ruins. At Sbayda, at corner of mountains oneast bank, crude brick walls, and some grottoes.At Shekh Said, the mountains recede to the eastward,leaving the river ; and a little beyond is the village of Tel elAmarna, to the north of which are the remains of a small town,and to the south, the ruins of a city, which I suppose to beAlabastron. All the stone buildings have been quite destroyed,but some of the brick houses remain. Near the crude bricktowers of the temple are the largest houses. ( Vide plan, PlateVI. Vol.11, p. 106.) To the east are several fine grottoes in theface of the mountain, with curious sculptures; and on the summitof it is an ancient alabaster quarry.Six miles below Manfaloot, at el Haryib, ruins of an old town,in a ravine of the Gebel Aboolfaydee ; numerous dog and catmummies. Near el Maabdeh, opposite Manfaloot, crocodilemummies in chambers of great extent in the mountain.At E'Sioot (Lycopolis), the capital of Upper Egypt, grottoes;wolf mummies : the modern cemetery is prettily laid out. Gow(Annapolis), a few stones of the temple, close to the river;some grottoes at the corner of the mountain, to the north,below Gow, but not containing good sculpture. Shekh Heredes,small grottoes ; Roman statue at the base of the mountain,cut out of a piece of rock. The snake of Shekh Heredesla still supposed to perform cures.To the west of Soohag, near the corner of mountains, old townof Arthritis ; a Greek inscription in the ruined temple ; grottoesin the mountain, and to the north is the white monastery, orDayrr Alba Shnoodee. Nearly opposite Soohag is E'Khmim(Panopolis) ; Greek inscription of the temple of Pan ; andsome remains of other stone buildings.Mensheeh (Ptolemaic's Hermit), west bank. Eight milesabove E'Khmim, remains of a stone quay. From Girgeh gotoAbydus (now Arabatel matson), three hours' ride, and sendon the boat to Bellianeh, returning to the boat in the eveningat Bellianeh, two hour's ride ; or, coming down the river, stop atBellianeh, and send on the boat to Girgeh. At Abydus, twotemples, and many tombs.How (Diospolis para), has very few remains, of Ptolemaicor Roman time. In mounds at the edge of the desert, a mileVOL. III. D D402 APPENDIX.and a half south of How, some tombs ; one, of a certainDionysius, son of one Ptolemy, has some sculpture.Qasr e'Syad (Chenoboscion), remains of a quay ; about onemile beyond the eastern mouth of the canal of this village aresome very ancient grottoes, with kings' names. ( F?V/e wood-cut,No. 381.) Tender (Tentyris), opposite Qeneh ; two temples,inscriptions, zodiac, &c. Qeneh is famous for its manufactureof porous jars. From it roads lead to Kossayr on the Red Sea.Soft (Coptos) ; ruins of the old town, and of a temple ; aChristian church ; canals, &:c. ; at the village of el Gala, to thenorth, is a small Roman Egyptian temple.Quos (Apollinopolis para) ; no more ruins left; at a well onthe north of the town, is a Ptolemaic monolith, with hieroglyphics,converted into a tank ; and a few stone remains of early time, inthe plain to the west, near a Shekh's tomb. Thebes (Diospolismagna) , on the east bank, Karnak and Luqsor ; on the west,the tombs of the kings, private tombs, several temples, colossiof the plain, &c. ; for these I refer the reader to my Egypt andThebes.Ferment (Hermonthis), west bank; temple and earlyChristian church. Trot, or E'Selemeeh (Tuphium); on eastbank Ptolemaic temple, much ruined, and concealed by thehovels of the peasants. Gebelayn, i. e. " the two hills," asmall ancient town in ruins, and grottoes, not worthy of avisit. At Tones and Soon, mounds of ancient towns, noruins.Esneh (Latopolis), fine portico, zodiac, and quay. At E'dayr,three miles to the north of Esneh, remains of a small temple ofthe Polemics and Caesar, lately destroyed. Thirteen milesfrom Esneh, near El Qenan, ruins of a quay, on west bank ; andthree miles further, a small stone pyramid; opposite the quay isthe junction of the limestone and sandstone. Four miles beyond,on east bank, is El Rab (Eilethyas) ; ruins of a very ancient town ;the temples lately destroyed : curious grottoes in the mountain ;and a short distance up the valley, are three small temples. Inthe bed of the ravine are ponds encrusted with natron.Edfoo (Apollinopolis magna), two temples. Eleven miles aboveEdfoo, and on east bank, remains of an old town, on face of hill,fortified with towers of Arab construction. Silsilis (now HagarAPPENDIX. 403Simili), quarries of sandstone, used for building the temples ofUpper Egypt; tablets, and grottoes. Kom onibo (Ombos) ;two temples ; ancient stone gateway in a crude brick wall onthe east side of the enclosure of the temples ; houses burnt.At E'Sooan (Syene) ruins of small temple of Roman date ;some columns; Saracen wall, and Cufic tombstones; granitequarries; in one of which is a broken obelisk; Latin inscriptionof Caracalla, near another quarry ; road to Phase, and wall ;numerous hieroglyphic tablets on the rocks. Island of Elephantine; opposite the projecting rocks of E'Sooan, is the Nilo-meter, which is a staircase, with Greek inscriptions, relating tothe rise of the Nile. Granite gateway, bearing the name ofAlexander, the son of Alexander the Great.At the northern end of the cataract is the island of Sehayl.Few vestiges of a temple; hieroglyphic tablets on the rocks.Go from E'Sooan to Sehtiyl in a boat, and ride to Philae. AtPhilae temples and ruins. Island of Bigger, opposite Philae, tothe west, ruined temple, tablets, &c.NUBIA.Dabdde (Parembole), temple, west bank. Kerdassy, ruinsand quarries. Tara (Tapis), two small ruins, and stone enclosures.Kalabshee (Talis), large temple ; quarries ; and, onhill behind it, to the northward, a small but interesting temple,called Bay el Wcllee, cut in the rock, of the time of Remeses II.Candour, temple. Gers Hos^ayn (Tutzis), temple cut in therock, of the time of Remeses II.Dakkeh (Pelvis) ; temple of Ptolemaic and Roman date. Ithas also the names of two Ethiopian princes *, Ergamun, orErgamenes (mentioned by Diodorus, iii. 6., as a contemporaryof Ptolemy Philadelphus), and Ataramun ? ; many Greek inscriptions.Opposite Dakkeh, ruins of Contra Pelvis, or of .Cortes (Corti) ; few remains. Maharraka, or Oofideena, ruinsof Hierasycaininon ; style bad, and all of late date : Isis is representedunder the sacred Jig tree. Sabooa ; temple of the time ofRemeses II., with avenue of sphinxes; the adytum is cut in theVide the wood-cut in page 398.^gs. 1. 2. 3. and 4.40-4 APPENDIX.rock, the rest built. Hassan, or Amanda, a temple of Thothmes,ancient ; nearly opposite to it is Dayrr or Dire, on east bank, thecapital of Nubia, which has a temple, cut in the rock, of thetime of Ilemeses II.Ibreem (Primus para) ; part of the ancient wall on southside of town ; remains of a stone building amidst the houses;some small grottoes below the town, near the river. Aboo-simnel, two temples, cut in the rock, the finest Egyptian monumentsout of Thebes : they are of the time of Remeses II.At Ferayg, nearly opposite, on east bank, a small temple in therock. Arras, on west bank, few remains ; grottoes, with Copticinscriptions, some distance from the river. Wadeee Halfehh ;remains of three buildings, on west bank ; fine view of thesecond cataract from a rock on the same bank, a short walk tothe south of Wadeee Halfehh.A day and a half beyond Wadeee Halfehh are the two smalltemples of Samuel, and the third cataract.The distances from the Mediterranean to the second cataractare as follow : —From Rosetta to Cairo - - about 110 miles. /4 -Cairo to Benisooef - - - - 83 ' ,Benisooef to Minyeh - - - - S5 -S" ^ '•■Minyeh to E'Sioot - - --106$^%E'Sioot to Girgeh - - - - 97 ^ ''Girgeh to Qeneh - - - - 73 M ,Qeneh to Thebes - - - - - 4:9 ^ ^ "i.Thebes to Esneh . 38 3 2.Esneh to E'Sooan . , - - lOO ^ "^ ,E'Sooan to Wadeee Halfehh - - - 219 ^1 if '-^Total from Rosetta to Wadeee Halfehh 960 milesles. (j^^THE END.Printed by A. Spottiswoode,Nevv-Street-Square.