YARROW REVISITED,ANDOTBEZt POEMS.BYWILLIAM WORDSWORTH.Poets dwell on earthTo clothe whate'er the soul admires and loves %With language and with numbers' »Akensid-s.LONDON:PRINTED FORHangman, Trees, ORME, BROWN, GREEN, & Hangman,Paternoster-row J ANDEDWARD Moon, DOVER STREET.1835.TOSAMUEL ROGERS, ESQ.ASA TESTIMONY OF FRIENDSHIP,ANDAN ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF INTELLECTUAL OBLIGATIONS,THIS VOLUMEIS AFFECTIONATELY INSCRIBED,BYWILLIAM WORDSWORTH.Rydal Mount,Dec. 11. 1834.74PADVERTISEMENT.It was the Author's intention to reserve thecontents of this Volume to be interspersed insome future edition of his miscellaneous Poems;but it is obvious that, by so doing, the purchasersof his former works, who might wish forthese Pieces also, would have reason to complainif they could not procure them without beingobliged to re-purchase what they already possessed:from this consideration, and at therequest of many of his friends, they are nowpublished in a separate volume, uniform withformer editions.CONTENTS.POEMS COMPOSED DURING A TOUR INSCOTLAND, AND ON THE ENGLISHBORDER, IN THE AUTUMN OF 1831.PageYarrow Revisited - - - - 1Sonnets.On the Departure of Sir Walter Scott from Abbots-ford,for Naples - - - 9A Place of Burial in the South of Scotland - 10On the Sight of a Manse in the South of Scotland 1 1Composed in Rosin Chapel, during a Storm - 12The Trosachs - - - - - 13The Pibroch's Note, discountenanced or mute - 14Composed in the Glen of Loch Etive - - 15Eagles, composed at Dunois Castle in the Bay ofOban - - . - - - 16In the Sound of Mull - - . . 17At Tyndrum - - - - - 18The Earl of Breadalbane's ruined Mansion, andFamily Burial-place, near Killing - - 19Rest and be thankful, at the Head of Glencoe - 20Highland Hut - - - - - 21X CONTENTS.PageThe Brownie - - - - - 22To the Planet Venus, an Evening Star. Composedat Loch Lomond - - - - 23Bothwell Castle - - - - - 24Picture of Daniel in the Lion's Den, at HamiltonPalace - - - - - 25The Avon, a Feeder of the Anna - - 26Suggested by a View from an Eminence in Ingle-woodForest - - - - - 27Heart's-horn Tree, near Penrith - - 28Countess's Pillar - - - - 29Roman Antiquities. (From the Roman Station atOld Penrith) - - - - 30Apology for the foregoing - - - 31The Highland Broach - - - - 33Notes - - - - - 38The Egyptian Maid; or, the Romance of theWater Lily - - - - 45Ode, composed on May Morning - - 69To May - - - . - 73Inscription - - . - 78Elegiac Musings in the Grounds of Coleorton Hall,the Seat of the late Sir George Beaumont, Bart. 80Epitaph - - - - - 83Inscription intended for a Stone in the Grounds ofRydal Mount - - - - 85Written in an Album - ^ - - ib.CONTENTS. XIPageIncident at Bruges - - - - 86A Jewish Family. (In a small Valley opposite St.Roar, upon the Rhine) - - - 89Devotional Incitements - - - 92The Armenian Lady's Love - - - 96The Primrose of the Rock - - - 106Presentiments - - - - 110The Poet and the caged Turtledove - - 115Sonnets.Chatsworth! thy stately Mansion - - - 117Desponding Father ! mark this altered Bough - 11Roman Antiquities discovered, at Bishopstone,Herefordshire - - - - 119St. Catherine of Sudbury - . - - 120The Russian Fugitive. Part I. - - . 121Part II. - - 128Part III. - - 133Part IV. - - 138Sonnets.Why art thou silent ! - - - - I45Four fiery Steeds impatient of the Rein - - 146To the Author's Portrait - - - 147Gold and Silver Fishes, in a Vase - - 148Liberty. C Sequel to the above) - - 151Xll CONTENTS.PageEvening Voluntaries - - - . I59Calm is the fragrant Air, and loth to lose - 161Not in the lucid Intervals of Life - - 1 63By the Side of Rydal Mere - - - 165Soft as a Cloud is yon blue Ridge - - 167The Leaves that rustled on this Oak-crowned Hill 169The Sun, that seemed so mildly to retire . 171By the Sea-side - - - - 173The Sun has long been set - - - 175Throned in the Sun's descending Car - - 177The Labourer's Noon-day Hymn - - 178A Wren's Nest - - - - 180Sonnets, 1833, composed during a Tour - - 185Adieu ! Rydalian Laurels ! that have grown - 187Why should the Enthusiast, journeying through thisIsle - - - - - 188They called Thee merry England, in old Time - 189To the River Greta, near Keswick - - 190To the River Derwent - - - 191In Sight of the Town of Cockermouth - - 192Address from the Spirit of Cockermouth Castle - 193Nun's Well, Brigham - - --194To a Friend (on the Banks of the Derwent) - 195Mary Queen of Scots (landing at the Mouth of theDerwent, Workington) - - - 196In the Channel, between the Coast of Cumberlandand the Isle of Man - - - - 197CONTENTS* XlllPageAt Sea off the Isle of Man - - - 198Desire we past Illusions to recall? - - 199On entering Douglas Bay, Isle of Man - - 200By the Sea-shore, Isle of Man - - - 201Isle of Man - - - - - 202The Retired Marine Officer, Isle of Man - 203By a Retired Mariner (a Friend of the Author) - 204At Bala^sala, Isle of Man. ( Supposed to be writtenby a Friend of the Author) - - - 205tynwald Hill - - - - 206Despond who will — / heard a Voice exclaim - 207In the Frith of Clyde, Ails Crag. (July 17. 1833) 208On the Frith of Clyde. (In a Steam-boat) - 209On revisiting Dunolly Castle - - 210The Dunolly Eagle - - - - 211CaveofStaffa - - - - 212CaveofStaffa - - - - 213CaveofStaffa - - - - 214Flowers on the Top of the Pillars at the Entranceof the Cave - - - - 215On to iona! What can she afford - - 216iona. (Upon landing) - - - 217The Black Stones of iona - - - 218Homeward we turn. Isle of Columba's Cell - 219Greenock - 220"There!" said a Stripling, pointing with meetPride - - - - - 221Fancy and Tradition - - -^ « 222aXIV Contents.PageThe River Eden, Cumberland - - 223Monument of Mrs. Howard (by Nollekins) inEthereal Church, near Corby, on the Banks ofthe Eden - - - - 224Tranquillity ! the sovereign aim wert thou - 225Nunnery - - - - 226Steam-boats, Viaducts, and Railways - - 227Other ! in thy majestic Pile are seen - 228To the Earl of Lonsdale - - - 229To Cornelia M , Hampstead, Ullswater - 230Conclusion - - - - 231Notes - - - - 232Lines written in the Album of the Countess ofNov. 5. 1834 - - - 237The Somnambulism - - - - 241To , upon the Birth of her first-born Child,March, 1833 - - - - 251The Warning, a Sequel to the foregoing. March,1833 - - - - 255If this great World of Joy and Pain - - 263Sonnet, composed after reading a Newspaper of theDay - - - - 264Loving and Liking : irregular Verses addressed to aChild 265St. Bees, suggested in a Steam-boat off St. Bees'Heads - - - - 269Note - - - - - 280CONTENTS. XVSonnets.PageDeplorable his Lot who tills the Ground - 28 1The Vaudois - - - - 282Praised be the Rivers, from their Mountain-springs 283The Redbreast (suggested in a Westmoreland Cottage- - - . - 284To - - - - 288Rural Illusions - - - - 289This Lawn, &c. - - - - methoughton the Seasons - - - 292Humanity. (Written in the Year 1829) - 295Lines suggested by a Portrait from the Pencil ofF. Stone - - - - 301The foregoing Subject resumed - - 307Stanzas on the Power of Sound - - 309Postscript . - 323ERRATA AND EMENDATIONS.Page 13. line 6. from bottom, for " Guest" read " quest."Page 47. last two lines, read thus : —Became, as nearer to the Coast she drew,More glorious, with spread sail and streaming pendant."Page 48. line 5. read thus : —Was ever built with patient care."Page 85. lines 6 and 7. read thus : —So let it rest, — and time will comeWhen here the tender-hearted."YARROW REVISITED,ERRATUM.Page 108. line 6. for « In Gods redeeming love," read « IsGod's redeeming love."COMPOSED (two excepted) DURING A TOUR INSCOTLAND, AND ON THE ENGLISH BORDER,IN THE AUTUMN OF 1831.ERRATA AND EMENDATIONS.So let it rest, — and time will comeWhen here the tender-hearted."YARROW REVISITED,OTHER POEMS,COMPOSED (two excepted) DURING A TOUR INSCOTLAND, AND ON THE ENGLISH BORDER,IN THE AUTUMN OF 1831.YARROW REVISITED.[The following Stanzas are a memorial of a day passed withSir Walter Scott, and other Friends visiting the Banks of theYarrow under his guidance, immediately before his departurefrom Abbotsford, for Naples.The title Yarrow Revisited will stand in no need of explanation,for Readers acquainted with the Author's previouspoems suggested by that celebrated Stream.]The gallant Youth, who may have gained,Or seeks, a " Winsome Marrow'*Was but an Infant in the lapWhen first I looked on Yarrow ;Once more, by Newark's Castle-gateLong left without a Warder,I stood, looked, listened, and with Thee,Great Minstrel of the Border!B 2YARROW Ran I.'^ITED, 1831.Grave thoughts ruled wide on that sweet day,Their dignity instalHngIn gentle bosoms, while sere leavesWere on the bough, or falling ;But breezes played, and sunshine gleamed —The forest to embolden ;Reddened the fiery hues, and shotTransparence through the golden.For busy thoughts the Stream flowed onIn foamy agitation ;And slept in many a crystal poolFor quiet contemplation :No public and no private careThe freeborn mind enthralling.We made a day of happy hours,Our happy days recalling.Brisk Youth appeared, the Morn of youth,With freaks of graceful folly, —Life's temperate Noon, her sober Eve,Her Night not melancholy,Past, present, future, all appearedIn harmony united.Like guests that meet, and some from far,By cordial love invited.YARROW REVISITED, 1831.And if, as Yarrow, through the woodsAnd down the meadow ranging,Did meet us with unaltered face,Though we were changed and changing ;If, then some natural shadows spreadOur inward prospect over,The soul's deep valley was not slowIts brightness to recover.Eternal blessings on the Muse,And her divine employment IThe blameless Muse, who trains her SonsFor hope and calm enjoyment ;Albeit sickness lingering yetHas o'er their pillow brooded ;And Care waylay their steps — a SpriteNot easily eluded.For thee, O Scott ! compelled to changeGreen Eldon-hill and CheviotFor warm Vesuvius's vine-clad slopes ;And leave thy Tweed and TeviotFor mild Lorenzo's breezy waves ;May classic Fancy, linkingWith native Fancy her fresh aid,Preserve thy heart from sinking !B 36 YARROW REVISITED, 1831.O ! while they minister to thee,Each vying with the other.May Health return to mellow Age,With Strength, her venturous brother ;And Tiber, and each brook and rillRenowned in song and story.With unimagined beauty shine,Nor lose one ray of glory IFor Thou, upon a hundred streams.By tales of love and sorrow.Of faithful love, undaunted truth.Hast shed the power of Yarrow ;And streams unknown, hills yet unseen,Where'er thy path invite thee.At parent Nature's grateful call.With gladness must requite Thee.A gracious welcome shall be thine,Such looks of love and honourAs thy own Yarrow gave to meWhen first I gazed upon her ;Beheld what I had feared to see,Unwilling to surrenderDreams treasured up from early days,The holy and the tender.YARROW REVISITED, 1831.And what, for this frail world, were allThat mortals do or suffer,Did no responsive harp, no pen.Memorial tribute offer ?Yea, what were mighty Nature's self?Her features, could they win us,Unhelped by the poetic voiceThat hourly speaks within us ?Nor deem that localised RomancePlays false with our affections ;Unsanctified our tears — made sportFor fanciful dejections :Ah, no ! the visions of the pastSustain the heart in feelingLife as she is — our changeful Life,With friends and kindred dealing.Bear witness. Ye, whose thoughts that dayIn Yarrow's groves were centered ;Who through the silent portal archOf mouldering Newark entered.And clomb the winding stair that onceToo timidly was mountedBy the " last Minstrel," (not the last)Ere he his Tale recounted !B 48 YARROW REVISITED, 1831.Flow on for ever, Yarrow Stream !Fulfil thy pensive duty.Well pleased that future Bards should chantFor simple hearts thy beauty,To dream-light dear while yet unseen.Dear to the common sunshine,And dearer still, as now I feel.To memory's shadowy moonshine !SONNETS.I.ON THE DEPARTURE OF SIR WALTER SCOTT FROMABBOTSFORD, FOR NAPLES.A TROUBLE, not of clouds, or weeping rain.Nor of the setting sun's pathetic lightEngendered, hangs o'er Veil don's triple height :Spirits of Power, assembled there, complainFor kindred Power departing from their sight ;While Tweed, best pleased in chanting a blithe strain.Saddens his voice again, and yet again.Lift up your hearts, ye Mourners ! for the mightOf the whole world's good wishes with him goes ;Blessings and prayers in nobler retinueThan sceptred King or laurelled Conqueror knows,Follow this wondrous Potentate. Be true.Ye winds of ocean, and the midland sea.Wafting your Charge to soft Parthenope !B 510 SONNETS.II.A PLACE OF BURIAL IN THE SOUTH OF SCOTLAND.Part fenced by man, part by a ragged steepThat curbs a foaming brook, a Grave-yard lies ;The Hare's best couching-place for fearless sleep ;Which moonlit Elves, far seen by credulous eyes,Enter in dance. Of Church, or Sabbath ties,No vestige now remains ; yet thither creepBereft Ones, and in lowly anguish weepTheir prayers out to the wind and naked skies.Proud tomb is none ; but rudely-sculptured knights,By humble choice of plain old times, are seenLevel with earth, among the hillocks green :Union not sad, when sunny daybreak smitesThe spangled turf, and neighbouring thickets ringWith jubilate from the choirs of spring !SONNETS. 11III.ON THE SIGHT OF A MANSE IN THE SOUTH OFSCOTLAND.Say, ye far-travelled clouds, far-seeing hills,Among the happiest-looking Homes of men LScatter'd all Britain over, through deep glen,On airy upland, and by forest rills.And o'er wide plains whereon the sky distilsHer lark's loved warbling ; does aught meet your kenMore fit to animate the Poet's pen.Aught that more surely by its aspect fillsPure minds with sinless envy, than the AbodeOf the good Priest : who, faithful through all hoursTo his high charge, and truly serving God,Has yet a heart and hand for trees and flowers,Enjoys the walks his Predecessors trod,Nor covets lineal rights in lands and towers.B 612 SONNETS.IV.COMPOSED IN Rosin CHAPEL, DURING A STORM.The wind is now thy organist ; — a clank(We know not whence) ministers for a bellTo mark some change of service. As the swellOf music reached its height, and even when sankThe notes, in prelude, Rosin ! to a blankOf silence, how it thrilled thy sumptuous roof,Pillars, and arches, — not in vain time-proof.Though Christian rites be wanting ! From what bankCame those live herbs ? by what hand were they sownWhere dew falls not, where rain-drops seem unknown?Yet in the Temple they a friendly nicheShare with their sculptured fellows, that, green-grown.Copy their beauty more and more, and preach,Though mute, of all things blending into one.SONNETS. 13V.THE TROSACHS.There 's not a nook within this solemn Pass,But were an apt confessional for OneTaught by his summer spent, his autumn gone,That Life is but a tale of morning grass,Withered at eve. From scenes of art that chaseThat thought away, turn, and with watchful eyesFeed it 'mid Nature's old felicities.Rocks, rivers, and smooth lakes more clear than glassUntouched, breathed upon. Thrice happy Guest,If from a golden perch of aspen spray(October's workmanship to rival May)The pensive warbler of the ruddy breastThis moral sweeten by a heaven-taught lay,Lulling the year, with all its cares, to rest.14? SONNETS.VI.The Pibroch's note, discountenanced or mute ;The Roman kilt, degraded to a toyOf quaint apparel for a half-spoilt boy ;The target mouldering like ungathered fruit ;The smoking steam-boat eager in pursuit,As eagerly pursued ; the umbrella spreadTo weather-fend the Celtic herdsman's head —All speak of manners withering to the root,And some old honours, too, and passions high :Then may we ask, though pleased that thoughtshould rangeAmong the conquests of civility.Survives imagination — to the changeSuperior ? Help to virtue does it give ?If not, O Mortals, better cease to Hve !SONNETS. 15VII.COMPOSED IN THE GLEN OF LOCH ETIVE.This Land of Rainbows, spanning glens whose walls,Rock-built, are hung with rainbow coloured mists,Of far-stretched Meres, whose salt flood never rests,Of tuneful caves and playful waterfalls.Of mountains varying momently their crests —Proud be this Land ! whose poorest Huts are HallsWhere Fancy entertains becoming guests ;While native song the heroic Past recalls.Thus, in the net of her own wishes caught.The Muse exclaimed ; but Story now must hideHer trophies. Fancy crouch ; — the course of prideHas been diverted, other lessons taught,That make the Patriot-spirit bow her headWhere the all-conquering Roman feared to tread.16 SONNETS.VIII.EAGLES.COMPOSED AT DUNOLLIE CASTLE IN THE BAY OF OBAN.Dishonoured Rock and Ruin ! that, by lawTyrannic, keep the Bird of Jove embarkedLike a lone criminal whose life is spared.Vexed is he, and screams loud. The last I sawWas on the wing ; stooping, he struck with aweMan, bird, and beast ; then, with a Consort paired,From a bold headland, their loved aery^s guard,Flew high above Atlantic waves, to drawLight from the fountain of the setting sun.Such was this Prisoner once ; and, when his plumesThe sea-blast ruffles as the storm comes on,In spirit, for a moment he resumesHis rank 'mong freeborn creatures that live free.His power, his beauty, and his majesty.IX.IN THE SOUND OF MULL.Tradition, be thou mute ! Oblivion, throwThy veil, in mercy, o'er the records hungRound strath and mountain, stamped by the ancienttongueOn rock and ruin darkening as we go, —Spots where a word, ghost-like, survives to showWhat crimes from hate, or desperate lovelace sprung ;From honour misconceived, or fancied wrong,What feuds, not quenched but fed by mutual woe :Yet, though a wild vindictive Race, untamedBy civil arts and labours of the pen,Could gentleness be scorned by these fierce Men,Who, to spread wide the reverence that they claimedFor patriarchal occupations, namedYon towering Peaks, '^ Shepherds of Etive Glen ?"*In Gaelic, Buachaill Site.18 SONNETS.X.AT TYNDRUM.Enough of garlands, of the Arcadian crook.And all that Greece and Italy have sungOf Swains reposing myrtle groves among IOurs couch on naked rocks, will cross a brookSwoln with chill rains, nor ever cast a lookThis way or that, or give it even a thoughtMore than by smoothest pathway may be broughtInto a vacant mind. Can written bookTeach what they learn ? Up, hardy Mountaineer !And guide the Bard, ambitious to be OneOf Nature's privy council, as thou art.On cloud-sequestered heights, that see and hearTo what dread Power He delegates his partOn earth, who works in the heaven of heavens, alone.SONNETS. 19XI.THE EARL OF BREADALBANE S RUINED MANSION,AND FAMILY Burial-place, NEAR Killing.Well sang the Bard who called the Grave, in strainsThoughtful and sad, the " Narrow House' No styleOf fond sepulchral flattery can beguileGrief of her sting ; nor cheat, where he detainsThe sleeping dust, stern Death : how reconcileWith truth, or with each other, decked RemainsOf a once warm Abode, and that new Pile,For the departed, built with curious painsAnd mausoleum pomp ? Yet here they standTogether, — 'mid trim walks and artful bowers,To be looked down upon by ancient hills,That, for the living and the dead, demandAnd prompt a harmony of genuine powers ;Concord that elevates the mind, and stills20 SONNETS.XII.REST AND BE THANKFUL, AT THE HEAD OFGlencoe.Doubling and doubling with laborious walk,Who, that has gained at length the wished-for Height,This brief this simple way-side call can slight.And rests not thankful ? Whether cheered by talkWith some loved Friend, or by the unseen HawkWhistling to clouds and sky-born streams, that shineAt the sun's outbreak, as with light divine.Ere they descend to nourish root and stalkOf valley flowers. Nor, while the limbs repose.Will we forget that, as the Fowl can keepAbsolute stillness, poised aloft in air.And Fishes front, unmoved, the torrent's sweep, —So may the Soul, through powers that Faith bestows.Win rest, and ease, and peace, with bliss thatAngels share.SONNETS. 21XIII.HIGHLAND HUT.See what gay wild flowers deck this earth-built Cot,Whose smoke, forth-issuing whence and how it may,Shines in the greeting of the Sun's first rayLike wreaths of vapour without stain or blot.The limpid mountain rill avoids it not ;And why shouldst thou ? If rightly trained and bred,Humanity is humble, — finds no spotWhich her Heaven-guided feet refuse to tread.The walls are cracked, sunk is the flowery roof,Undressed the pathway leading to the door ;But love, as Nature loves, the lonely Poor ;Search, for their worth, some gentle heart wrong-proof.Meek, patient, kind, and, were its trials fewer,Belike less happy. — Stand no more aloof! *See Note, p. 38.22 SONNETS.XIV.THE BROWNIE.[Upon a small island not far from the head of Loch Lomond,are some remains of an ancient building, which was forseveral years the abode of a solitary Individual, one of thelast survivors of the Clan of Macfarlane, once powerful inthat neighbourhood. Passing along the shore opposite thisisland in the year 1814, the Author learned these particulars,and that this person then living there had acquired theappellation of " The Brownie." (See " The Brownie's Cell*'in the Author's Poems, vol. ii. p. 237. ed. of 1832, to whichthe following Sonnet is a sequel.]How disappeared he ? " Ask the newt and toad ;Ask of his fellow men, and they will tellHow he was found, cold as an icicle,Under an arch of that forlorn abode ;Where he, unpeopled, and by the gathering floodOf years hemm'd round, had dwelt, prepared to tryPrivation's worst extremities, and dieWith no one near save the omnipresent God.Verily so to live was an awful choice —A choice that wears the aspect of a doom ;But in the mould of mercy all is castFor Souls familiar with the eternal Voice ;And this forgotten Taper to the lastDrove from itself, we trust, all frightful gloom.SONNETS. 23XV.TO THE PLANET VENUS, AN EVENING STAR.COMPOSED AT LOCH LOMOND.Though joy attend thee orient at the birthOf dawn, it cheers the lofty spirit mostTo watch thy course when Day-light, fled from earth,In the grey sky hath left his lingering Ghost,Perplexed as if between a splendour lostAnd splendour slowly mustering. Since the Sun,The absolute, the world-absorbing One,Relinquished half his empire to the HostEmboldened by thy guidance, holy Star,Holy as princely, who that looks on theeTouching, as now, in thy humilityThe mountain borders of this seat of care.Can question that thy countenance is bright,Celestial Power, as much with love as light ?24 SONNETS.XVI.BOTHWELL CASTLE.Immured in Bothwell's Towers, at times the Brave(So beautiful is Clyde) forgot to mournThe liberty they lost at Bannockburn.Once on those steeps roamed at large, and haveIn mind the landscape, as if still in sight ;The river glides, the woods before me wave ;But, by occasion tempted, now I craveNeedless renewal of an old delight.Better to thank a dear and long-past dayFor joy its sunny hours were free to giveThan blame the present, that our wish hath crost.Memory, like Sleep, hath powers which dreams obey,Dreams, vivid dreams, that are not fugitive :How little that she cherishes is lost !xvi.PICTURE OF DANIEL IN THE LION's DEN, ATHAMILTON PALACE.Amid a fertile region green with woodAnd fresh with rivers, well doth it becomeThe Ducal Owner, in his Palace-homeTo naturalise this tawny Lion brood ;Children of Art, that claim strange brotherhood,Couched in their Den, with those that roam at largeOver the burning wilderness, and chargeThe wind with terror while they roar for food.But these are satiate, and a stillness drearCalls into life a more enduring fear ;Yet is the Prophet calm, nor would the caveDaunt him — if his Companions, now be-drowsedYawning and listless, were by hunger roused :Man placed him here, and God, he knows, can save.SONNETS.XVIII.THE AVON {a feeder of the Anna),Avon — a precious, an immortal name !Yet is it one that other Rivulets bearLike this unheard-of, and their channels wearLike this contented, though unknown to Fame :For great and sacred is the modest claimOf streams to Nature's love, where'er they flow ;And ne'er did genius slight them, as they go.Tree, flower, and green herb, feeding without blame.But Praise can waste her voice on work of tears.Anguish, and death : full oft where innocent bloodHas mixed its current with the limpid flood.Her heaven-offending trophies Glory rears ;Never for like distinction may the goodShrink from ih^ name, pure Rill, with unpleasedears!SONNETS. 27XIX.SUGGESTED BY A VIEW FROM AN EMINENCE ININGLEWOOD FOREST.The forest huge of ancient CarletonIs but a name, nor more is Inglewood,That swept from hill to hill, from flood to flood :On her last thorn the nightly Moon has shone ;Yet still, though unappropriate Wild be none,Fair parks spread wide where Adam Bell might deignWith Clem o* the Clough, were they alive again,To kill for merry feast their venison.Nor wants the holy Abbot's gliding ShadeHis Church with monumental wreck bestow ;The feudal Warrior-chief, a Ghost unlaid.Hath still his Castle, though a Skeleton,That he may watch by night, and lessons conOf Power that perishes, and Rights that fade.c 228 SONNETS.XX.Heart's-HORN tree, near PENRITH.Here stood an Oak, that long had borne affixedTo his huge trunk, or, with more subtle art.Among its withering topmost branches mixed,The palmy antlers of a hunted Hart,Whom the dog Hercules pursued — his partEach desperately sustaining, till at lastBoth sank and died, the life-veins of the chasedAnd chaser bursting here with one dire smart.Mutual the Victory, mutual the Defeat !High was the trophy hung with pitiless pride ;Say, rather, with that generous sympathyThat wants not, even in rudest breasts, a seat ;And, for this feeling's sake, let no one chideVerse that would guard thy memory, Heart's-hornTrees*See Note, p. 43.SONNETS. 29XXI.countess's pillar.[On the roadside between Penrith and Appleby, there standsa pillar with the following inscription : —This pillar was erected, in the year 1656, by Anne CountessDowager of Pembroke, &c. for a memorial of her last partingwith her pious mother, Margaret Countess Dowager of Cumberland,on the 2d of April, 1616 ; in memory whereof shehath left an annuity of 41. to be distributed to the poor of theparish of Brougham, every 2d day of April for ever, upon thestone table placed hard by. Laus Deo ! "]While the Poor gather round, till the end of timeMay this bright flower of Charity displayIts bloom, unfolding at the appointed day ;Flower than the loveliest of the vernal primeLovelier — transplanted from heaven's purest clime ICharity never falleth :" on that creed,More than on written testament or deed,The pious Lady built with hope sublime.Alms on this stone to be dealt outer ever ILaus Deo.'' Many a Stranger passing byHas with that parting mixed a filial sigh,Blest its humane Memorial's fond endeavour ;And, fastening on those lines an eye tear-glazed.Has ended, though no Clerk, with " God bepraised ! "c 330 SONNETS.XXII.ROMAN ANTIQUITIES.(from the ROMAN STATION AT OLD PENRITH.)How profitless the relics that we cull,Troubling the last holds of ambitious Rome,Unless they chasten fancies that presumeToo high, or idle agitations lull !Of the world's flatteries if the brain be full,To have no seat for thought were better doom,Like this old helmet, or the eyeless skullOf him who gloried in its nodding plume.Heaven out of view, our wishes what are they ?Our fond regrets, insatiate in their grasp ?The Sage's theory ? the Poet's lay ?Mere Fibulae without a robe to clasp ;Obsolete lamps, whose light no time recalls;Urns without ashes, tearless lacrymal !APOLOGY.No more : the end is sudden and abrupt,Abrupt — as without preconceived designWas the beginning, yet the several LaysHave moved in order, to each other boundBy a continuous and acknowledged tieThough unapparent, like those Shapes distinctThat yet survive sculptured on the wallsOf Palace, or of Temple, *mid the wreckOf famed Persepolis ; each following each.As might beseem a stately embassy.In set array ; these bearing in their handsEnsign of civil power, weapon of war,Or gift, to be presented at the ThroneOf the Great King ; and others, as they goIn priestly vest, with holy offerings charged,Or leading victims drest for sacrifice.Nor will the Muse condemn, or treat with scornOur ministration, humble but sincere,c 432 APOLOGY.That from a threshold loved by every MuseIts impulse took — that sorrow-stricken door,Whence, as a current from its fountain-head.Our thoughts have issued, and our feelings flowed.Receiving, willingly or not, fresh strengthFrom kindred sources ; while around us sighed(Life's three first seasons having passed away)Leaf scattering winds, and hoar-frost sprinklingsfell,Foretaste of winter, on the moorland heights;And every day brought with it tidings newOf rash change, ominous for the public weal.Hence, if dejection have too oft encroachedUpon that sweet and tender melancholyWhich may itself be cherished and caressedMore than enough, a fault so natural,Even with the young the hopeful or the gay,For prompt forgiveness will not sue in vain.THE HIGHLAND BROACH.If to Tradition faith be due,And echoes from old verse speak true,Ere the meek Saint, Columba, boreGlad tidings to iona's shore,No common light of nature blessedThe mountain region of the west,A land where gentle manners ruledO'er men in dauntless virtues schooled,That raised, for centuries, a barImpervious to the tide of war ;Yet peaceful Arts did entrance gainWhere haughty Force had striven in vain ;And, 'mid the works of skilful hands.By wanderers brought from foreign landsAnd various climes, was not unknownThe clasp that fixed the Roman Gown ;c 534 THE HIGHLAND BROACH.The Fibula, whose shape, I ween.Still in the Highland Broach is seen,The silver Broach of massy frame.Worn at the breast of some grave DameOn road or path, or at the doorOf fern-thatched Hut on heathy moor :But delicate of yore its mould,And the material finest gold ;As might beseem the fairest Fair,Whether she graced a royal chair.Or shed, within a vaulted Hall,No fancied lustre on the wallWhere shields of mighty Heroes hung,While Fingal heard what Ossian sung.The heroic Age expired — it sleptDeep in its tomb : — the bramble creptO'er Fingal's hearth ; the grassy sodGrew on the floors his Sons had trod tCalvin ! where art thou ? Their stateThe noblest-born must abdicate,The fairest, while with fire and swordCome Spoilers — horde impelling horde,Must walk the sorrowing mountains, drestBy ruder hands in homelier vest.THE HIGHLAND BROACH. 35Yet Still the female bosom lent,And loved to borrow, ornament ;Still was its inner world a placeReached by the dews of heavenly grace ;Still pity to this last retreatClove fondly ; to his favourite seatLove wound his way by soft approach,Beneath a masser Highland Broach.When alternations came of rageYet fiercer, in a darker age ;And feuds, where, clan encountering clan,The weaker perished to a man ;For maid and mother, when despairMight else have triumphed, baffling prayer,One small possession lacked not power.Provided in a calmer hour,To meet such need as might befall —Roof, raiment, bread, or burial :For woman, even of tears bereft.The hidden silver Broach was left.As generations come and go.Their arts, their customs, ebb and flow ;c 636 THE HIGHLAND BROACH.Fate, fortune, sweep strong powers away,And feeble, of themselves, decay ;What poor abodes the heir-loom hide,In which the castle once took pride !Tokens, once kept as boasted wealth.If saved at all, are saved by stealth.Lo ! ships, from seas by nature barred.Mount along ways by man prepared ;And in far-stretching vales, whose streamsSeek other seas, their canvass gleams.Lo ! busy towns spring up, on coastsThronged yesterday by airy ghosts ;Soon, like a lingering star forlornAmong the novelties of morn,While young delights on old encroach.Will vanish the last Highland Broach.But when, from out their viewless bed.Like vapours, years have rolled and spread ;And this poor verse, and worthier lays,Shall yield no light of love or praise,Then, by the spade, or cleaving plough.Or torrent from the mountain's brow,THE HIGHLAND BROACH. 37Or whirlwind, reckless what his mightEntombs, or forces into light.Blind Chance, a volunteer ally.That oft befriends Antiquity,And clears Oblivion from reproach.May render back the Highland Broach.The exact resemblance which the old Broach (still in use,though rarely met with, among the Highlanders) bears to theRoman Fibula must strike every one, and concurs with theplaid and kilt to recall to mind the communication which theancient Romans had with this remote country. How muchthe Broach is sometimes prized by persons in humble stationsmay be gathered from an occurrence mentioned to me by afemale friend. She had had an opportunity of benefiting a poorold woman in her own hut, who, wishing to make a return, saidto her daughter, in Erse, in a tone of plaintive earnestness, " Iwould give any thing I have, but I hope she does not wish formy Broach ! " and, uttering these words, she put her hand uponthe Broach which fastened her kerchief, and which, she imagined,had attracted the eye of her benefactress.NOTES.Highland Hut. Page 21.This sonnet describes the exterior of a Highland hut, asoften seen under morning or evening sunshine. The readermay not be displeased with the following extract from thejournal of a Lady, my fellow-traveller in Scotland, in theautumn of 1803, which accurately describes, under particularcircumstances, the beautiful appearance of the interior of oneof these rude habitations.On our return from the Trossachs the evening began todarken, and it rained so heavily that we were completely wetbefore we had come two miles, and it was dark when welanded with our boatman, at his hut upon the banks of LochKatrine. I was faint from cold : the good woman had provided,according to her promise, a better fire than we hadfound in the morning ; and, indeed, when I sat down sin thechimney corner of her smoky biggin, I thought I had neverfelt more comfortable in my life : a pan of coffee was boilingfor us, and, having put our clothes in the way of drying, weall sat down thankful for a shelter. We could not prevail uponour boatman, the master of the house, to draw near the fire,though he was cold and wet, or to suffer his wife to get himdry clothes till she had served us, which she did most willingly,though not very expeditiously.A Cumberland man of the same rank would not have hadsuch a notion of what was fit and right in his own house, or, ifhe had, one would have accused him of servility ; but in theHighlander it only seemed like politeness (however erroneousNOTES. ayand painful to us), naturally growing out of the dependence ofthe inferiors of the clan upon their laird : he did not, however,refuse to let his wife bring out the whisky bottle for hisrefreshment, at our request. " She keeps a dram," as thephrase is : indeed, I believe there is scarcely a lonely house bythe wayside, in Scotland, where travellers may not be accommodatedwith a dram. We asked for sugar, butter, barley-bread,and milk ; and, with a smile and a stare more of kindnessthan wonder, she replied, " Ye '11 get that," bringing eacharticle separately. We caroused our cups of coffee, laughinglike children at the strange atmosphere in which we were : thesmoke came in gusts, and spread along the walls ; and aboveour heads in the chimney (where the hens were roosting) likeclouds in the sky. We laughed and laughed again, in spite ofthe smarting of our eyes, yet had a quieter pleasure in observingthe beauty of the beams and rafters gleaming between theclouds of smoke : they had been crusted over, and varnished bymany winters, till, where the firelight fell upon them, they hadbecome as glossy as black rocks, on a sunny day, cased in ice.When we had eaten our supper we sat about half an hour, andI think I never felt so deeply the blessing of a hospitable welcomeand a warm fire. The man of the house repeated fromtime to time that we should often tell of this night when wegot to our homes, and interposed praises of his own lake, whichhe had more than once, when we were returning in the boat,ventured to say was " bonnier than Loch Lomond." Our companionfrom the Trossachs, who, it appeared, was an Edinburghdrawing master going, during the vacation, on a pedestrian tourto John o' Groat's house, was to sleep in the barn with my fellow-travellers,where the man said he had plenty of dry hay. I donot believe that the hay of the Highlands is ever very dry,but this year it had a better chance than usual : wet or dry,however, the next morning they said they had slept comfortably.When I went to bed, the mistress, desiring me to " gohen's attended me with a candle, and assured me that the bedwas dry, though not " sic as I had been used to." It was of40 NOTES.chaff; there were two others in the room, a cupboard and twochests, upon one of which stood milk in wooden vessels, coveredover. The walls of the whole house were of stone plastered :it consisted of three apartments, the townhouse at one end, thekitchen or house in the middle, and the spence at the otherend ; the rooms were divided, not up to the rigging, but onlyto the beginning of the roof, so that there was a free passagefor light and smoke from one end of the house to the other.I went to bed some time before the rest of the family : thedoor was shut between us, and they had a bright fire, which Icould not see, but the light it sent up among the varnishedrafters and beams, which crossed each other in almost as intricateand fantastic a manner as I have seen the under boughsof a large beech tree withered by the depth of shade above,produced the most beautiful effect that can be conceived. Itwas like what I should suppose an underground cave ortemple to be, with a dripping or moist roof, and the moonlightentering in upon it by some means or other; and yet thecolours were more like those of melted gems. I lay lookingup till the light of the fire faded away, and the man andhis wife and child had crept into their bed at the other end ofthe room: I did not sleep much, but passed a comfortablenight ; for my bed, though hard, was warm and clean : theunusualness of my situation prevented me from sleeping. Icould hear the waves beat against the shore of the lake ; a littlerill close to the door made a much louder noise, and, when Isat up in my bed, I could see the lake through an openwindow-place at the bed's head. Add to this, it rained all night.I was less occupied by remembrance of the Trossachs, beautifulas they were, than the vision of the Highland hut, which Icould not get out of my head ; I thought of the Fairy-land ofSpenser, and what I had read in romance at other times, andthen what a feast it would be for a London Pantomime-makercould he but transplant it to Drury Lane, with all its beautifulcolours ! " — MS,NOTES. 41Bothwell Castle. Page 24. Line 4.Once on those steeps roamed."The following is from the same MS., and gives an accountof the visit to Bothwell Castle here alluded to ; —It was exceedingly delightful to enter thus unexpectedlyupon such a beautiful region. The castle stands nobly, overlookingthe Clyde. When we came up to it, I was hurt tosee that flower-borders had taken place of the natural over-growingof the ruin, the scattered stones and wild plants. Itis a large and grand pile of red freestone, harmonising perfectlywith the rocks of the river, from which, no doubt, it hasbeen hewn. When I was a little accustomed to the unnaturalnessof a modern garden, I could not help admiring the excessivebeauty and luxuriance of some of the plants, particularlythe purple-flowered clematis, and a broad-leafed creeping plantwithout flowers, which scrambled up the castle wall, alongwith the ivy, and spread its vine-like branches so lavishly thatit seemed to be in its natural situation, and one could not helpthinking that, though not self-planted among the ruins of thiscountry, it must somewhere have its native abode in suchplaces. If Bothwell Castle had not been close to the Douglasmansion, we should have been disgusted with the possessor'smiserable conception of adorning such a venerable ruin ; but itis so very near to the house, that of necessity the pleasure-groundsmust have extended beyond it, and perhaps the neatnessof a shaven lawn and the complete desolation natural toa ruin might have made an unpleasing contrast ; and, besidesbeing within the precincts of the pleasure-grounds, and so verynear to the dwelling of a noble family, it has forfeited, in somedegree, its independent majesty, and becomes a tributary tothe mansion : its solitude being interrupted, it has no longerthe command over the mind in sending it back into past times,or excluding the ordinary feelings which we bear about us indaily life. We had then only to regret that the castle andthe house were so near to each other ; and it was impossible42 NOTES.not to regret it ; for the ruin presides in state over the river,far from city or town, as if it might have a peculiar privilegeto preserve its memorials of past ages and maintain its owncharacter for centuries to come. We sat upon a bench underthe high trees, and had beautiful views of the different reachesof the river, above and below. On the opposite bank, which isfinely wooded with elms and other trees, are the remains of apriory built upon a rock ; and rock and ruin are so blended,that it is impossible to separate the one from the other.Nothing can be more beautiful than the little remnant of thisholy place : elm trees (for we were near enough to distinguishthem by their branches) grow out of the walls, and overshadowa small, but very elegant window. It can scarcely be conceivedwhat a grace the castle and priory impart to each other ;and the river Clyde flows on smooth and unruffled below,seeming to my thoughts more in harmony with the sober andstately images of former times, than if it had roared over arocky channel forcing its sound upon the ear. It blendedgently with the warbling of the smaller birds, and the chatteringof the larger ones, that had made their nests in the ruins.In this fortress the chief of the English nobility were confinedafter the battle of Bannockburn. If a man is to be a prisoner,he scarcely could have a more pleasant place to solace his captivity; but I thought that, for close confinement, I should preferthe banks of a lake, or the seaside. The greatest charm ofa brook or river is in the liberty to pursue it through its windings; you can then take it in whatever mood you like ; silentor noisy, sportive or quiet. The beauties of a brook or rivermust be sought, and the pleasure is in going in search ofthem ; those of a lake, or of the sea,^come to you of themselves.These rude warriors cared little, perhaps, about either; andyet, if one may judge from the writings of Chaucer, and fromthe old romances, more interesting passions were connectedwith natural objects in the days of chivalry than now ; thoughgoing in search of scenery, as it is called, had not then beenthought of. I had previously heard nothing of Both wellNOTES. 43Castle, at least nothing that I remembered ; therefore, perhaps,ray pleasure was greater, compared with what I received elsewhere,than others might feel." — MS, Journal.The Hares-horn Tree. Page 28.« In the time of the first Robert de Clifford, in the year 1333or 1334, Edward Baliol king of Scotland came into Westmorland,and stayed some time with the said Robert at his castlesof Appleby, Brougham, and Pendragon. And during thattime they ran a stag by a single greyhound out of WhinePark to Redkirk,J in Scotland, and back again to this place ;where, being both spent, the stag leaped over the pales, butdied on the other side ; and the greyhound, attempting to leap,fell, and died on the contrary side. In memory of this factthe stag's horns were nailed upon a tree just by, and (the dogbeing named Hercules) this rythme was made upon them :Hercules kill'd Hart a greeceAnd Hart a greece kill'd Hercules.'The tree to this day bears the name of Heart's-horn Tree. Thehorns in process of time were almost grown over by the growthof the tree, and another pair was put up in their place." —Nicholson and Burnes History of Westmorland and Cumberland.The tree has now disappeared, but the author of thesepoems well remembers its imposing appearance as it stood, in adecayed state, by the side of the high road leading from Penrithto Appleby. This whole neighbourhood abounds in interestingtraditions and vestiges of antiquity, viz., Julian's Bower ;Brougham and Penrith Castles ; Penrith Beacon, and the curiousremains in Penrith churchyard ; Arthur's Round Table ;the excavation, called the Giant's Cave, on the banks of theEgmont ; Long Meg and her Daughters, near Eden, &c. &c.THE EGYPTIAN MAID;THE ROMANCE OF THE WATER LILY.[For the names and persons in the following poem, see theHistory of the renowned Prince Arthur and his Knightsof the Round Table ;" for the rest the Author is answerable ;only it may be proper to add, that the Lotus, with the bust ofthe goddess appearing to rise out of the full-blown flower,was suggested by the beautiful work of ancient art, once includedamong the Townley Marbles, and now in the BritishMuseum. 1THE EGYPTIAN MAID ;OR,THE ROMANCE OF THE WATER LILY.While Merlin paced the Cornish sands,Forth-looking toward the Rocks of Scilly,The pleased Enchanter was awareOf a bright Ship that seemed to hang in air,Yet was she work of mortal hands,And took from men her name — The Water Lily.Soft was the wind, that landward blew ;And, as the Moon, o'er some dark hill ascendant,Grows from a little edge of lightTo a full orb, this Pinnace bright.As nearer to the Coast she drew.Appeared more glorious, with spread sail and pendant.48 THE EGYPTIAN MAID ; OR,Upon this winged Shape so fairSage Merlin gazed with admiration :Her lineaments, thought he, surpassAught that was ever shown in magic glass ;In patience built with subtle care ;Or, at a touch, set forth with wondrous transformation.Now, though a Mechanist, whose skillShames the degenerate grasp of modern science,Grave Merlin (and belike the moreFor practising occult and perilous lore)Was subject to a freakish willThat sapped good thoughts, or scared them withdefiance.Provoked to envious spleen, he castAn altered look upon the advancing StrangerWhom he had hailed with joy, and cried,My Art shall help to. tame her pride — "Anon the breeze became a blast.And the waves rose, and sky portended danger.THE ROMANCE OF THE WATER LILY. 49With thrilling word, and potent signTraced on the beach, his work the Sorcerer urges ;The clouds in blacker clouds are lost.Like spiteful Fiends that vanish, crossedBy Fiends of aspect more malign ;And the winds roused the Deep with fiercerscourges.But worthy of the name she boreWas this Sea-flower, this buoyant Galley;Supreme in loveliness and graceOf motion, whether in the embraceOf trusty anchorage, or scudding o'erThe main flood roughened into hill and valley.Behold, how wantonly she lavesHer sides, the Wizard's craft confounding ;Like something out of Ocean sprungTo be for ever fresh and young.Breasts the sea-flashes and huge wavesTop-gallant high, rebounding and rebounding !50 THE EGYPTIAN MAID ; OR,But Ocean under magic heaves,And cannot spare the Thing he cherished :Ah I what avails that She was fair,Luminous, bathe, and debonair ?The storm has stripped her of her leaves ;The Lily floats no longer ! — She hath perished.Grieve for her, — She deserves no less ;So like, yet so unlike, a living Creature INo heart had she, no busy brain ;Though loved, she could not love again ;Though pitied, feel her own distress ;Nor aught that troubles us, the fools of Nature.Yet is there cause for gushing tears ;So richly was this Galley laden ;A fairer than Herself she bore,And, in her struggles, cast ashore ;A lovely One, who nothing hearsOf wind or wave — a meek and guileless Maiden.THE ROMANCE OF THE WATER LILY. 51Into a cave had Merlin fledFrom mischief, caused by spells himself had muttered;And, while repentant all too late,In moody posture there he sate.He heard a voice, and saw, with half-raised head,A Visitant by whom these words were uttered :On Christian service this frail BarkSailed" (hear me, Merlin !) " under high protection.Though on her prow a sign of heathen powerWas carved — a Goddess with a Lily flower,The old Egyptian's emblematic markOf joy immortal and of pure affection.Her course was for the British strand.Her freight it was a Damsel peerless ;God reigns above, and Spirits strongMay gather to avenge this wrongDone to the Princess, and her LandWhich she in duty left, though sad not cheerless.D 252 THE EGYPTIAN MAID ; OR,And to Carlton's loftiest towerSoon will the Knights of Arthur's TableA cry of lamentation send;And all will weep who there attend,To grace that Stranger's bridal hour.For whom the sea was made unnavigable.Shame ! should a Child of Royal LineDie through the blindness of thy malice :"Thus to the Necromancer spakeNina, the Lady of the Lake,A gentle Sorceress, and benign.Who ne'er embittered any good man's chalice.What boots'' continued she, " to mourn ?To expiate thy sin endeavour IFrom the bleak isle where she is laid.Fetched by our art, the Egyptian MaidMay yet to Arthur's court be borneCold as she is, ere life be fled for ever.THE ROMANCE OF THE WATER LILY. 53My pearly Boat, a shining Light,That brought me down that sunless river,Will bear me on from wave to wave,And back with her to this sea-cave ;Then Merlin ! for a rapid flightThrough air to thee my charge will I deliver.The very swiftest of thy CarsMust, when my part is done, be ready ;Meanwhile, for further guidance, lookInto thy own prophetic book ;And, if that fail, consult the StarsTo learn thy course; farewell! be prompt andsteady."This scarcely spoken, she againWas seated in her gleaming Shallop,That, o'er the yet-distempered Deep,Pursued its way with bird-like sweep.Or like a steed, without a rein,Urged o'er the wilderness in sportive gallop.D 354 THE EGYPTIAN MAID ; OR,Soon did the gentle Nina reachThat Isle without a house or haven ;Landing, she found not what she sought,Nor saw of wreck or ruin aughtBut a carved Lotus cast upon the shoreBy the fierce waves, a flower in marble graven.Sad relique, but how fair the while IFor gently each from each retreatingWith backward curve, the leaves revealedThe bosom half, and half concealed.Of a Divinity, that seemed to smileOn Nina as she passed, with hopeful greeting.No quest was hers of vague desire.Of tortured hope and purpose shaken ;Following the margin of a bay,She spied the lonely Cast-away,Unmarred, stripped of her attire.But with closed eyes, — of breath and bloom forsaken.THE ROMANCE OF THE WATER LILY. 55Then Nina, stooping down, embraced,With tenderness and mild emotion,The Damsel, in that trance unbound ;And, while she raised her from the ground,And in the pearly shallop placed.Sleep fell upon the air, and stilled the ocean.The turmoil hushed, celestial springsOf music opened, and there came a blendingOf fragrance, underived from earth.With gleams that owed not to the Sun theirbirth.And that soft rustling of invisible wingsWhich Angels make, on works of love descending.And Nina heard a sweeter voiceThan if the Goddess of the Flower had spoken :Thou hast achieved, fair Dame I what noneLess pure in spirit could have done ;Go, in thy enterprise rejoice IAir, earth, sea, sky, and heaven, success betoken."D 455 THE EGYPTIAN MAID ; OR,So cheered she left that Island bleak,A bare rock of the Scilly cluster ;And, as they traversed the smooth brine,The self-illumined BrigantineShed, on the Slumberer's cold wan cheekAnd pallid brow, a melancholy lustre.Fleet was their course, and when they cameTo the dim cavern, whence the riverIssued into the salt-sea flood,Merlin, as fixed in thought he stood.Was thus accosted by the Dame :Behold to thee my Charge I now deliver !But where attends thy chariot — where ? "Quoth Merlin, " Even as I was bidden,So have I done ; as trusty as thy bargeMy vehicle shall prove — O precious Charge !If this be sleep, how soft I if death, how fair !Much have my books disclosed, but the end ishidden."THE ROMANCE OF THE WATER LILY. 57He spake, and gliding into viewForth from the grotto's dimmest chamberCame two mute Swans, whose plumes of duskywhiteChanged, as the pair approached the light,Drawing an ebon car, their hue(Like clouds of sunset) into lucid amber.Once more did gentle Nina liftThe Princess, passive to all changes :The car received her ; then up-wentInto the ethereal elementThe Birds with progress smooth and swiftAs thought, when through bright regions memoryranges.Sage Merlin, at the Slumberer's side.Instructs the Swans their way to measure ;And soon Carlton's towers appeared,And notes of minstrelsy were heardFrom rich pavilions spreading wide,For some high day of long-expected pleasure.D 558 THE EGYPTIAN MAID ; OR,Awe-stricken stood both Knights and DamesEre on firm ground the car alighted ;Eftsoons astonishment was past,For in that face they saw the lastLast lingering look of clay, that tamesAll pride, by which all happiness is blighted.Said Merlin, " Mighty King, fair Lords,Away with feast and tilt and tourney !Ye saw, throughout this Royal House,Ye heard, a rocking marvellousOf turrets, and a clash of swordsSelf-shaken, as I closed my airy journey.Lo ! by a destiny well knownTo mortals, joy is turned to sorrow ;This is the wished-for Bride, the MaidOf Egypt, from a rock conveyedWhere she by shipwreck had been thrown ;111 sight ! but grief may vanish ere the morrow."THE ROMANCE OF THE WATER LILY. 59Though vast thy power, thy words are weak,"Exclaimed the King, " a mockery hateful ;Dutiful Child ! her lot how hard !Is this her piety's reward ?Those watery locks, that bloodless cheek !O winds without remorse ! O shore ungrateful IRich robes are fretted by the moth ;Towers, temples, fall by stroke of thunder ;Will that, or deeper thoughts, abateA Father's sorrow for her fate ?He will repent him of his troth ;His brain will burn, his stout heart split asunder.Alas ! and I have caused this woe ;For, when my prowess from invading NeighboursHad freed his Realm, he plighted wordThat he would turn to Christ our Lord,And his dear Daughter on a Knight bestowWhom I should choose for love and matchless labours.D 660 THE EGYPTIAN MAID ; OR,Her birth was heathen, but a fenceOf holy Angels round her hovered ;A Lady added to my courtSo fair, of such divine reportAnd worship, seemed a recompenceFor fifty kingdoms by my sword recovered.Ask not for whom, O champions true !She was reserved by me her life's betrayer ;She who was meant to be a brideIs now a corse ; then put asideVain thoughts, and speed ye, with observancedueOf Christian rites, in Christian ground to lay her."The tomb," said Merlin, " may not closeUpon her yet, earth hide her beauty ;Not froward to thy sovereign willEsteem me, Liege ! if I, whose skillWafted her hither, interposeTo check this pious haste of erring duty.THE ROMANCE OF THE WATER LILY. 61My books command me to lay bareThe secret thou art bent on keeping ;Here must a high attest be given,WhatBridegroom was for her ordained by Heaven ;And in my glass significant there areOf things that may to gladness turn this weeping.'^ For this, approaching, One by OneThy Knights must touch the cold hand of theVirgin ;So, for the favoured One, the Flower may bloomOnce more ; but, if unchangeable her doom,If life departed be for ever gone,Some blest assurance, from this cloud emerging.May teach him to bewail his loss ;Not with a grief that, like a vapour, risesAnd melts ; but grief devout that shall endureAnd a perpetual growth secureOf purposes which no false thought shall crossA harvest of high hopes and noble enterprises."62 THE EGYPTIAN MAID ; OR,So be it," said the King; — " anon,Here, where the Princess lies, begin the trial ;Knights each in order as ye standStep forth." — To touch the pallid handSir Agravaine advanced ; no sign he wonFrom Heaven or Earth ; — Sir Kate had like denial.Abashed, Sir Dines turned away ;Even for Sir Percival was no disclosure ;Though he, devotes of all Champions, ereHe reached that ebon car, the bierWhereon diffused like snow the Damsel lay,Full thrice had crossed himself in meek composure.Imagine (but ye Saints ! who can ?)How in still air the balance trembled ;The wishes, peradventure the despiteThat overcame some not ungenerous Knights ;And all the thoughts that lengthened out a spanOf time to Lords and Ladies thus assembled.THE ROMANCE OF THE WATER LILY. 63What patient confidence was here !And there how many bosoms panted !While drawing toward the Car Sir Againe,mailedFor tournament, his Beaver wailed,And softly touched; but, to his princely cheerAnd high expectancy, no sign was granted.Next, disencumbered of his harp.Sir Tristan, dear to thousands as a brother.Came to the proofs nor grieved that there ensuedNo change ; — the fair Izonda he had wooedWith love too true, a love with pangs too sharp,From hope too distant, not to dread another.Not so Sir Launcelot ; — from Heaven's graceA sign he craved, tired slave of vain contrition ;The royal Guinever looked passing gladWhen his touch failed. — Next came Sir Galahad;He paused, and stood entranced by that still faceWhose features he had seen in noontide vision.64 THE EGYPTIAN MAID ; OR,For late, as near a murmuring streamHe rested 'mid an arbour green and shady,Nina, the good Enchantress, shedA light around his mossy bed ;And, at her call, a waking dreamPrefigured to his sense the Egyptian Lady.Now, while his bright-haired front he bowed.And stood, far-kenned by mantle furred withermine.As o'er the insensate Body hungThe enrapt, the beautiful, the young,Belief sank deep into the crowdThat he the solemn issue would determine.Nor deem it strange ; the Youth had wornThat very mantle on a day of glory.The day when he achieved that matchless feat,The marvel of the Perilous Seat,Which whosoe'erapproachedof strength wasshorn.Though King or Knight the most renowned in story.THE ROMANCE OF THE WATER LILY. 65He touched with hesitating hand,And lo ! those Birds, far-famed through Love'sdominions.The Swans, in triumph clap their wings ;And their necks play, involved in rings,Like sinless snakes in Eden's happy land ; —Mine is she," cried the Knight ; — again theyclapped their pinions.Mine was she — mine she is, though dead.And to her name my soul shall cleave in sorrow; "Whereat, a tender twilight streakOf colour dawned upon the Damsel's cheek ;And her lips, quickening with uncertain red.Seemed from each other a faint warmth to borrowDeep was the awe, the rapture high.Of love emboldened, hope with dread entwining,When, to the mouth, relenting DeathAllowed a soft and flower-like breath.Precursor to a timid sigh.To lifted eyelids, and a doubtful shining.66 THE EGYPTIAN MAID ; OR,In silence did King Arthur gazeUpon the signs that pass away or tarry ;In silence watched the gentle strifeOf Nature leading back to life ;Then eased his Soul at length by praiseOf God, and Heaven's pure Queen — the blissfulMary.Then said he, " Take her to thy heartSir Galahad ! a treasure that God giveth.Bound by indissoluble ties to theeThrough mortal change and immortality ;Be happy and unenvied, thou who artA goodly Knight that hath no Peer that liveth ! "Not long the Nuptials were delayed ;And sage tradition still rehearsesThe pomp the glory of that hourWhen toward the Altar from her bowerKing Arthur led the Egyptian Maid,And Angels carolled these far-echoed verses ; —THE ROMANCE OF THE WATER LILY. 67Who shrinks not from allianceOf evil with good Powers,To God proclaims defiance,And mocks whom he adores.A Ship to Christ devotedFrom the Land of Nile did go ;Alas I the bright Ship floated,An Idol at her Prow.By magic domination,The Heaven-permitted ventOf purblind mortal passion.Was wrought her punishment.The Flower, the Form within it,What served they in her need ?Her port she could not win it,Nor from mishap be freed.6S THE EGYPTIAN MAID.The tempest overcame her,And she was seen no more ;But gently gently blame her,She cast a Pearl ashore.The Maid to Jesu hearkened,And kept to him her faith,Till sense in death was darkened.Or sleep akin to death.But Angels round her pillowKept watch, a viewless band ;And, billow favouring billow.She reached the destined strand.Blest Pair I whatever befall youYour faith in Him approveWho from frail earth can call you.To bowers of endless love !ODE,COMPOSED ON MAY MORNING,While from the purpling east departsThe Star that led the dawn,Bathe Flora from her couch upstarts,For May is on the lawn.A quickening hope, a freshening glee,Foreran the expected Power,Whose first-drawn breath, from bush and tree.Shakes off that pearly shower.All Nature welcomes Her whose swayTempers the year's extremes ;Who scattered lustres o'er noon-day.Like morning's dewy gleams ;While mellow warble, sprightly trill,The tremulous heart excite ;And hums the balmy air to stillThe balance of delight.70 MAY MORNING.Time was, blest Power I when Youths and MaidsAt peep of dawn would rise,And wander forth, in forest gladesThy birth to solemnize.Though mute the song — to grace the riteUntouched the hawthorn bough,Thy Spirit triumphs e'er the slight ;Man changes, but not Thou IThy feathered Lieges bill and wingsIn love's disport employ ;Warmed by thy influence, creeping ThingsAwake to silent joy:Queen art thou still for each gay PlantWhere the slim wild Deer roves ;And served in depths where Fishes hauntTheir own mysterious groves.Cloud-piercing Peak, and trackless Heath,Instinctive homage pay ;Nor wants the dim-lit Cave a wreathTo honour Thee, sweet May !MAY MORNING. 71Where Cities fanned by thy brisk airsBehold a smokeless sky,Their priest Flower-pot-nursling daresTo open a bright eye.And if, on this thy natal morn,The Pole, from which thy nameHath not departed, stands forlornOf song and dance and game.Still from the village-green a vowAspires to thee addrest.Wherever peace is on the brow,Or love within the breast.Yes ! where Love nestles thou canst teachThe soul to love the more ;Hearts also shall thy lessons reachThat never loved before.Stript is the haughty One of pride.The bashful freed from fear.While rising, like the ocean-tide,In flows the joyous year.72 MAY MORNING.Hush, feeble lyre ! weak words, refuseThe service to prolong ITo yon exulting Thrush the MuseIntrusts the imperfect song ;His voice shall chant, in accents clear,Throughout the live-long day.Till the first silver Star appear,The sovereignty of May.TO MAY.Though many suns have risen and setSince thou, blithe May, wert born.And Bards, who hailed thee, may forgetThy gifts, thy beauty scorn ;-There are who to a birthday strainConfine not harp and voice,But evermore throughout thy reignAre grateful and rejoice !Delicious odours I music sweet,Too sweet to pass away IOh for a deathless song to meetThe soul's desire — a layThat, when a thousand years are told,Should praise thee, genial Power !Through summer heat, autumnal cold.And winter's dreariest hour.74? TO MAY.Earth, Sea, thy presence feel — nor less.If yon ethereal blueWith its soft smile the truth express,The Heavens have felt it too.The inmost heart of man if gladPartakes a livelier cheer ;And eyes that cannot but be sadLet fall a brightened tear.Since thy return, through days and weeksOf hope that grew by stealth,How many wan and faded cheeksHave kindled into health IThe Old, by thee revived, have said,Another year is ours ;"And wayworn Wanderers, poorly fed.Have smiled upon thy flowers.Who tripping lisps a merry songAmid his playful peers ?The tender Infant who was long ^A prisoner of fond fears ;TO MAY. 75But now, when every sharp-edged blastIs quiet in its sheath,His Mother leaves him free to tasteEarth's sweetness in thy breath.Thy help is with the Weed that creepsAlong the humblest ground ;No Cliff so bare but on its steepsThy favours may be found ;But most on some peculiar nookThat our own hands have drest,Thou and thy train are proud to look,And seem to love it best.And yet how pleased we wander forthWhen May is whispering, '^ Come !Choose from the bowers of virgin earthThe happiest for your home ;Heaven s bounteous love through me is spreadFrom sunshine, clouds, winds, waves,Drops on the mouldering turret's head,And on your turf-clad graves I "s 276 TO MAY.Such greeting heard, away with sighsFor lilies that must fade,Or " the rathe primrose as it diesForsaken" in the shade !Vernal fruitions and desiresAre linked in endless chase ;While as one kindly growth retires,Another takes its place.And what if thou, sweet May, hast knownMishap by worm and blight ;If expectations newly blownHave perished in thy sight ;If loves and joys, while up they sprung.Were caught as in a snare ;Such is the lot of all the young.However bright and fair.Lo ! Streams that April could not checkAre patient of thy rule ;Gurgling in foamy water-break.Loitering in glassy pool :TO MAY. 77By thee, thee only, could be sentSuch gentle Mists as glide,Curling with unconfirmed intent,On that green mountain's side.How delicate the leafy veilThrough which yon House of GodGleams 'mid the peace of this deep daleBy few but shepherds trod !And lowly Huts, near beaten ways.No sooner stand attiredIn thy fresh wreaths, than they for praisePeep forth, and are admired.Season of fancy and of hope,Permit not for one hourA blossom from thy crown to drop,Nor add to it a flower IKeep, lovely May, as if by touchOf self-restraining art,This modest charm of not too much,Part seen, imagined part !E 3INSCRIPTION.The massy Ways, carried across these HeightsBy Roman Perseverance, are destroyed,Or hidden under ground, like sleeping worms.How venture then to hope that Time will spareThis humble Walk ? Yet on the mountain's sideA Poets hand first shaped it ; and the stepsOf that same Bard, repeated to and froAt morn, at noon, and under moonlight skies.Through the vicissitudes of many a year.Forbade the weeds to creep over its grey line.No longer, scattering to the heedless windsThe vocal raptures of fresh poesy.Shall he frequent these precincts ; locked nomoreIn earnest converse with beloved Friends,Here will he gather stores of ready bliss.As from the beds and borders of a gardenINSCRIPTION. 79Choice flowers are gathered! But, if Power mayspringOut of a farewell yearning favoured moreThan kindred wishes mated suitablyWith vain regrets, the Exile would consignThis Walk, his loved possession, to the careOf those pure Minds that reverence the Muse.E 4ELEGIAC MUSINGSIN THE GROUNDS OF COLEORTON HALL, THE SEAT OF THELATE SIR GEORGE BEAUMONT, BART.In these grounds stands the Parish Church, wherein is a muralmonument, the Inscription upon which, in deference to theearnest request of the deceased, is confined to name, dates,and these words : — " Enter not into judgment with thyservant, O Lord ! "]With copious eulogy in prose and rhymeGraven on the tomb we struggle against Time,Alas, how feebly ! but our feelings riseAnd still we struggle when a good man dies :Such offering Beaumont dreaded and forbade,A spirit meek in self-abasement clad.Yet here at least, though few have numbered daysThat shunned so modestly the light of praise.His graceful manners, and the temperate rayOf that arch fancy which would round him play,Brightening a converse never known to swerveFrom courtesy and delicate reserve ;That sense — the bland philosophy of lifeWhich checked discussion ere it warmed to strife ;ELEGIAC MUSINGS. 81Those fine accomplishments, and varied powers,Might have their record among sylvan bowers.Oh, fled for ever ! vanished like a blastThat shook the leaves in myriads as it passed ;Gone from this world of earth, air, sea, and sky,From all its spirit-moving imagery,Intensely studied with a Painter's eye,A Poet's heart ; and, for congenial view,Portrayed with happiest pencil, not untrueTo common recognitions while the lineFlowed in a course of sympathy divine —Oh ! severed too abruptly from delightsThat all the seasons shared with equal rights —Rapt in the grace of dismantled age.From soul-felt music, and the treasured page.Lit by that evening lamp which loved to shedIts mellow lustre round thy honoured head.While Friends beheld thee give with eye, voice,mien,More than theatric force to Shakspeare's scene —Rebuke us not ! — The mandate is obeyedThat said, " Let praise be mute where I am laid ;"The holier deprecation,, given in trustTo the cold Marble, waits upon thy dust ;E 582 ELEGIAC MUSINGS.Yet have we found how slowly genuine griefFrom silent admiration wins relief.Too long abashed thy Name is like a RoseThat doth " within itself its sweetness close;"A drooping Daisy changed into a cupIn which her bright-eyed beauty is shut up.Within these Groves, where still are flitting byShades of the Past, oft noticed with a sigh,Shall stand a votive Tablet, haply free.When towers and temples fall, to speak of Thee IIf sculptured emblems of our mortal doomRecall not there the wisdom of the Tomb,Green ivy, risen from out the cheerful earth,Shall fringe the lettered stone ; and herbs springforth,Whose fragrance, by soft dews and rain unbound,Shall penetrate the heart without a wound ;While truth and love their purposes fulfil.Commemorating genius, talent, skill.That could not lie concealed where Thou wertknown ;Thy virtues He must judge, and He alone.The God upon whose mercy they are thrown.EPITAPH.By a blest Husband guided, Mary cameFrom nearest kindred, ****** her new name ;She came, though meek of soul, in seemly prideOf happiness and hope, a youthful Bride.O dread reverse ! if aught be so, which provesThat God will chasten whom he dearly loves.Faith bore her up through pains in mercy given,And troubles that were each a step to Heaven :Two Babes were laid in earth before she died ;A third now slumbers at the Mother's side ;Its Sister-twin survives, whose smiles affordA trembling solace to her widowed Lord.Reader I if to thy bosom cling the painOf recent sorrow combated in vain ;Or if thy cherished grief have failed to thwartTime still intent on his insidious part,684 EPITAPH.Lulling the Mourner's best good thoughts asleep,Pilfering regrets we would, but cannot, keep ;Bear with Him — judge Him gently who makesknownHis bitter loss by this memorial Stone ;And pray that in his faithful breast the graceOf resignation find a hallowed place.INSCRIPTIONINTENDED FOR A STONE IN THE GROUNDS OK RYDAL MOUNT.In these fair Vales hath many a TreeAt Wordsworth's suit been spared ;And from the Builder's hand this Stone,For some rude beauty of its own,Was rescued by the Bard :To let it rest in peace ; and here(Heaven knows how soon) the tender-heartedMay heave a gentle sigh for him,As one of the departed.WRITTEN IN AN ALBUM.Small service is true service while it lasts ;Of Friends, however humble, scorn not one :The Daisy, by the shadow that it casts,Protects the lingering dew-drop from the Sun.INCIDENT AT BRUGES.In Bruges town is many a streetWhence busy life hath fled ;Where, without hurry, noiseless feet,The grass-grown pavement tread.There heard we, halting in the shadeFlung from a Convent-tower,A harp that tuneful prelude madeTo a voice of thrilling power.The measure, simple truth to tell.Was fit for some gay throng ;Though from the same grim turret fellThe shadow and the song.When silent were both voice and chordsThe strain seemed doubly dear,Yet sad as sweet, for English wordsHad fallen upon the ear.INCIDENT AT BRUGES. 87It was a breezy hour of eve ;And pinnacle and spireQuivered and seemed almost to heave,Clothed with innocuous fire ;But where we stood, the setting sunShowed little of his state ;And, if the glory reached the Nun,'Twas through an iron grate.Not always is the heart unwise.Nor pity idly born.If even a passing Stranger sighsFor them who do not mourn.Sad is thy doom, self-solaced dove.Captive, whoe'er thou be !Oh I what is beauty, what is love,And opening life to thee ?Such feeling pressed upon my soul,A feeling sanctifiedBy one soft trickling tear that stoleFrom the Maiden at my side ;88 INCIDENT AT BRUGES.Less tribute could she pay than this,Borne gaily o'er the sea,Fresh from the beauty and the blissOf English liberty ?A JEWISH FAMILY.(in a small valley opposite ST. Roar, UPON THE RHINE.)Genius of Raphael I if thy wingsMight bear thee to this glen,With faithful memory left of thingsTo pencil dear and pen,Thou wouldst forego the neighbouring Rhine,And all his majesty,A studious forehead to inclineO'er this poor family.The Mother — her thou must have seen,In spirit, ere she cameTo dwell these rifted rocks between.Or found no earth a name ;An image, too, of that sweet Boy,Thy inspirations give :Of playfulness, and love, and joy.Predestined here to live.90 A JEWISH FAMILY.Downcast, or shooting glances far,How beautiful his eyes,That blend the nature of the starWith that of summer skies !I speak as if of sense beguiled ;Uncounted months are gone,Yet am I with the Jewish Child,That exquisite Saint John.I see the dark brown curls, the brow.The smooth transparent skin.Refined, as with intent to showThe holiness within ;The grace of parting InfancyBy blushes yet untamed ;Age faithful to the mother's knee,Nor of her arms ashamed.Two lovely Sisters, still and sweetAs flowers, stand side by side ;Their soul-subduing looks might cheatThe Christian of his pride :A JEWISH FAMILY.Such beauty hath the Eternal pouredUpon them not forlorn,Though of a lineage once abhorred,Nor yet redeemed from scorn.Mysterious safeguard, that, in spiteOf poverty and wrong,Doth here preserve a living light.From Hebrew fountains sprung ;That gives this ragged group to castAround the dell a gleamOf Palestine, of glory past,And proud Jerusalem !DEVOTIONAL INCITEMENTS.Not to the earth confined,** Ascend to heaven."Where will they stop, those breathing Powers,The Spirits of the new-born flowers ?They wander with the breeze, they windWhere'er the streams a passage find ;Up from their native ground they riseIn mute aerial harmonies ;From humble violet modest thymeExhaled, the essential odours climb.As if no space below the skyTheir subtle flight could satisfy :Heaven will not tax our thoughts with prideIf like ambition be their guide.Roused by this kindliest of May-showers,The spirit" quickener of the flowers.That with moist virtue softly cleavesThe buds, and freshens the young leaves,DEVOTIONAL INCITEMENTS. 93The Birds pour forth their souls in notesOf rapture from a thousand throats,Here checked by too impetuous haste,While there the music runs to waste,With bounty more and more enlargedTill the whole air is overcharged ;Give ear, O Man ! to their appealAnd thirst for no inferior zeal,Thou, who canst thinks as well as feel.Mount from the earth ; aspire I aspire !So pleads the town's cathedral choir,In strains that from their solemn heightSink, to attain a loftier flight ;While incense from the altar breathesRich fragrance in embodied wreaths ;Or, flung from swinging censer, shroudsThe taper lights, and curls in cloudsAround angelic Forms, the stillCreation of the painter's skill,That on the service wait concealedOne moment, and the next revealed.Cast off your bonds, awake, arise.And for no transient ecstasies I94 DEVOTIONAL INCITEMENTS.What else can mean the visual pleaOf still or moving imagery ?The iterated summons loud,Not wasted on the attendant crowd,Nor wholly lost upon the throngHurrying the busy streets along ?Alas ! the sanctities combinedBy art to sensualist the mind,Decay and languish ; or, as creedsAnd humours change, are spurned like weeds :The solemn rites, the awful forms.Founder amid fanatic storms ;The priests are from their altars thrust,The temples levelled with the dust :Yet evermore, through years renewedIn undisturbed vicissitudeOf seasons balancing their flightOn the swift wings of day and night,Kind Nature keeps a heavenly doorWide open for the scattered Poor.Where flower-breathed incense to the skiesIs wafted in mute harmonies ;DEVOTIONAL INCITEMENTS. 95And ground fresh cloven by the ploughIs fragrant with a humbler vow ;Where birds and brooks from leafy dellsChime forth unwearied canticles,And vapours magnify and spreadThe glory of the sun's bright head ;Still constant in her worship, stillConforming to the almighty Will,Whether men sow or reap the fields.Her admonitions Nature yields ;That not by bread alone we live,Or what a hand of flesh can give ;That every day should leave some partFree for a sabbath of the heart ;So shall the seventh be truly blest,From morn to eve, with hallowed rest.THE ARMENIAN LADY'S LOVE.[The subject of the following poem is from the Orlando ofthe author's friend, Kenelm Henry Digby ; and the libertyis taken of inscribing it to him as an acknowledgment, howeverunworthy, of pleasure and instruction derived from hisnumerous and valuable writings, illustrative of the piety andchivalry of the olden time.]1.You have heard " a Spanish LadyHow she wooed an English Man"*Hear now of a fair Armenian,^ ^ Daughter of the proud Soldan ;How she loved a Christian Slave, and told her painBy word, look, deed, with hope that he might loveagain.See, in Percy's Reliques, that fine old ballad, " The SpanishLady's Love ; " from which Poem the form of stanza, assuitable to dialogue, is adopted.THE ARMENIAN LADY S LOVE. 9/2.Pluck that rose, it moves my liking,"Said she, lifting up her veil ;Pluck it for me gentle Gardener,Ere it wither and grow pale."** Princess fair, I till the ground, but may not takeFrom twig or bed an humbler flower, even for 3 oursake."<' Grieved am I, submissive Christian !To behold thy captive state ;Women, in your land, may pity(May they not?) the unfortunate."Yes, kind Lady ! otherwise Man could not bearLife, which to every one that breathes is full of care."4. ,Worse than idle is compassionIf it end in tears and sighs ;Thee from bondage would I rescueAnd from vile indignities ;Nurtured, as thy mien bespeaks, in high degree,Look up — and help a hand that longs to set theefree."98 THE ARMENIAN LADY's LOVE.5.Lady, dread the wish, nor ventureIn such peril to engage ;Think how it would stir against youYour most loving Father's rage :Sad deliverance would it be, and yoked with shame.Should troubles overflow on her from whom it6.Generous Frank ! the just in effortAre of inward peace secure ;Hardships for the brave encountered.Even the feeblest may endure :If Almighty Grace through me thy chains unbind.My Father for slave's work may seek a slave inmind."7.Princess, at this burst of goodness,My long-frozen heart grows warm ! "Yet you make all courage fruitless,Me to save from chance of harm :Leading such Companion I that gilded Dome,Yon Minarets, would gladly leave for his worst home."THE ARMENIAN LADY's LOVE. 998.Feeling tunes your voice, fair Princess !And your brow is free from scorn,Else these words would come like mockery.Sharper than the pointed thorn."Whence the undeserved mistrust? Too wide apartOur faith hath been, — O would that eyes could seetheheart ! "9.Tempt me not, I pray ; my doom isThese base implements to wield ;Lusty Lance, I ne'er shall grasp thee,Ne'er assoil my cobwebb'd shield INever see my native land, nor castle towers,Nor Her who thinking of me there counts widowedhours."10.Prisoner ! pardon youthful fancies ;Wedded ? If you can say no ! —Blessed is and be your Consort ;Hopes I cherished let them go !Handmaid's privilege would leave my purpose free,Without another link to my felicity."F 2100 THE ARMENIAN LADY's LOVE.11.Wedded love with loyal Christians,Lady, is a mystery rare ;Body, heart, and soul in union,Make one being of a pair."Humble love in me would look for no return,Soft as a guiding star that cheers, but cannot burn*'12.Gracious Allah ! by such titleDo I dare to thank the God,Him who thus exalts thy spirit.Flower of an unchristian sod IOr hast thou put off wings which thou in heavendost wear ?What have I seen, and heard, or dreamt ? where amI? where?"IS.Here broke off the dangerous converse :Less impassioned words might tellHow the Pair escaped together,Tears not wanting, nor a knell [door.Of sorrow in her heart while through her Father'sAnd from her narrow world, she passed for evermore.THE ARMENIAN LADY S l/Q\ E. 10114.But affections higher, holier,Urged her steps ; she shrunk from trustIn a sensual creed that trampledWoman's birthright into dust.Little be the wonder then, the blame be none.If she, a timid Maid, hath put such boldness on.15.Judge both Fugitives with knowledge :In those old romantic daysMighty were the soul's commandmentsTo support, restrain, or raise.Foes might hang upon their path, snakes rustle near,But nothing from their inward selves had they tofear.16.Thought infirm ne'er came between them,Whether printing desert sandsWith accordant steps, or gatheringForest-fruit with social hands ;Or whispering like two reeds that in the cold moonbeamBend with the breeze their heads, beside a crystalstream.F 3^\\}^2 :1JI?^^ ARMENIAN I/ADY's LOVE.17.On a friendly deck reposingThey at length for Venice steer ;There, when they had closed their voyage,One, who daily on the PierWatched for tidings from the East, beheld his Lord,Fell down and clasped his knees for joy, not utteringword.18.Mutual was the sudden transport ;Breathless questions followed fast,Years contracting to a moment,Each word greener than the last;Hie thee to the Countess, Friend ! return withspeed.And of this Stranger speak by whom her Lord wasfreed.19.Say that I, who might have languished.Drooped and pined till life was spent,Now before the gates of StolbergMy Deliverer would presentFor a crowning recompence, the precious graceOf her who in my heart still holds her ancientplace.THE ARMENIAN LADY's LOVE. 10320.Make it known that my CompanionIs of royal Eastern blood,Thirsting after all perfection,Innocent, and meek, and good.Though with unbelievers bred ; but that dark nightWill Holy Church disperse by beams of GospelLight."Swiftly went that grey-haired Servant,Soon returned a trusty PageCharged with greetings, benedictions.Thanks and praises, each a gageFor a sunny thought to cheer the Stranger's way,Her virtuous scruples to remove, her fears allay.22.Fancy (while, to banners floatingHigh on Stolberg's Castle walls.Deafening noise of welcome mounted.Trumpets, Drums, and Cabals,)The devout embraces still, while such tears fellAs made a meeting seem most like a dear farewell.F 4?104 THE ARMENIAN LADY's LOVE.23.Through a haze of human nature,Glorified by heavenly light.Looked the beautiful DelivererOn that overpowering sight,While across her virgin cheek pure blushes strayed,For every tender sacrifice her heart had made.24.On the ground the weeping CountessKnelt, and kissed the Stranger's hand ;Act of soul-devoted homage,Pledge of an eternal band :Nor did aught of future days that kiss belie.Which, with a generous shout, the crowd did ratify.25.Constant to the fair Armenian,Gentle pleasures round her moved,Like a tutelary SpiritReverenced, like a Sister, loved.Christian meekness smoothed for all the path of life,Who, loving most, should liveliest love, their onlystrife.THE ARMENIAN LADY S LOVE.26.Mute Memento of that unionIn a Saxon Church survives,Where a cross-legged Knight lies sculpturedAs between two wedded Wives —Figures with armorial signs of race and birth,And the vain rank the Pilgrims bore while yet onearth.V 5THE PRIMROSE OF THE ROCK.A Rock there is whose homely frontThe passing Traveller slights ;Yet there the Glow-worms hang their lamps,Like stars, at various heights ;And one coy Primrose to that RockThe vernal breeze invites.What hideous warfare hath been waged.What kingdoms overthrown,Since first I spied that Primrose-tuftAnd marked it for my own ;A lasting link in Nature's chainFrom highest Heaven let down !THE PRIMROSE OF THE ROCK. 107The Flowers, still faithful to the stems,Their fellowship renew ;The stems are faithful to the root.That worketh out of view ;And to the rock the root adheresIn every fibre true.Close clings to earth the living rock,Though threatening still to fall ;The earth is constant to her sphere ;And God upholds them all :So blooms this lonely Plant, nor dreadsHer annual funeral.Here closed the meditative Strain ;But air breathed soft that day.The hoary mountain-heights were cheeredThe sunny vale looked gay ;And to the Primrose of the RockI gave this after-lay.F 6108 THE PRIMROSE OF THE ROCK.I sang, Let myriads of bright flowers,Like Thee, in field and groveRevive unenvied, — mightier farThan trembHngs that reproveOur vernal tendencies to hopeIn God's redeeming love :That love which changed, for wan disease,For sorrow that had bentO'er hopeless dust, for withered age,Their moral element,And turned the thistles of a curseTo types beneficent.Sin-blighted though we are, we too,The reasoning Sons of Men,From one oblivious winter calledShall rise, and breathe again ;And in eternal summer loseOur threescore years and ten.THE PRIMROSE OF THE ROCK.To humbleness of heart descendsThis prescience from on high,The faith that elevates the Just,Before and when they die ;And makes each soul a separate heaven,A court for Deity.PRESENTIMENTS.Presentiments ! they judge not rightWho deem that ye from open lightRetire in fear of shame ;All heaven-born Instincts shun the touchOf vulgar sense, and, being such.Such privilege ye claim.The tear whose source I could not guess,The deep sigh that seemed fatherless.Were mine in early days ;And now, unforced by Time to partWith Fancy, I obey my heart,And venture on your praise.PRESENTIMENTS. 11.1What though some busy Foes to good,Too potent over nerve and blood,Lurk near you, and combineTo taint the health which ye infuse.This hides not from the moral MuseYour origin divine.How oft from you, derided Powers !Comes Faith that in auspicious hoursBuilds castles, not of air ;Boding unsanctioned by the willFlow from your visionary skill.And teach us to beware.The bosom-weight, your stubborn gift,That no philosophy can lift,Shall vanish, if ye please.Like morning mist ; and, where it lay.The spirits at your bidding playIn gaiety and ease.112 PRESENTIMENTS,Star-guided Contemplations moveThrough space, though calm, not raised abovePrognostic that ye rule ;The naked Indian of the Wild,And haply, too, the cradled Child,Are pupils of your school.But who can fathom your intents,Number their signs or instruments ?A rainbow, a sunbeam,A subtle smell that Spring unbinds,Dead pause abrupt of midnight winds,An echo, or a dream.The laughter of the Christmas hearthWith sighs of self-exhausted mirthYe feelingly reprove ;And daily, in the conscious breast.Your visitations are a testAnd exercise of love.PRESENTIMENTS. 113When some great change gives boundless scopeTo an exulting Nation's hope,Oft, startled and made wiseBy your low breathed in terre tings,The simply-meek foretaste the springsOf bitter contraries.Ye daunt the proud array of War,Pervade the lonely Ocean farAs sail hath been unfurled ;For Dancers in the festive hallWhat ghastly Partners hath your callFetched from the shadowy world !'Tis said, that warnings ye dispense,Emboldened by a keener sense ;That men have lived for whom,With dread precision, ye made clearThe hour that in a distant yearShould knell there to the tomb.114 PRESENTIMENTS.Unwelcome Insight ! Yet there areBlest times when mystery is laid bare,Truth shows a glorious face,While on that Isthmus which commandsThe councils of both worlds she stands.Sage Spirits ! by your grace.God, who instructs the Brutes to scentAll changes of the element.Whose wisdom fixed the scaleOf Natures, for our wants providesBy higher, sometimes humbler, guides,When lights of Reason fail.THE POET AND THE CAGED TURTLEDOVE.As often as. I murmur hereMy half-formed melodies,Straight from her osier mansion near,The Turtledove replies :Though silent as a leaf before.The captive promptly coos ;Is it to teach her own soft lore,Or second my weak Muse ?I rather think, the gentle DoveIs murmuring a reproof,Displeased that I from lays of loveHave dared to keep aloof;That I, a Bard of hill and dale,Have caroll'd, fancy free,As if nor dove, nor nightingale.Had heart or voice for me.116 THE POET AND CAGED TURTLEDOVE.If such thy meaning, O forbear,Sweet Bird ! to do me wrong ;Love, blessed Love, is every whereThe spirit of my song :'Mid grove, and by the calm fireside.Love animates my lyre ;That coo again ! — 'tis not to chide,I feel, but to inspire.SONNETS. 117Chatsworth ! thy stately mansion, and the prideOf thy domain, strange contrast do presentTo house and home in many a craggy rentOf the wild Peak ; where new-born waters glideThrough fields whose thrifty Occupants abideAs in a dear and chosen banishment,With every semblance of entire content ;So kind is simple Nature, fairly tried !Yet He whose heart in childhood gave her troth •To pastoral dales, thin set with modest farms,May learn, if judgement strengthen with his growth,That, not for Fancy only, pomp hath charms ;And, strenuous to protect from lawless harmsThe extremes of favoured life, may honour both.118 SONNETS.Desponding Father ! mark this altered bough.So beautiful of late, with sunshine warmed,Or moist with dews ; what more unsightly nowIts blossoms shrivelled, and its fruit, if formed,Invisible ? yet Spring her genial browKnits not o'er that discolouring and decayAs false to expectation. Nor fret thouAt like unlovely process in the MayOf human life : a Stripling's graces blow.Fade and are shed, that from their timely fall(Misdeem it not a cankerous change) may growRich mellow bearings, that for thanks shall call ;In all men, sinful is it to be slowTo hope — in Parents, sinful above all.SONNETS. 119ROMAN ANTIQUITIES DISCOVERED,AT BISHOPSTONE, HEREFORDSHIRE.While poring Antiquarians search the groundUpturned with curious pains, the Bard, a Seer,Takes fire : — The men that have been reappear ;Romans for travel girt, for business gowned,And some recline on couches, myrtle-crowned.In festal glee: why not? For fresh and clear.As if its hues were of the passing year,Dawns this time-buried pavement. From thatmoundHoards may come forth of Trajan, Maximin,Shrunk into coins with all their warlike toil :Or a fierce impress issues with its foilOf tenderness — the Wolf, whose suckling TwinsThe unlettered Ploughboy pities when he winsThe casual treasure from the furrowed soil.120 SONNETS.ST. CATHERINE OF Newbury.When human touch, as monkish books attest,Nor was applied nor could be, Sudbury bellsBroke forth in concert flung adown the dells,And upward, high as Malvern's cloudy crest ;Sweet tones, and caught by a noble Lady blestTo rapture ! Mabel listened at the sideOf her loved Mistress : soon the music died,And Catherine said, '' Here I set up my rest."Warned in a dream, the Wanderer long had soughtA home that by such miracle of soundMust be revealed : — she heard it now, or feltThe deep, deep joy of a confiding thought;And there, a saintly Anchoress she dweltTill she exchanged for heaven that happy ground.THERUSSIAN FUGITIVE.[Peter Henry Bruce, having given in his entertaining Memoirsthe substance of the following Tale, affirms, that,besides the concurring reports of others, he had the storyfrom the Lady's own mouth.The Lady Catherine, mentioned towards the close, wasthe famous Catherine, then bearing that name as the acknowledgedWife of Peter the Great.]THE RUSSIAN FUGITIVE.PART I.1.Enough of rose-bud lips, and eyesLike harebells bathed in dew,Of cheek that with carnation vies.And veins of violet hue ;Earth wants not beauty that may scornA likening to frail flowers ;Yea, to the stars, if they were bornFor seasons and for hours.2.Through Moscow's gates, with gold unbarred,Stepped one at dead of night.Whom such high beauty could not guardFrom meditated blight ;By stealth she passed, and fled as fastAs doth the hunted fawn.Nor stopped, till in the tapping eastAppeared unwelcome dawn.G 2124 THE RUSSIAN FUGITIVE.3.Seven days she lurked in brake and field,Seven nights her course renewed,Sustained by what her scrip might yield.Or berries of the wood ;At length, in darkness travelling on.When lowly doors were shut.The haven of her hope she won.Her Foster-mother's hut.4.To put your love to dangerous proofI come," said she, " from far ;For I have left my Father's roof.In terror of the Czar."No answer did the Matron give,No second look she cast ;She hung upon the Fugitive,Embracing and embraced.5.She led her Lady to a seatBeside the glimmering fire.Bathed duteously her wayworn feet,Prevented each desire :THE RUSSIAN FUGITIVE. 125The cricket chirped, the house-dog dozed,And on that simple bed,Where she in childhood had reposed.Now rests her weary head.6.When she, whose couch had been the sod,Whose curtain pine or thorn,Had breathed a sigh of thanks to God,Who comforts the forlorn ;While over her the Matron bentSleep sealed her eyes, and stoleFeeling from limbs with travel spent,And trouble from the soul.7.Refreshed, the Wanderer rose at morn.And soon again was dightIn those unworthy vestments wornThrough long and perilous flight ;And " O beloved Nurse," she said.My thanks with silent tearsHave unto Heaven and You been paid 2Now listen to my fears !G 3126 THE RUSSIAN FUGITIVE.8.Have you forgot" — and here she smiled-thebabbling flatteriesYou lavished on me when a childDisporting round your knees ?I was your lambkin, and your bird.Your star, your gem, your flower ;Light words that were more lightly heardIn many a cloudless hour I9.The blossom you so fondly praisedIs come to bitter fruit ;A mighty One upon me gazed ;I spurned his lawless suit,And must be hidden from his wrath :You, Foster-father dear,Will guide me in my forward path ;I may not tarry here !10.I cannot bring to utter woeYour proved fidelity." —'' Dear Child, sweet Mistress, say not so IFor you we both would die."THE RUSSIAN FUGITIVE. 127Nay, nay, I come with semblance feignedAnd cheek embroiled by art ;Yet, being inwardly unstained,With courage will depart."11.** But whither would you, could you, flee ?A poor Man's counsel take ;The Holy Virgin gives to meA thought for your dear sake ;Rest shielded by our Lady's grace ;And soon shall you be ledForth to a safe abiding-place.Where never foot doth tread."G 4THE RUSSIAN FUGITIVE.PART II.1.The Dwelling of this faithful pairIn a straggling village stood,For One who breathed unquiet airA dangerous neighbourhood ;But wide around lay forest groundWith thickets rough and blind ;And pine-trees made a heavy shadeImpervious to the wind.2.And there, sequestered from the sight.Was spread a treacherous swamp,On which the noonday sun shed lightAs from a lonely lamp ;And midway in the unsafe morass,A single Island roseOf firm dry ground, with healthful grassAdorned, and shady boughs.THE RUSSIAN FUGITIVE. 1293.The Woodman knew, for such the craftThis Russian Vassal plied,That never fowler's gun, nor shaftOf archer, there was tried ;A sanctuary seemed the spotFrom all intrusion free ;And there he planned an artful CotFor perfect secrecy.4.With earnest pains unchecked by dreadOf Power's far-stretching hand.The bold good Man his labour spedAt nature's pure command ;Heart-soothed, and busy as a wren.While, in a hollow nook,She moulds her sight-eluding denAbove a murmuring brook.5.His task accomplished to his mind.The twain ere break of dayCreep forth, and through the forest windTheir solitary way ;G 5130 THE RUSSIAN FUGITIVE.Few words they speak, nor dare to slackTheir pace from mile to mile,Till they have crossed the quaking marsh,And reached the lonely Isle.6.The sun above the pine-trees showedA bright and cheerful face ; ,And Ina looked for her abode,The promised hiding-place ;She sought in vain, the Woodman smiled ;No threshold could be seen,Nor roof, nor window ; all seemed wildAs it had ever been,7.Advancing, you might guess an hour.The front with such nice careIs masked, " if house it be or bower,"But in they entered are ;As shaggy as were wall and roofWith branches intertwined,So smooth was all within, air-proof,And delicately lined.THE RUSSIAN FUGITIVE. 1318.And hearth was there, and maple dish,And cups in seemly rows.And couch — all ready to a wishFor nurture or repose ;And Heaven doth to her virtue grantThat here she may abideIn solitude, with every wantBy cautious love supplied.9.No Queen, before a shouting crowd,Led on in bridal state,E'er struggled with a heart so proud,Entering her palace gate ;Rejoiced to bid the world farewell.No saintly AnchoressE'er took possession of her cellWith deeper thankfulness.10.<* Father of all, upon thy careAnd mercy am I thrown ;Be thou my safeguard I" — such her prayerWhen she was left alone,G 61S2 THE RUSSIAN FUGITIVE.Kneeling amid the wildernessWhen joy had passed away,And smiles, fond efforts of distressTo hide what they betray !11.The prayer is heard, the Saints have seen,Diffused through form and face,Resolves devotedly serene ;That monumental graceOf Faith, which doth all passions tameThat Reason should control ;And shows in the trembling frameA statue of the soul.THE RUSSIAN FUGITIVE.PART III.1.*T IS sung in ancient minstrelsyThat Phoebus wont to wearThe leaves of any pleasant treeAround his golden hair," *Till Daphne, desperate with pursuitOf his imperious love,At her own prayer transformed, took root,A laurel in the grove.2.Then did the Penitent adornHis brow with laurel green ;And *mid his bright locks never shornNo meaner leaf was seen ;From Geldings Translation of Ovid's Metamorphoses.See also his Dedicatory Epistle prefixed to the same work.lS4i THE RUSSIAN FUGITIVE.And Poets sage, through every age,About their temples woundThe bay ; and Conquerors thanked the Gods,With laurel chaplets crowned.3.Into the mists of fabling TimeSo far runs back the praiseOf Beauty, that disdains to climbAlong forbidden ways ;That scorns temptation ; power defiesWhere mutual love is not ;And to the tomb for rescue fliesWhen life would be a blot.4.To this fair Votaress, a fateMore mild doth Heaven ordainUpon her Island desolate ;And words, not breathed in vain,Might tell what intercourse she found,Her silence to endear ;What birds she tamed, what "flowers the groundSent forth her peace to cheer.THE RUSSIAN FUGITIVE. 1355.To one mute Presence, above all,Her soothed affections clung,A picture on the Cabin wallBy Russian usage hung —The Mother-maid, whose countenance brightWith love abridged the day ;And, communed with by taper light,Chased spectral fears away.6.And oft, as either Guardian came,The joy in that retreatMight any common friendship shame,So high their hearts would beat ;And to the lone Recluse, whate'erThey brought, each visitingWas like the crowding of the yearWith a new burst of spring.7.But, when she of her Parents thought.The pang was hard to bear ;And, if with all things not inwrought,That trouble still* is near.136 THE RUSSIAN FUGITIVE.Before her flight she had not daredTheir constancy to prove,Too much the heroic Daughter fearedThe weakness of their love.8.Dark is the Past to them, and darkThe Future still must be,Till pitying Saints conduct her barkInto a safer sea —Or gentle Nature close her eyes,And set her Spirit freeFrom the altar of this sacrifice,In vestal purity.9.Yet, when above the forest-gloomsThe white swans southward passed,High as the pitch of their swift plumesHer fancy rode the blast ;And bore her tow rd the fields of France,Her Father's native land,To mingle in the rustic dance.The happiest of the band !THE RUSSIAN FUGITIVE.10.Of those beloved fields she oftHad heard her Father tellIn phrase that now with echoes softHaunted her lonely Cell ;She saw the hereditary bowers,She heard the ancestral stream ;The Kremlin and its haughty towersForgotten like a dream ITHE RUSSIAN FUGITIVE.PART IV.1.The ever-changing Moon had tracedTwelve times her monthly round,When through the unfrequented WasteWas heard a startling sound ;A shout thrice sent from one who chasedAt speed a wounded Deer,Bounding through branches interlaced,And where the wood was clear.2.The fainting Creature took the marsh,And toward the Island fled,While plovers screamed with tumult harshAbove his antlered head ;This, Ina saw ; and, pale with fear,Shrunk to her citadel ;The desperate Deer rushed on, and nearThe tangled covert fell.THE RUSSIAN FUGITIVE. 1393.Across the marsh, the game in view,The Hunter followed fast,Nor paused, till o'er the Stag he blewA death-proclaiming blast ;Then, resting on her upright mind,Came forth the Maid — " In meBehold," she said, " a stricken HindPursued by destiny !4.From your deportment. Sir ! I deemThat you have worn a sword,And will not hold in light esteemA suffering woman's word ;There is my covert, there perchanceI might have lain concealed.My fortunes hid, my countenanceNot even to you revealed.5.Tears might be shed, and I might pray,Crouching and terrified.That what has been unveiled to day.You would in mystery hide ;140 THE RUSSIAN FUGITIVE.But I will not defile with dustThe knee that bends to adoreThe God in heaven; — attend, be just:This ask I, and no more I6.I speak not of the winter's cold,For summer's heat exchanged,While I have lodged in this rough hold,From social life estranged ;Nor yet of trouble and alarms :High Heaven is my defence ;And every season has soft armsFor injured Innocence.Y.From Moscow to the WildernessIt was my choice to come,Lest virtue should be harbourless,And honour want a home ;And happy were I, if the CzarRetain his lawless will.To end life here like this poor Deer,Or a Lamb on a green hill."THE RUSSIAN FUGITIVE. 1418.Are you the Maid," the Stranger cried,From Gallic Parents sprung,Whose vanishing was rumoured wide,Sad theme for every tongue ;Who foiled an Emperor's eager quest ?You, Lady, forced to wearThese rude habiliments, and restYour head in this dark lair I"9.But wonder, pity, soon were quelled ;And in her face and mienThe soul's pure brightness he beheldWithout a veil between :He loved, he hoped, — a holy flameKindled 'mid rapturous tears ;The passion of a moment cameAs on the wings of years.10.Such bounty is no gift of chance,"Exclaimed he ; " righteous Heaven,Preparing your deliverance,To me the charge hath given.142 THE RUSSIAN FUGITIVE.The Czar full oft in words and deedsIs stormy and self-willed ;But, when the Lady Catherine pleads,His violence is stilled.ILLeave open to my wish the course,And I to her will go ;From that humane and heavenly source,Good, only good, can flow**Faint sanction given, the CavalierWas eager to depart,Though question followed question, dearTo the Maiden's filial heart.12.Light was his step, — his hopes, more light.Kept pace with his desires ;And the third morning gave him sightOf Moscow's glittering spires.He sued: — heart-smitten by the wrong.To the lorn FugitiveThe Emperor sent a pledge as strongAs sovereign power could give.IHE RUSSIAN FUGITIVE. 14313.O more than mighty change ! If e'erAmazement rose to pain,And over-joy produced a fearOf something void and vain,*T was when the Parents, who had mournedSo long the lost as dead.Beheld their only Child returned,The household floor to tread.14.Soon gratitude gave way to loveWithin the Maiden's breast :Delivered and Deliverer moveIn bridal garments drest ;Meek Catherine had her own reward ;The Czar bestowed a dower ;And universal Moscow sharedThe triumph of that hour.15*Flowers strewed the ground ; the nuptial feastWas held with costly state ;And there, 'mid many a noble Guest,The Foster-parents sate ;144« THE RUSSIAN FUGITIVE.Encouraged by the imperial eye,They shrank not into shade ;Great was their bliss, the honour highTo them and nature paid ISONNETS. 145Why art thou silent ! Is thy love a plantOf such weak fibre that the treacherous airOf absence withers what was once so fair ?Is there no debt to pay, no boon to grant ?Yet have my thoughts for thee been vigilant(As would my deeds have been) with hourly care.The mind's least generous wish a mendicantFor nought but what thy happiness could spare.Speak, though this soft warm heart, once free to holdA thousand tender pleasures, thine and mine,Be left more desolate, more dreary coldThan a forsaken bird's-nest filled with snow'Mid its own bush of leafless eglantine ;Speak, that my torturing doubts their end mayknow I146 SONNETS.Four fiery steeds impatient of the reinWhirled us o'er sunless ground beneath a void of sunshine, when, from that wide Plain,Clear tops of far-off Mountains we descry,Like a Sierra of cerulean Spain,All light and lustre. Did no heart reply ?Yes, there was One ; — for One, asunder flyThe thousand links of that ethereal chain ;And green vales open out, with grove and field,And the fair front of many a happy Home;Such tempting spots as into vision comeWhile Soldiers, of the weapons that they wieldWeary, and sick of strifeful Christendom,Gaze on the moon by parting clouds revealed.SONNETS. 147TO THE AUTHORS PORTRAIT.[Painted at Rydal Mount, by W. Pickersgill, Esq., forSt. John's College, Cambridge.]Go, faithful Portrait ! and where long hath kneltMargaret, the saintly Foundress, take thy place ;And, if Time spare the colours for the graceWhich to the work surpassing skill hath dealt,Thou, on thy rock reclined, though Kingdoms meltAnd States be torn up by the roots, wilt seemTo breathe in rural peace, to hear the stream.To think and feel as once the Poet felt.Whate'er thy fate, those features have not grownUnrecognised through many a household tear.More prompt more glad to fall than drops of dewBy morning shed around a flower half blown ;Tears of delight, that testified how trueTo life thou art, and, in thy truth, how dear !H 2GOLD AND SILVER FISHES,IN A VASE.The soaring Lark is blest as proudWhen at Heaven's gate she sings ;The roving Bee proclaims aloudHer flight by vocal wings ;While Ye, in lasting durance pent.Your silent lives employFor something " more than dull contentThough haply less than joy'*Yet might your glassy prison seemA place where joy is known,Where golden flash and silver gleamHave meanings of their own ;While, high and low, and all about,Your motions, glittering Elves 1Ye weave — no danger from without.And peace among yourselves.GOLD AND SILVER FISHES. 149Type of a sunny human breastIs your transparent Cell ;Where Fear is but a transient Guest,No sullen Humours dwell ;Where, sensitive of every rayThat smites this tiny sea,Your scaly panoplies repayThe loan with usury.How beautiful I Yet none knows whyThis ever graceful change,Renewed — renewed incessantly —Within your quiet range.Is it that ye with conscious skillFor mutual pleasure glide ;And sometimes, not without your will,Are dwarfed, or magnified ?Fays — Genii of gigantic size —And now, in twilight dim.Clustering like constellated EyesIn wings of Cherubim,H 3150 GOLD AND SILVER FISHES.When they abate their fiery glare :Whatever your forms express,Whate'er ye seem, whate'er ye are,All leads to gentleness.Cold though your nature be, tis pure;Your birthright is a fenceFrom all that haughtier kinds endureThrough tyranny of sense.Ah ! not alone by colours brightAre Ye to Heaven allied.When, like essential Forms of light.Ye mingle, or divide.For day-dreams soft as e'er beguiledDay-thoughts while limbs repose ;For moonlight fascinations mildYour gift, ere shutters close ;Accept, mute Captives ! thanks and praise ;And may this tribute proveThat gentle admirations raiseDelight resembling love.LIBERTY.(sequel to the above.)[Addressed to a Friend ; the Gold and Silver Fishes havingbeen removed to a pool in the pleasure-ground of RydalMount.]The liberty of a people consists in being governed by lawswhich they have made for themselves, under whatever form itbe of government. The liberty of a private man, in being masterof his own time and actions, as far as may consist with thelaws of God and of his country. Of this latter we are here todiscourse." — Cowley.Those breathing Tokens of your kind regard,(Suspect not, Anna, that their fate is hard ;Not soon does aught to which mild fancies cling,In lonely spots, become a slighted thing ;)Those silent Inmates now no longer share,Nor do they need, our hospitable care.Removed in kindness from their glassy CellTo the fresh waters of a living Well ;That spreads into an elfin pool opaqueOf which close boughs a glimmering mirror make,H 4152 LIBERTY.On whose smooth breast with dimples Hight and smallThe fly may settle, leaf or blossom fall.There swims, of blazing sun and beating showerFearless (but how obscured !) the golden Power,That from his bauble prison used to castGleams by the richest jewel unsurpassednear him, darkling like a sullen Gnome,The silver Tenant of the crystal dome ;Dissevered both from all the mysteriesOf hue and altering shape that charmed all eyes.They pined, perhaps, they languished while theyshone ;And, if not so, what matters beauty goneAnd admiration lost, by change of placeThat brings to the inward Creature no disgrace ?But if the change restore his birthright, then,Whatever the difference, boundless is the gain.Who can divine what impulses from GodReach the caged Lark, within a town-abode.From his poor inch or two of daisies sod ?O yield him back his privilege ! No seaSwells like the bosom of a man set free ;A wilderness is rich with liberty.Roll on, ye spouting Whales, who die or keepYour independence in the fathomless Deep !LIBERTY. 153Spread, tiny Nautilus, the living sail ;Dive, at thy choice, or brave the freshening gale !If unreproved the ambitious Eagle mountSunward to seek the daylight in its fount,Bays, gulfs, and Ocean's Indian width, shall be.Till the world perishes, a field for thee IWhile musing here I sit in shadow cool.And watch these mute Companions, in the pool.Among reflected boughs of leafy trees.By glimpses caught — disporting at their ease —Enlivened, braced, by hardy luxuries,I ask what warrant fixed them (like a spellOf witchcraft fixed them) in the crystal Cell ;To wheel with languid motion round and round,Beautiful, yet in a mournful durance bound.Their peace, perhaps, our lightest footfall marred ;On their quick sense our sweetest music jarred;And whither could they dart, if seized withfear ?No sheltering stone, no tangled root was near.When fire or taper ceased to cheer the room,They wore away the night in starless gloom ;And, when the sun first dawned upon the streams,How faint their portion of his vital beams !H 5154 LIBERTY.Thus, and unable to complain, they fared,While not one joy of ours by them was shared.Is there a cherished Bird (I venture nowTo snatch a sprig from Chaucer's reverend brow) —Is there a brilliant Fondling of the cage,Though sure of plaudits on his costly stage.Though fed with dainties from the snow-whitehandOf a kind Mistress, fairest of the land,But gladly would escape; and, if need were.Scatter the colours from the plumes that bearThe emancipated captive through blithe airInto strange woods, where he at large may liveOn best or worst which they and Nature give ?The Beetle loves his unpretending track.The Snail the house he carries on his back :The far-fetched Worm with pleasure would disownThe bed we give him, though of softest down ;A noble instinct ; in all Kinds the same.All Ranks ! What Sovereign, worthy of the name,If doomed to breathe against his lawful willAn element that flatters him — to kill,But would rejoice to barter outward showFor the least boon that freedom can bestow ?LIBERTY. 155But most the Bard is true to inborn right,Lark of the dawn, and Philomel of night,Exults in freedom, can with rapture vouchI For the dear blessings of a lowly couch,A natural meal — days, months, from Nature'shand ;Time, place, and business, all at his command IWho bends to happier duties, who more wiseThan the industrious Poet, taught to prize,Above all grandeur, a pure life uncrossedBy cares in which simplicity is lost ?That life — the flowery path which winds bystealth,Which Horace needed for his spirit's health ;Sighed for, in heart and genius, overcomeBy noise, and strife, and questions wearisome,And the vain splendours of Imperial Rome ?Let easy mirth his social hours inspire.And fiction animate his sportive lyre.Attuned to verse that crowning light DistressWith garlands cheats her into happiness ;Give me the humblest note of those sad strainsDrawn forth by pressure of his gilded chains,As a chance sunbeam from his memory fellUpon the Sabine Farm he loved so well ;H 6156 LIBERTY.Or when the prattle of Bandusia's springHaunted his ear — he only listening —He proud to please, above all rivals, fitTo win the palm of gaiety and wit;He, doubt not, with involuntary dread,Shrinking from each new favour to be shed,By the World's Ruler, on his honoured head !In a deep vision's intellectual scene.Such earnest longings and regrets as keenDepressed the melancholy Cowley, laidUnder a fancied yew-tree's luckless shade ;A doleful bower for penitential song.Where Man and Muse complained of mutualwrong ;While Cam's ideal current glided by,And antique Towers nodded their foreheads high,Citadels dear to studious privacy.But Fortune, who had long been used to sportWith this tried Servant of a thankless Court,Relenting met his wishes ; and to YouThe remnant of his days at least was true ;You, whom, though long deserted, he loved best ;You, Muses, Books, Fields, Liberty, and Rest !LIBERTY. 157But happier they who, fixing hope and aimOn the humanities of peaceful fame.Enter betimes with more than martial fireThe generous course, aspire, and still aspire ;Upheld by warnings heeded not too lateStifle the contradictions of their fate,And to one purpose cleave, their Being's godlikemate !Thus, gifted Friend, but with the placid browThat Woman ne'er should forfeit, keep thy vow ;With modest scorn reject whate'er would blindThe ethereal eyesight, cramp the winged mind !Then, with a blessing granted from aboveTo every act, word, thought, and look of love,Life's book for Thee msiy lie unclosed, till ageShall with a thankful tear bedrop its latest page.*There is now, alas ! no possibility of the anticipation, withwhich the above Epistle concludes, being realised : nor werethe verses ever seen by the Individual for whom they were intended.She accompanied her husband, the Rev. Wm. Fletcher,to India, and died of cholera, at the age of thirty-two orthirty-three years, on her way from Shalapore to Bombay,deeply lamented by all who knew her.Her enthusiasm was ardent, her piety steadfast; and hergreat talents would have enabled her to be eminently useful inthe difficult path of life to which she had been called. The158 NOTE.opinion she entertained of her own performances, given to theworld under her maiden name, Newbury, was modest andhumble, and, indeed, far below their merits ; as is often thecase with those who are making trial of their powers with ahope to discover what they are best fitted for. In one quality,viz., quickness in the motions of her mind, she was in theauthor's estimation unequalled.EVENING VOLUNTARIES.EVENING VOLUNTARIES.I.Calm is the fragrant air, and loth to loseDayes grateful warmth, tho* moist with falling dews.Look for the stars, you '11 say that there are none ;Look up a second time, and, one by one,You mark them twinkling out with silvery light.And wonder how they could elude the sight.The birds, of late so noisy in their bowers.Warbled a while with faint and fainter powers.But now are silent as the dim-seen flowers :Nor does the Village Church-clock's iron toneThe time's and season's influence disown ;Nine beats distinctly to each other boundIn drowsy sequence ; how unlike the soundThat, in rough winter, oft inflicts a fearOn fireside Listeners, doubting what they hear JThe Shepherd, bent on rising with the sun.Had closed his door before the day was done,162 EVENING VOLUNTARIES.And now with thankful heart to bed doth creep,And join his little Children in their sleep.The Bat, lured forth where trees the lane o'er shade.Flits and reality along the close arcade ;Far-heard the Dor-hawk chases the white MothWith burning note, which Industry and SlothMight both be pleased with, for it suits them both.Wheels and the tread of hoofs are heard no more ;One Boat there was, but it will touch the shoreWith the next dipping of its slackened oar ;Faint sound, that, for the gayest of the gayMight give to serious thought a moment's sway,As a last token of Man's toilsome day !EVENING VOLUNTARIES. 16311.Not in the lucid intervals of lifeThat come but as a curse to Party-strife ;Not in some hour when Pleasure with a sighOf languor puts his rosy garland by ;Not in the breathing-times of that poor SlaveWho daily piles up wealth in Mammon's cave,Is Nature felt, or can be ; nor do words,Which practised Talent readily affords,Prove that her hand has touched responsive chords ;Nor has her gentle beauty power to moveWith genuine rapture and with fervent loveThe soul of Genius, if he dares to takeLife's rule from passion craved for passion's sake ;Untaught that meekness is the cherished bentOf all the truly Great and all the Innocent.But who is innocent ? By grace divine,Not otherwise, O Nature I we are thine.Through good and evil thine, in just degreeOf rational and manly sympathy.164 EVENING VOLUNTARIES.To all that Earth from pensive hearts is stealing,And Heaven is now to gladdened eyes revealing,Add every charm the Universe can showThrough every change its aspects undergo,Care may be respited, but not repealed ;No perfect cure grows on that bounded field.Vain is the pleasure, a false calm the peace.If He, through whom alone our conflicts cease.Our virtuous hopes without relapse advance.Come not to speed the Soul's deliverance ;To the distempered Intellect refuseHis gracious help, or give what we abuse.EVENING VOLUNTARIES. 165III.(by the side of rydal mere.)The Linnet's warble, sinking towards a close,Hints to the Thrush 't is time for their repose ;The shrill voiced Thrush is heedless, and againThe Monitor revives his own sweet strain ;But both will soon be mastered, and the copseBe left as silent as the mountain-tops.Ere some commanding Star dismiss to restThe throng of Rooks, that now, from twig or nest,(After a steady flight on home-bound wings.And a last game of mazy hoveringAround their ancient grove) with cawing noiseDisturb the liquid music's equipoise.O Nightingale I Who ever heard thy songMight here be moved, till Fancy grows so strongThat listening sense is pardonably cheatedWhere wood or stream by thee was never greeted.Surely, from fairest spots of favoured lands.Were not some gifts withheld by jealous hands,166 EVENING VOLUNTARIES.This hour of deepening darkness here would be,As a fresh morning for new harmony ;And Lays as prompt would hail the dawn of night ;A dawn she has both beautiful and bright,When the East kindles with the full moon's light.Wanderer by spring with gradual progress led.For sway profoundly felt as widely spread ;To king, to peasant, to rough sailor, dear,And to the soldier's trumpet-wearied ear ;How welcome wouldst thou be to this green ValeFairer than Tempe ! Yet, sweet Nightingale !From the warm breeze that bears thee on alightAt will, and stay thy migratory flight ;Build, at thy choice, or sing, by pool or fount.Who shall complain, or call thee to account ?The wisest, happiest, of our kind are theyThat ever walk content with Nature's way,God's goodness measuring bounty as it may ;For whom the gravest thought of what they miss,Chastening the fulness of a present bliss.Is with that wholesome office satisfied.While repining sadness is alliedIn thankful bosoms to a modest pride.EVENING VOLUNTARIES. 167IV.Soft as a cloud is yon blue Ridge — the MereSeems firm as solid crystal, breathless, clear,And motionless ; and, to the gazer's eye.Deeper than Ocean, in the immensityOf its vague mountains and unreal sky !But, from the process in that still retreat,Turn to minuter changes at our feet ;Observe how dewy Twilight has withdrawnThe crowd of daisies from the shaven lawn.And has restored to view its tender green.That, while the sun rode high, was lost beneaththeir dazzling sheen.An emblem this of what the sober HourCan do for minds disposed to feel its power IThus oft, when we in vain have wish'd awayThe petty pleasures of the garish day.Meek Eve shuts up the whole usurping host(Bashful dwarfs each glittering at his post)168 EVENING VOLUNTARIES.And leaves the disencumbered spirit freeTo reassume a staid simplicity.'Tis well — but what are helps of time and place,When wisdom stands in need of nature's grace ;Why do good thoughts, invoked or not, descend,Like Angels from their bowers, our virtues to befriend;If yet To-morrow, unbelief, may say,I come to open out, for fresh display.The elastic vanities of yesterday?"EVENING VOLUNTARIES, 169The leaves that rustled on this oak-crowned hill,And sky that danced among those leaves, are still ;Rest smooths the way for sleep ; in field and bowerSoft shades and dews have shed their blended powerOn drooping eyelid and the closing flower ;Sound is there none at which the faintest heartMight leap, the weakest nerve of superstition start;Save when the Owlet's unexpected screamPierces the ethereal vault ; and mid the gleamOf unsubstantial imagery — the dream,From the hushed vale's realities, transferredTo the still lake, the imaginative BirdSeems, 'mid inverted mountains, not unheard.Grave Creature ! whether, while the moon shinesbrightOn thy wings opened wide for smoothest flight.Thou art discovered in a roofless tower,Rising from what may once have been a Lady'sbower :170 EVENING VOLUNTARIES.Or spied where thou sit'st moping in thy mewAt the dim centre of a churchyard yew ;Or, from a rifted crag or ivy todDeep in a forest, thy secure abode,Thou giv'st, for pastime's sake, by shriek or shout,A puzzling notice of thy whereabout ;May the night never come, the day be seen,When I shall scorn thy voice or mock thy mien IIn classic ages men perceived a soulOf sapience in thy aspect, headless Owl !Thee Athens reverenced in the studious grove ;And, near the golden sceptre grasped by Jove,His Eagle's favourite perch, while round him sateThe Gods revolving the decrees of Fate,Thou, too, wert present at Minerva's side —Hark to that second larum ! far and wideThe elements have heard, and rock and cave replied.EVENING VOLUNTARIES. 171VI.The Sun, that seemed so mildly to retire,Flung back from distant climes a streaming fire.Whose blaze is now subdued to tender gleams,Prelude of night's approach with soothing dreams.Look round; — of all the clouds not one is moving;'T is the still hour of thinking, feeling, loving.Silent, and stedfast as the vaulted sky.The boundless plain of waters seems to lie: —Comes that low sound from breezes rustling o'erThe grass-crowned headland that conceals the shore !No 't is the earth-voice of the mighty sea,Whispering how meek and gentle he can be !Thou Power supreme ! who, arming to rebukeOffenders, dost put off the gracious look,And clothe thyself with terrors like the floodOf ocean roused into his fiercest mood,I 2172 EVENING VOLUNTARIES.Whatever discipline thy Will ordainFor the brief course that must for me remain ;Teach me with quick-eared spirit to rejoiceIn admonitions of thy softest voice !Whate'er the path these mortal feet may trace,Breathe through my soul the blessing of thy grace,Glad, through a perfect love, a faith sincereDrawn from the wisdom that begins with fear;Glad to expand, and, for a season, freeFrom finite cares, to rest absorbed in Thee !EVENING VOLUNTARIES. 173VII.(by the sea-side.)The sun is couched, the sea-fowl gone to rest,And the wild storm hath somewhere found a nest ;Air slumbers — wave with wave no longer strives.Only a heaving of the deep survives,A tell-tale motion I soon will it be laid.And by the tide alone the water swayed.Stealthy with drawings, intermingling mildOf light with shade in beauty reconciled —Such is the prospect far as sight can range.The soothing recompence, the welcome change.Where now the ships that drove before the blast,Threatened by angry breakers as they passed ;And by a train of flying clouds blocked ;Or, in the hollow surge, at anchor rockedAs on a bed of death ? Some lodge in peace.Saved by His care who bade the tempest cease ;And some, too heedless of past danger, courtFresh gales to waft them to the far-off port ;I 3174 EVENING VOLUNTARIES.But near, or hanging sea and sky between,Not one of all those winged Powers is seen,Seen in her course, nor *mid this quiet heard ;Yet oh ! how gladly would the air be stirredBy some acknowledgment of thanks and praise,Soft in its temper as those vesper laysSung to the Virgin while accordant oarsUrge the slow bark along Calabria shores ;A sea-born service through the mountains feltTill into one loved vision all things melt :Or like those hymns that soothe with graver soundThe gulfy coast of Norway iron-bound ;And, from the wide and open Baltic, riseWith punctual care, Lutheran harmonies.Hush, not a voice is here ! but why repine,Now when the star of eve comes forth to shineOn British waters with that look benign ?Ye mariners, that plough your onward way.Or in the haven rest, or sheltering bay.May silent thanks at least to God be givenWith a full heart, " our thoughts are heard inheaven ! '*EVENING VOLUNTARIES. 175VIII.[The former of the two following Pieces appeared, many yearsago, among the Author's poems, from which, in subsequenteditions, it was excluded. It is here reprinted, at therequest of a friend who was present when the lines werethrown off as an impromptu.For printing the latter, some reason should be given, asnot a word of it is original : it is simply a fine stanza ofAkenside, connected with a still finer from Battle, by acouplet of Thomson. This practice, in which the authorsometimes indulges, of linking together, in his own mind,favourite passages from different authors, seems in itselfunobjectionable: but, as the publishing such compilationsmight lead to confusion in literature, he should deem himselfinexcusable in giving this specimen, were it not from ahope that it might open to others a harmless source oi privategratification.]The sun has long been set,The stars are out by twos and threes,The little birds are piping yetAmong the bushes and trees ;There's a cuckoo, and one or two thrushes.And a far-off wind that rushes.And a sound of water that gushes,And the Cuckoo's sovereign cryFills all the hollow of the sky.I 4176 EVENING VOLUNTARIES.Who would " go parading "In London, " and masquerading,"On such a night of JuneWith that beautiful soft half-moon.And all these innocent blesses,On such a night as this is ?EVENING VOLUNTARIES. 177IX,Throned in the Sun's descending carWhat Power unseen diffuses farThis tenderness of mind ?What Genius smiles on yonder flood ?What God in whispers from the woodBids every thought be kind ?O ever pleasing Solitude,Companion of the wise and good,Thy shades, thy silence, now be mine.Thy charms my only theme ;My haunt the hollow cliff whose PineWaves over the gloomy stream ;Whence the scared Owl on pinions greyBreaks from the rustling boughs,And down the lone vale sails awayTo more profound repose !I 5THE LABOURER'S NOON-DAY HYMN.Up to the throne of God is borneThe voice of praise at early morn,And he accepts the punctual hymnSung as the light of day grows dim.Nor will he turn his ear asideFrom holy offerings at noontide :Then here reposing let us raiseA song of gratitude and praise.What though our burthen be not lightWe need not toil from morn to night ;The respite of the mid-day hourIs in the thankful Creature's power.Blest are the moments, doubly blest,That, drawn from this one hour of rest.Are with a ready heart bestowedUpon the service of our God !THE labourer's NOON-DAY HYMN. 179Why should we crave a hallowed spot ?An Altar is in each man's cot,A Church in every grove that spreadsIts living roof above our heads.Look up to Heaven ! the industrious SunAlready half his race hath run ;He cannot halt nor go astray,But our immortal Spirits may.Lord I since his rising in the East,If we have faltered or transgressed.Guide, from thy love's abundant source,What yet remains of this day's course :Help with thy grace, through life's short dayOur upward and our downward way ;And glorify for us the west.When we shall sink to final rest.I 6A WREN'S NEST.Among the dwellings framed by birdsIn field or forest with nice care,Is none that with the little Wren'sIn snugness may compare.No door the tenement requires,And seldom needs a laboured roof;Yet is it to the fiercest sunImpervious and storm-proof.So warm, so beautiful withal,In perfect fitness for its aim,That to the Kind by special graceTheir instinct surely came.And when for their abodes they seekAn opportune recess.The Hermit has no finer eyeFor shadowy quietness.A wren's nest. 181These find, *ibid ivied Abbey walls,A canopy in some still nook ;Others are pent-housed by a braeThat overhangs a brook.There to the brooding Bird her MateWarbles by fits his low clear song ;And by the busy Streamlet bothAre sung to all day long.Or in sequestered lanes they build,Where, till the flitting Bird's return,Her eggs within the nest repose,Like relics in an urn.But still, where general choice is good.There is a better and a best ;And, among fairest objects, someAre fairer than the rest ;This, one of those small Builders provedIn a green covert, where, from outThe forehead of a pollard oak,The leafy antlers sprout ;182 A wren's nest.For She who planned the mossy Lodge,Mistrusting her evasive skill,Had to a Primrose looked for aidHer wishes to fulfil.High on the trunk's projecting brow,And fixed an infant's span aboveThe budding flowers, peeped forth the nestThe prettiest of the grove !The treasure proudly did I showTo some whose minds without disdainCan turn to little things, but onceLooked up for it in vain :'T is gone — a ruthless Spoiler's prey.Who heeds not beauty, love, or song,'T is gone ! (so seemed it) and we grievedIndignant at the wrong.Just three days after, passing byIn clearer light the moss-built cellI saw, espied its shaded mouth,And felt that all was well.A wren's nest. 183The Primrose for a veil had spreadThe largest of her upright leaves ;And thus, for purposes benign,A simple Flower deceives.Concealed from friends who might disturbThy quiet with no ill intent,Secure from evil eyes and handsOn barbarous plunder bent,Rest, mother-bird ! and when thy youngTake flight, and thou art free to roam,When withered is the guardian flower.And empty thy late home,Think how ye prospered, thou and thine,Amid the inviolate groveHoused near the growing primrose tuftIn foresight, or in love.SONNETSCOMPOSED OR SUGGESTED DURING A TOUR IN SCOTLAND,IN THE SUMMER OF 1833.[Having been prevented by the lateness of the season, in 1831,from visiting StafFa and iona, the author made these theprincipal objects of a short tour in the summer of 1833, ofwhich the following series of sonnets is a Memorial. Thecourse pursued was down the Cumberland river Derwent,and to Whitehall ; thence (by the Isle of Man, where a fewdays were passed) up the Frith of Clyde to Greenock, thento Oban, StafFa, iona ; and back towards England, by LochAwe, Inverary, Loch Coil-head, Greenock, and through partsof Renfrewshire, Ayrshire, and Dumfries-shire to Carlisle,and thence up the river Eden, and homewards by Ulls-water.]SONNETS, 1833.I.Adieu, Rydalian Laurels ! that have grownAnd spread as if ye knew that days might comeWhen ye would shelter in a happy home,On this fair Mount, a Poet of your own.One who ne'er ventured for a Delphic crownTo sue the God ; but, haunting your green shadeAll seasons through, is humbly pleased to braidGround-flowers, beneath your guardianship, selfsown.Farewell ! no Minstrels now with Harp new-strungFor summer wandering quit their household bowers ;Yet not for this wants Poesy a tongueTo cheer the Itinerant on whom she poursHer spirit, while he crosses lonely moors.Or musing sits forsaken halls among.188 SONNETS.II.Why should the Enthusiast, journeying through thisIsle,Repine as if his hour were come too late ?Not unprotected in her mouldering state.Antiquity salutes him with a smile,'Mid fruitful fields that ring with jocund toil,And pleasure-grounds where Taste, refined Co-mateOf Truth and Beauty, strives to imitate,Far as she may, primeval Nature's style.Fair land I by Time's parental love made free,By social Order's watchful arms embraced,With unexampled union meet in thee.For eye and mind, the present and the past ;With golden prospect for futurity,If what is rightly reverenced may last.SONNETS. 189in.They called Thee merry England, in old time;A happy people won for thee that nameWith envy heard in many a distant clime ;And, spite of change, for me thou deepest the sameEndearing title, a responsive chimeTo the heart's fond belief, though some there areWhose sterner judgments deem that word a snareFor inattentive Fancy, like the limeWhich foolish birds are caught with. Can, 1 ask,This face of rural beauty be a maskFor discontent, and poverty, and crime ;These spreading towns a cloak for lawless will ;Forbid it. Heaven I — that " merry England" stillMay be thy rightful name, in prose and rhyme IJ90 SONNETS.IV.TO THE RIVER GRETA, NEAR KESWICK.Greta, what fearful listening I when huge stonesRumble along thy bed, block after block :Or, whirling with reiterated shock,Combat, while darkness aggravates the groans :But if thou (like Cactus i from the moansHeard on his rueful margin) thence wert namedThe Mourner, thy true nature was defamed,And the habitual murmur that atonesFor thy worst rage, forgotten. Oft as SpringDecks, on thy sinuous banks, her thousand thrones,Seats of glad instinct and lovers carolling.The concert, for the happy, then may vieWith liveliest peals of birth day harmony :To a grieved heart, the notes are benson.SONNETS. 191V.TO THE RIVER DerwentAmong the mountains were we nursed, loved stream !Thou near the Eagle's nest — within brief sail,I, of his bold wing floating on the gale,Where thy deep voice could lull me I Faint thebeamOf human life when first allowed to gleamOn mortal notice. — Glory of the Vale,Such thy meek outset, with a crown, though frail.Kept in perpetual verdure by the steamOf thy soft breath ! — Less vivid wreath entwinedDemean victor's brow ; less bright was worn.Meed of some Roman chief — in triumph borneWith captives chained ; and shedding from his carThe sunset splendours of a finished warUpon the proud enslavers of mankind !192 SONNETS.VI.IN SIGHT OF THE TOWN OF COCKERMOUTH,(where the author was born, and his father's remainsARE LAID.)A POINT of life between my Parents' dust,And your's, my burled Little-ones ! am I ;And to those graves looking habituallyIn kindred quiet I repose my trust.Death to the innocent is more than just.And, to the sinner, mercifully bent ;So may I hope, if truly I repentAnd meekly bear the ills which bear I must :And You, my Offspring ! that do still remain.Yet may outstrip me in the appointed race.If e'er, through fault of mine, in mutual painWe breathed together for a moment's space,The wrong, by love provoked, let love arraign,And only love keep in your hearts a place.SONNETS. 193VILADDRESS FROMTHE SPIRIT OF COCKERMOUTH CASTLE.Thou look'st upon me, and dost fondly think,Poet I that, stricken as both are by years.We, differing once so much, are now Compeers,Prepared, when each has stood his time, to sinkInto the dust. Erewhile a sterner HnkUnited us ; when thou, in boyish play.Entering my dungeon, didst become a preyTo soul-appalling darkness. Not a blinkOf light was there ; — and thus did I, thy Tutor,Make thy young thoughts acquainted with thegrave ;While thou wert chasing the wing d butterflyThrough my green courts ; or climbing, a boldsuitor,Up to the flowers whose golden progenyStill round my shattered brow in beauty wave.19iVIII.nun's well, brigham.The cattle crowding round this beverage clearTo slake their thirst, with reckless hoofs have trodThe encircling turf into a barren clod ;Through which the waters creep, then disappear,Born to be lost in Derwent flowing near ;Yet, o'er the brink, and round the limestone-cellOf the pure spring (they call it the " Nun's Well,"Name that first struck by chance my startled ear)A tender Spirit broods — the pensive ShadeOf ritual honours to this Fountain paidBy hooded Votaries ^ with saintly cheer ;Albeit oft the Virgin-mother mildLooked down with pity upon eyes beguiledInto the shedding of *^ too soft a tear."SONNETS. 195IX.TO A FRIEND(on the banks of the derwent).Pastor and Patriot ! at whose bidding riseThese modest Walls, amid a flock that needFor one who comes to watch them and to feedA fixed Abode, keep down presageful sighs.Threats which the unthinking only can despise.Perplex the Church ; but be thou firm, — be trueTo thy first hope, and this good work pursue,Poor as thou art. A welcome sacrificeDost Thou prepare, whose sign will be the smokeOf thy new hearth ; and sooner shall its wreaths,Mounting while earth her morning incense breathes,From wandering fiends of air receive a yoke,And straightway cease to aspire, than God disdainThis humble tribute as ill-timed or vain.K 2196 SONNETS.X.MARY QUEEN OF SCOTS,(landing at the mouth of the DERWENT, WORKINGTON.^)Dear to the Loves, and to the Graces vowed,The Queen drew back the wimple that she wore ;And to the throng how touchingly she bowedThat hailed her landing on the Cumbrian shore ;Bright as a Star (that, from a sombre cloudOf pine-tree foliage poised in air, forth darts.When a soft summer gale at evening partsThe gloom that did its loveliness enshroud)She smiled ; but Time, the old Saturnian Seer,Sighed on the wing as her foot pressed the strand,With step prelusive to a long arrayOf woes and degradations hand in hand,Weeping captivity, and shuddering fearStilled by the ensanguined block of Bothering !SONNETS. 197XI.IN THE CHANNEL, BETWEEN THE COAST OFCUMBERLAND AND THE ISLE OF MAN.Ranging the Heights of Scawfell or Black coom,In his lone course the Shepherd oft will pause,And strive to fathom the mysterious lawsBy which the clouds, arrayed in light or gloom,On Mona settle, and the shapes assumeOf all her peaks and ridges. What He drawsFrom sense, faith, reason, fancy, of the causeHe will take with him to the silent tomb :Or, by his fire, a Child upon his knee.Haply the untaught Philosopher may speakOf the strange sight, nor hide his theoryThat satisfies the simple and the meek,Blest in their pious ignorance, though weakTo cope with Sages devoutly free.K 3198 SONNETS.XII.AT SEA OFF THE ISLE OF MAN.Bold words affirmed, in days when faith wasStrong,That no adventurer's bark had power to gainThese shores if he approached them bent on wrong ;For, suddenly up-conjured from the Main,Mists rose to hide the Land — that search, thoughlongAnd eager, might be still pursued in vain.O Fancy, what an age was that for song !That age, when not by laws inanimate.As men believed, the waters were impelled.The air controlled, the stars their courses held,But element and orb on acts did waitOf Powers endued with visible form, instinctWith will, and to their work by passion linked.SONNETS. 199XIII.Desire we past illusions to recall ?To reinstate wild Fancy would we hideTruths whose thick veil Science has drawn aside.No, — let this Age, high as she may, installIn her esteem the thirst that wrought man's fall,The universe is infinitely wide,And conquering Reason, if self-glorified.Can nowhere move uncrossed by some new wallOr gulf of mystery, which thou alone.Imaginative Faith ! canst overleap.In progress toward the fount of Love, — the throneOf Power, whose ministering Spirits records keepOf periods fixed, and laws established, lessFlesh to exalt than prove its nothingness.K 4200 SONNETS.XIV.ON ENTERING DOUGLAS BAY, ISLE OF MAN.Difijnum laude virum Musa vetat mori."The feudal Keep, the bastions of Cohort,Even when they rose to check or to repelTides of aggressive war, oft served as wellGreedy ambition, armed to treat with scornJust limits ; but yon Tower, whose smiles adornThis perilous bay, stands clear of all offence ;Blest work it is of love and innocence,A Tower of refuge to the else forlorn.Spare it, ye waves, and lift the mariner,Struggling for life, into its saving arms !Spare, too, the human helpers ! Do they stir'Mid your fierce shock like men afraid to die ?No, their dread service nerves the heart it warms,And they are led by noble Hillary. ^SONNETS. 201XV.BY THE SEA-SHORE, ISLE OF MAN.Why stand we gazing on the sparkling BrineWith wonder, smit by its transparency,And all-enraptured with its purity ?Because the unstained, the clear, the crystalline,Have ever in them something of benign;Whether in gem, in water, or in sky,A sleeping infant's brow, or wakeful eyeOf a young maiden, only not divine.Scarcely the hand forbears to dip its palmFor beverage drawn as from a mountain well:Temptation centres in the liquid Calm ;Our daily raiment seems no obstacleTo instantaneous plunging in, deep Sea !And revelling in long embrace with Thee.K 5202 SONNETS.XVI.ISLE OF MAN.A YOUTH too certain of his power to wadeOn the smooth bottom of this clear bright sea,To sight so shallow, with a bather's gleeLeapt from this rock, and surely, had not aidBeen near, must soon have breathed out life, betrayedBy fondly trusting to an elementFair, and to others more than innocent ;Then had sea-nymphs sung dirges for him laidIn peaceful earth : for, doubtless, he was frank,Utterly in himself devoid of guile ;Knew not the double-dealing of a smile ;Nor aught that makes men's promises a blank,Or deadly snare : and He survives to blessThe Power that saved him in his strange distress.SONNETS. 203XVII.THE RETIRED MARINE OFFICER, ISLE OF MAN.Not pangs of grief for lenient time too keen,Grief that devouring waves had caused, nor guiltWhich they had witnessed, swayed the man whobuiltThis homestead, placed where nothing could be seen,Nought heard of ocean, troubled or serene.A tired Ship-soldier on paternal land.That o'er the channel holds august command,The dwelling raised, — a veteran Marine ;Who, in disgust, turned from the neighbouring seaTo shun the memory of a listless lifeThat hung between two callings. May no strifeMore hurtful here beset him doom'd, though free,Self-doom'd to worse inaction, till his eyeShrink from the daily sight of earth and sky IK 6204? SONNETS.XVIII.BY A RETIRED MARINER,(a friend of the author.) 6From early youth I ploughed the restless Main,My mind as restless and as apt to change ;Through every clime and ocean did I range,In hope at length a competence to gain ;For poor to Sea I went, and poor I still remain.Year after year I strove, but strove in vain.And hardships manifold did I endure,For Fortune on me never deign 'd to smile ;Yet I at last a resting-place have found,With just enough life's comforts to procure.In a snug Cove on this our favoured Isle,A peaceful spot where Nature's gifts abound ;Then sure I have no reason to complain,Though poor to Sea I went, and poor I still remain.SONNETS. 205XIX.AT BALA-SALA, ISLE OF MAN.(supposed to be written by a friend of the author.)Broken in fortune, but in mind entireAnd sound in principle, I seek reposeWhere ancient trees this convent-pile enclose*,In ruin beautiful. When vain desireIntrudes on peace, I pray the eternal SireTo cast a soul-subduing shade on me,A grey-haired, pensive, thankful Refugee,A shade but with some sparks of heavenly fireOnce to these cells vouchsafed. And when I noteThe old Tower's brow yellowed as with the beamsOf sunset ever there, albeit streamsOf stormy weather-stains that semblance wrought,I thank the silent Monitor, and sayShine so, my aged brow, at all hours of the day !'*Rush en Abbey.206 SONNETS*XX.TYNWALD HILL.Once on the top of Tynwald's formal mound(Still marked with green turf circles narrowingStage above stage) would sit this Island's King,The laws to promulgate, enrobed and crowned ;While, compassing the little mount around,Degrees and Orders stood, each under each :Now, like to things within fate's easiest reach.The power is merged, the pomp a grave has found.Off with yon cloud, old Safely ! ^ that thine eyeOver three Realms may take its widest range ;And let, for them, thy fountains utter strangeVoices, thy winds break forth in prophecy.If the whole State must suffer mortal change,Like Mona's miniature of sovereignty.SONNETS. 207XXI.Despond who will — heard a voice exclaim,Though fierce the assault, and shatter'd the defence.It cannot be that Britain's social frame,The glorious work of time and providenceBefore a flying season's rash pretence,Should fall ; that She, whose virtue put to shame.When Europe prostrate lay, the Conqueror's aim,Should perish, self-subverted. Black and denseThe cloud is ; but brings that a day of doomTo Liberty ? Her sun is up the while.That orb whose beams round Saxon Alfred shone,Then laugh, ye innocent Vales ! ye Streams, sweepon.Nor let one billow of our heaven-blest IsleToss in the fanning wind a humbler plume."SONNETS.XXII.IN THE Faith OF CLYDE, Ails CRAG.(JULY 17. 1833.)Since risen from ocean, ocean to defy,Appeared the Crag of Ails ; ne'er did mornWith gleaming lights more gracefully adornHis sides, or wreathe with mist his forehead high :Now, faintly darkening with the sun's eclipse,Still is he seen, in lone sublimity,Towering above the sea and little ships ;For dwarfs the tallest seem while sailing by,Each for her haven ; with her freight of Care,Pleasure, or Grief, and Toil that seldom looksInto the secret of tomorrow's fare ;Though poor, yet rich, without the wealth of books.Or aught that watchful Love to Nature owesFor her mute Powers, fix'd Forms, and transientShows.SONNETS.XXIII.ON THE Faith OF CLYDE.(in a steam-boat.)Arran ! a single-crested TenerifFe,A St. Helena next — in shape and hue,Varying her crowded peaks and ridges blue ;Who but must covet a cloud-seat or skifFBuilt for the air, or winged HippogrifF,That he might fly, where no one could pursue,From this dull Monster and her sooty crew ;And, like a God, light on thy topmost clifF.Impotent wish ! which reason would despiseIf the mind knew no union of extremes,No natural bond between the boldest schemesAmbition frames, and heart-humilities.Beneath stern mountains many a soft vale lies.And lofty springs give birth to lowly streams.210 SONNETS.XXIV.ON REVISITING Dolly CASTLE.[See former series, p. 16.]The captive Bird was gone ; — to clifF or moorPerchance had flown, delivered by the storm ;Or he had pined, and sunk to feed the worm :Him found we not ; but, climbing a tall tower.There saw, impaled with rude fidelityOf art mosaic, in a roofless floor.An Eagle with stretched wings, but beamless eye —An Eagle that could neither wail nor soar.Effigies of the Vanished, (shall I dareTo call thee so?) or symbol of past times,That towering courage, and the savage deedsThose times were proud of, take Thou too a share,Not undeserved, of the memorial rhymesThat animate my way where'er it leads !XXV.THE Dolly EAGLE.Not to the clouds, not to the cliffy he flew ;But when a storm, on sea or mountain bred,Came and delivered him, alone he spedInto the Castle-dungeon's darkest mew.Now, near his Master's house in open viewHe dwells, and hears indignant tempests howl.Kennelled and chained. Ye tame domestic Fowl,Beware of him ! Thou, saucy Cockatoo,Look to thy plumage and thy life ! — The Roe,Fleet as the west wind, is for him no quarry ;Balanced in ether he will never tarry,Eying the sea's blue depths. Poor Bird ! even soDoth Man of Brother-man a creature make,That clings to slavery for its own sad sake.212 SONNETS.XXVI.CAVE OF STAFFA.We saw, but surely, in the motley crowd.Not One of us has felt, the far-famed sight ;How could we feel it ? each the other's blight,Hurried and hurrying, volatile and loud.O for those motions only that inviteThe Ghost of Fingal to his tuneful Cave !By the breeze entered, and wave after waveSoftly embosoming the timid light !And by one Votary who at will might standGazing, and take into his mind and heart.With undistracted reverence, the effectOf those proportions where the almighty handThat made the worlds, the sovereign Architect,Has deigned to work as if with human Art !SONNETS. 213XXVII.CAVE OF STAFFA.Thanks for the lessons of this Spot — fit schoolFor the presumptuous thoughts that would assignMechanic laws to agency divine ;And, measuring heaven by earth, would overruleInfinite Power. The pillared vestibule.Expanding yet precise, the roof embowed,Might seem designed to humble Man, when proudOf his best workmanship by plan and tool.Down-bearing with his whole Atlantic weightOf tide and tempest on the Structure's base,And flashing upwards to its topmost height,Ocean has proved its strength, and of its graceIn calms is conscious, finding for his freightOf softest music some responsive place.214 SONNETS.XXVIII.CAVE OF STAFFA,Ye shadowy Beings, that have rights and claimsIn every cell of Fingers mystic Grot,Where are ye ? Driven or venturing to the spot,Our Fathers glimpses caught of your thin Frames,And, by your mien and bearing, knew your names ;And they could hear his ghostly song who trodEarth, till the flesh lay on him like a load.While he struck his desolate harp without hopes oraims.Vanished ye are, but subject to recall ;Why keep we else the instincts whose dread lawRuled here of yore, till what men felt they saw,Not by black arts but magic natural !If eyes be still sworn vassals of belief,Yon light shapes forth a Bard, that shade a Chief.SONNETS. 215XXIX.FLOWERS ON THE TOP OF THE PILLARS AT THEENTRANCE OF THE CAVE.Hope smiled when your nativity was cast,Children of Summer I ^^ Ye fresh flowers that braveWhat Summer here escapes not, the fierce wave.And whole artillery of the western blast,Battering the Temple's front, its long-drawn naveSmiting, as if each moment were their last.But ye, bright flowers, on frieze and architraveSurvive, and once again the Pile stands fast.Calm as the Universe, from specular TowersOf heaven contemplated by Spirits pure —Suns and their systems, diverse yet sustainedIn symmetry, and fashioned to endure,Unhurt, the assault of Time with all his hours,As the supreme Artificer ordained.216 SONNETS.XXX.On to iona ! — What can she affordTo us save matter for a thoughtful sigh,Heaved over ruin with stabilityIn urgent contrast? To diffuse the Word(Thy Paramount, mighty Nature ! and Time's Lord)Her Temples rose, 'mid pagan gloom ; but why.Even for a moment, has our verse deploredTheir wrongs, since they fulfilled their destiny ?And when, subjected to a common doomOf mutability, those far-famed PilesShall disappear from both the sister Isles,iona's Saints, forgetting not past days.Garlands shall wear of amaranthine bloom,While heaven's vast sea of voices chants theirpraise.SONNETS. 217XXXI.lONA.(upon landing.)With earnest look, to every voyager,Some ragged child holds up for sale his storeOf wave-worn pebbles, pleading on the shoreWhere once came monk and nun with gentle stir,Blessings to give, news ask, or suit prefer.But see yon neat trim church, a grateful speckOf novelty amid this sacred wreck —Nay spare thy scorn, haughty Philosopher !Fallen though she be, this Glory of the west,Still on her sons the beams of mercy shine ;And "hopes, perhaps more heavenly bright than thine,A grace by thee unsought and unpossest,A faith more fixed, a rapture more divineShall gild their passage to eternal rest." ^^!218 SONNETS.XXXII.THE BLACK STONES OF lONA.[See Martin's Voyage among the Western Isles.]Here on their knees men swore : the stones wereblack,Black in the People's minds and words, yet theyWere at that time, as now, in colour grey.But what is colour, if upon the rackOf conscience souls are placed by deeds that lackConcord with oaths ? What differ night and dayThen, when before the Perjured on his wayHell opens, and the heavens in vengeance crackAbove his head uplifted in vain prayerTo Saint, or Fiend, or to the Godhead whomHe had insulted — Peasant, King, or Thane.Fly where the culprit may, guilt meets a doom ;And, from invisible worlds at need laid bare.Come links for social order's awful chain.SONNETS. 219XXXIII.Homeward we turn. Isle of Columba's Cell,Where Christian piety's soul-cheering spark(Kindled from Heaven between the light and darkOf time) shone like the morning-star, farewell ! —Remote St. Kilda, art thou visible ?No — but farewell to thee, beloved sea-markFor many a voyage made in Fancy's bark,When, with more hues than in the rainbow dwellThou a mysterious intercourse dost hold;Extracting from clear skies and air serene,And out of sun-bright waves, a lucid veil.That thickens, spreads, and, mingling fold with foldMakes known, when thou no longer canst be seen,Thy whereabout, to warn the approaching sail.L 2220 SONNETS.XXXIV.GREENOCK.Per me si va bella Cotta dolente.We have not passed into a doleful City,We who were led to-day down a grim Dell,By some too boldly named " the Jaws of Hell :"Where be the wretched Ones, the sights for pity ?These crowded streets resound no plaintive ditty :As from the hive where bees in summer dwell,Sorrow seems here excluded; and that knell.It neither damps the gay, nor checks the witty.Too busy Mart ! thus fared it with old Tyre,Whose Merchants Princes were, whose decks werethrones :Soon may the punctual sea in vain respireTo serve thy need, in union with that ClydeWhose nursling current brawls o'er mossy stones,The poor, the lonely Herdsman's joy and pride.SONNETS. 221XXXV.There! " said a Stripling, pointing with meet prideTowards a low roof with green trees half concealed,Is Mossgiel farm ; and that 's the very fieldWhere Barns ploughed up the Daisy." Far and wideA plain below stretched sea-ward, while, descriedAbove sea-clouds, the Peaks of Arran rose ;And, by that simple notice, the reposeOf earth, sky, sea, and air was vivified.Beneath " the random held of clod or stone "Myriads of Daisies have shone forth in flowerNear the lark's nest, and in their natural hourHave passed away, less happy than the OneThat by the unwilling ploughshare died to proveThe tender charm of Poetry and Love.L 3222 SONNETS.Xxxvi.FANCY AND TRADITION.The Lovers took within this ancient groveTheir last embrace ; beside those crystal springsThe Hermit saw the Angel spread his wingsFor instant flight ; the Sage in yon alcoveSate musing ; on that hill the Bard would rove,Not mute, where now the Linnet only sings :Thus every where to truth Tradition clings,Or Fancy localities Powers we love.Were only History Licensed to take noteOf things gone by, her meagre monumentsWould ill suffice for persons and events :There is an ampler page for man to quote,A readier book of manifold contents,Studied alike in palace and in cot.SONNETS. 223XXXVII.THE RIVER EDEN, CUMBERLAND.Eden ! till now thy beauty had I viewedBy glimpses only, and confess with shameThat verse of mine, whatever its varying mood,Repeats but once the sound of thy sweet name ;Yet fetched from Paradise ^^ that honour came,Rightfully borne ; for Nature gives thee flowersThat have no rivals among British bowers ;And thy bold rocks are worthy of their fame.Measuring thy course, fair Stream I at length I payTo my life's neighbour dues of neighbourhood ;But I have traced thee on thy winding wayVv^ith pleasure sometimes by the thought restrainedThat things far off are toiled for, while a goodNot sought, because too near, is seldom gained.L 4224 SONNETS.XXXVIII.MONUMENT OF MRS. HOWARD,{by NolleMns^IX Ethereal CHURCH, NEAR CORBY, ON THE BANKS OF THEEDEN.Stretched on the dying Mother's lap, hies deadHer new-born Babe, dire issue of bright hope !But Sculpture here, with the divinest scopeOf luminous faith, heavenward hath raised that headSo patiently ; and through one hand has spreadA touch so tender for the insensate Child,Earth's lingering love to parting reconciledBrief parting — for the spirit is all but fled;That we, who contemplate the turns of lifeThrough this still medium, are consoled and cheered;Feel with the Mother, think the severed WifeIs less to be lamented than revered ;And own that Art, triumphant over strifeAnd pain, hath powers to Eternity endeared.SONNETS.XXXIX.99;3Tranquillity ! the sovereign aim wert thouIn heathen schools of philosophic lore ;Heart-stricken by stern destiny of yoreThe Tragic Muse thee served with thoughtful vow ;And what of hope Elysium could allowWas fondly seized by Sculpture, to restorePeace to the Mourner's soul ; but He who woreThe crown of thorns around his bleeding browWarmed our sad being with his glorious light :Then Arts, which still had drawn a softening graceFrom shadowy fountains of the Infinite,Communed with that Idea face to face ;And move around it now as planets run,Each in its orbit, round the central Sun.L 5226 SONNETSXL.NUNNERY.The floods are roused, and will not soon be weary ;Down from the Pennine Alps ^ how fiercely sweepsColin, the stately Eden's tributary!He raves or through some moody passage creepsPlotting new mischief — out again he leapsInto broad light, and sends, through regions airy,That voice which soothed the Nuns while on thesteepsThey knelt in prayer, or sang to blissful Mary.That union ceased : then, cleaving easy walksThrough crags, and smoothing paths beset withdanger.Came studious Taste ; and many a pensive StrangerDreams on the banks, and to the river talks.What change shall happen next to Nunnery Dell ?Canal, and Viaduct, and Railway, tell ! '•"The chain of Crossbill, which parts Cumberland and Westmorelandfrom Northumberland and Durham.SONNETS. 227XLI.STEAMBOATS, VIADUCTS, AND RAILWAYS.Motions and Means, on land and sea at warWith old poetic feeling, not for this.Shall ye, by Poets even, be judged amiss !Nor shall your presence, howsoe'er it marThe loveliness of Nature, prove a barTo the Mind's gaining that prophetic senseOf future change, that point of vision whenceMay be discovered what in soul ye are.In spite of all that beauty may disownIn your harsh features, Nature doth embraceHer lawful offspring in Man's art ; and Time,Pleased with your triumphs o'er his brother Space,Accepts from your bold hands the proffered crownOf hope, and smiles on you with cheer sublime.L 6228 SONNETS.XLII.LowTHER ! in thy majestic Pile are seenCathedral pomp and grace, in apt accordWith the baronial castle's sterner mien ;Union significant of God adored,And charters won and guarded by the swordOf ancient honour; whence that goodly stateOf Polity which wise men venerate,And will maintain, if God his help afford.Hourly the democratic torrent swells ;For airy promises and hopes subornedThe strength of backward-looking thoughts isscorned.Fall if ye must, ye Towers and Pinnacles,With what ye symbolise, authentic StoryWill say, Ye disappeared with England's Glory !SONNETS. 229XLIII.TO THE EARL OF LONSDALEJ"^Magistrates indicate virum."Lonsdale! it were unworthy of a Guest,Whose heart with gratitude to thee inclines,If he should speak, by fancy touched, of signsOn thy Abode harmoniously imprest,Yet be unmoved with wishes to attestHow in thy mind and moral frame agreeFortitude and that christian CharityWhich, filling, consecrates the human breast.And if the Motto on thy 'scutcheon teachWith truth, " The Magistracy shows the Man ;That searching test thy public course has stood ;As will be owned alike by bad and good,Soon as the measuring of life's little spanShall place thy virtues out of Envy's reach.230 SONNETS.XLIV.TO Cornelia M~Hampstead, ULLSWATER.Not in the mines beyond the western main,You tell me, Delia ! was the metal sought,Which a fine skill, of Indian growth, has wroughtInto this flexible yet faithful Chain ;Nor is it silver of romantic SpainYou say. but from Helvellyn's depths was brought,Our own domestic mountain. Thing and thoughtMix strangely ; trifles light, and partly vain.Can prop, as you have learnt, our nobler being :Yes, Lady, while about your neck is wound(Your casual glance oft meeting) this bright cord,What witchery, for pure gifts of inward seeing,Lurks in it, Memory's Helper, Fancy's Lord,For precious trembling in your bosom found !SONNETS. 231XLV.CONCLUSION.Most sweet it is with uplifted eyesTo pace the ground, if path be there or none,While a fair region round the Traveller liesWhich he forbears again to look upon ;Pleased rather with some soft ideal scene.The work of Fancy, or some happy toneOf meditation, slipping in betweenThe beauty coming and the beauty gone.If Thought and Love desert us, from that dayLet us break off all commerce with the Muse ;With Thought and Love companions of our way.Whatever the senses take or may refuse,The Mind's internal Heaven shall shed her dewsOf inspiration on the humblest lay.NOTES.The River Greta. Page 190.1 " But if thou like Cactus," &c.Many years ago, when the author was at Greta Bridge, inYorkshire, the hostess of the inn, proud of her skill in etymology,said, that " the name of the river was taken from thebridge, the form of which, as every one must notice, exactlyresembled a great A." But Dr. Whitaker has derived it fromthe word of common occurrence in the north of England, " togreet ; " signifying to lament aloud, mostly with weeping : aconjecture rendered more probable from the stony and rockychannel of both the Cumberland and Yorkshire rivers. TheCumberland Greta, though it does not, among the countrypeople, take up that name till within three miles of its disappearancein the river Derwent, may be considered as havingits source in the mountain cove of Wythburn, and flowingthrough Thirlmere, the beautiful features of which lake areknown only to those who, travelling between Grasmere andKeswick, have quitted the main road in the vale of Wythburn,and, crossing over to the opposite side of the lake, have proceededwith it on the right hand.The channel of the Greta, immediately above Keswick, has,for the purposes of building, been in a great measure clearedof the immense stones which, by their concussion in highfloods, produced the loud and awful noises described in thesonnet.NOTES. 233The scenery upon this river," says Mr. Southey in hisColloquies, " where it passes under the woody side of Latrigg,is of the finest and most remembrance kind : —ambiguous lapse refluitque fluitque,Occurrence sibi ventures spirit unda.' "2 To the River Derwent. Page 191.This sonnet has already appeared in several editions of theauthor's poems; but he is tempted to reprint it in this place, asanatural introduction to the two that follow it.Nun's Well, Brigham. Page 194.3 " By hooded votaries," &c.Attached to the church of Brigham was formerly a chantry,which held a moiety of the manor ; and in the decayedparsonage some vestiges of monastic architecture are still to be+ Mary Queen of Scots landing at Workington. Page 1 96.The fears and impatience of Mary were so great," saysRobertson, " that she got into a fisher-boat, and with abouttwenty attendants landed at Workington, in Cumberland ; andthence she was conducted with many marks of respect to Carlisle." The apartment in which the Queen had slept at WorkingtonHall (where she was received by Sir Henry Currentsbecame her rank and misfortunes) was long preserved, outof respect to her memory, as she had left it ; and one cannotbut regret that some necessary alterations in the mansioncould not be effected without its destruction.Douglas Bay, Isle of Man. Page 200.^ " They are led by noble Hillary."The Tower of Refuge, an ornament to Douglas Bay, waserected chiefly through the humanity and zeal of Sir WilliamHillary; and he also was the founder of the life-boat establishesNOTES.merit, at that place ; by which, under his superintendence, andoften by his exertions at the imminent hazard of his own life,many seamen and passengers have been saved.6 By a retired Mariner. Page 204.This unpretending sonnet is by a gentleman nearly connectedwith the author who hopes, as it falls so easily into itsplace, that both the writer and the reader will excuse its appearancehere.Tynwald Hill Page 206.Off with yon cloud, old Safely ! 'The summit of this mountain is well chosen by Cowley, asthe scene of the " Vision," in which the spectral angel discourseswith him concerning the government of Oliver Cromwell." I found myself," says he, " on the top of that famoushill in the Island Mona, which has the prospect of threegreat, and not long since most happy, kingdoms. As soon asever I looked upon them, they called forth the sad representationof all the sins and all the miseries that had overwhelmedthem these twenty years." It is not to be denied that thechanges now in progress, and the passions, and the way inwhich they work, strikingly resemble those which led to thedisasters the philosophic writer so feelingly bewails. Godgrant that the resemblance may not become still more strikingas months and years advance !8 On revisiting Dunolly Castle. Page 210.This ingenious piece of workmanship, as the author afterwardslearned, had been executed for their own amusementby some labourers employed about the place.9 Cave of Staffa. Page 2 1 3.The reader may be tempted to exclaim, " How came this andthe two following sonnets to be written, after the dissatisfied235tion expressed in the preceding one ? " In fact, at the risk ofincurring the reasonable displeasure of the master of the steamboat,the author returned to the cave, and explored it undercircumstances more favourable to those imaginative impressions,which it is so wonderfully fitted to make upon themind.Sonnet 29. Page 215.10 " Hope smiled when your nativity was cast.Children of summer ! "Upon the head of the columns which form the front ofthe cave, rests a body of decomposed basaltic matter, whichwas richly decorated with that large bright flower, the ox-eyeddaisy. The author had noticed the same flower growing withprofusion among the bold rocks on the western coast of theIsle of Man ; making a brilliant contrast with their black andgloomy surfaces.11 iona. Page 217.The four last lines of this sonnet are adopted from a well-knownsonnet of Russel, as conveying the author's feelingbetter than any words of his own could do.The River Eden, Page 223.12 « Yet fetched from Paradise," &c.It is to be feared that there is more of the poet than thesound etymologist in this derivation of the name Eden. Onthe western coast of Cumberland is a rivulet which enters thesea at Moresby, known also in the neighbourhood by the nameof Eden. May not the latter syllable come from the wordDean, a valley 9 Language, near Amalekite, is by the inhabitantscalled Langton. The former syllable occurs in thename Egmont, a principal feeder of the Eden ; and the streamwhich flows, when the tide is out, over Carmel Sands, is calledthe Ea.236 NOTES.Nunnery. Page 226.13 " Canal, and Viaduct, and Railway, tell !"At Corby, a few miles below Nunnery, the Eden is crossedby a magnificent viaduct ; and another of these works is thrownover a deep glen or ravine at a very short distance from themain stream.14 To the Earl of Lonsdale. Page 229.This sonnet was written immediately after certain trials,which took place at the Cumberland Assizes, when the Earlof Lonsdale, in consequence of repeated and long continuedattacks Upon his character, through the local press, had thoughtit right to prosecute the conductors and proprietors of threeseveral journals. A verdict of libel was given in one case ;and in the others, the prosecutions were withdrawn, upon theindividuals retracting and disavowing the charges, expressingregret that they had been made, and promising to abstain fromthe like in future.LINESWRITTEN IN THE ALBUM OF THE COUNTESS OFNov. 5. 1834.Lady ! a Pen, perhaps, with thy regard,Among the Favoured, favoured not the least,Left, 'mid the Records of this Book inscribed,Deliberate traces, registers of thoughtAnd feeling, suited to the place and timeThat gave them birth: — months passed, and stillthis hand.That had not been too timid to imprintWords which the virtues of thy Lord inspired.Was yet not bold enough to write of Thee.And why that scrupulous reserve ? In soothThe blameless cause lay in the Theme itselfFlowers are there many that delight to striveWith the sharp wind, and seem to court the shower,Yet are by nature careless of the sunWhether he shine on them or not ; and some,Where'er he naves along the unclouded sky.238 LINES WRITTEN IN THETurn a broad front full on his flattering beams :Others do rather from their notice shrink,Loving the dewy shade, — a humble Band,Modest and sweet, a Progeny of earth,Congenial with thy mind and character,High-born Augusta ITowers, and stately Groves,Bear witness for me ; thou, too. Mountain-stream !From thy most secret haunts ; and ye Parterres,Which she is pleased and proud to call her own ;Witness how oft upon my noble FriendMute offerings, tribute from an inward senseOf admiration and respectful love.Have waited, till the affections could no moreEndure that silence, and broke out in song ;Snatches of music taken up and droptLike those self-solacing those under notesTrilled by the redbreast, when autumnal leavesAre thin upon the bough. Mine, only mine.The pleasure was, and no one heard the praise,Checked, in the moment of its issue checked ;And reprehended by a fancied blushFrom the pure qualities that called it forth.ALBUM OF THE COUNTESS OF . 239Thus Virtue lives debarred from Virtue's meed;Thus, Lady, is retiredness a veilThat, while it only spreads a softening charmO'er features looked at by discerning eyes.Hides half their beauty from the common gaze ;And thus, even on the exposed and breezy hillOf lofty station, female goodness walks.When side by side with lunar gentleness.As in a cloister. Yet the grateful Poor(Such the immunities of low estate.Plain Nature's enviable privilege.Her sacred recompence for many wants)Open their hearts before Thee, pouring outAll that they think and feel, with tears of joy ;And benedictions not unheard in Heaven :And friend in the ear of friend where speech is freeTo follow truth, is eloquent as they.Then let the Book receive in these prompt linesA just memorial ; and thine eyes consentTo read that they, who mark thy course, behold ^A life declining with the golden lightOf summer, in the season of sere leaves ;See cheerfulness undamped by stealing Time ;240 LINES, ETC.See studied kindness flow with easy stream,Illustrated with inborn courtesy ;And an habitual disregard of selfBalanced by vigilance for others' weal.And shall the verse not tell of lighter giftsWith these ennobling attributes conjoinedAnd blended, in peculiar harmony,By Youth's surviving spirit? What agile grace !A nymphlike liberty, in nymphlike form,Beheld with wonder ; whether floor or pathThou tread, or on the managed steed art borne,Fleet as the shadows, over down or field,Driven by strong winds at play among the clouds.Yet one word more — one farewell word — a wishWhich came, but it has passed into a prayer.That, as thy sun in brightness is declining,So, at an hour yet distant for their sakesWhose tender love, here faltering on the wayOf a diviner love, will be forgiven, —So may it set in peace, to rise againFor everlasting glory won by faith.THE SOMNAMBULIST.1.List, ye who pass by Lyulph's Tower *At eve ; how softly thenDoth Air-force, that torrent hoarse.Speak from the woody glen !Fit music for a solemn vale !And holier seems the groundTo him who catches on the galeThe spirit of a mournful tale,Embodied in the sound.A pleasure-house built by the late Duke of Norfolk uponthe banks of Ullswater. Force is the word used in the LakeDistrict for Water-fall.M242 THE SOMNAMBULIST.2.Not far from that fair site whereonThe Pleasure-house is reared,As Story says, in antique days,A stern-brow'd house appeared ;Foil to a jewel rich in lightThere set, and guarded well ;Cage for a bird of plumage bright.Sweet-voiced, nor wishing for a flightBeyond her native dell.To win this bright bird from her cage.To make this gem their own.Came Barons bold, with store of gold.And Knights of high renown ;But one she prized, and only One ;Sir Eglamore was he ;Full happy season, when was known,Ye Dales and Hills ! to you aloneTheir mutual loyalty —THE SOMNAMBULIST. 243Known chiefly, Air I to thy glen,Thy brook, and bowers of holly ;Where Passion caught what Nature taught.That all but Love is folly ;Where Fact with Fancy stooped to play,Doubt came not, nor regret ;To trouble hours that winged their way,As if through an immortal dayWhose sun could never set.But in old times Love dwelt not longSequester'd with repose ;Best throve the fire of chaste desire.Fanned by the breath of foes.A conquering lance is beauty's test,And proves the Lover true;"So spake Sir Eglamore, and pressedThe drooping Emma to his breast.And looked a blind adieu.M 2244 THE SOMNAMBULIST.They parted. — Well with him it faredThrough wide-spread regions errant ;A knight of proof in love's behoof.The thirst of fame his warrant :And she her happiness can buildOn woman's quiet hours ;Though faint, compared with spear and shield,The solace beads and masses yield.And needlework and flowers.7.Yet blest was Emma when she heardHer Champion's praise recounted ;Though brain would swim, and eyes grow dim,And high her blushes mounted ;Or when a bold heroic layShe warbled from full heart :Delightful blossoms for the MayOf absence ! but they will not stay,Born only to depart.THE SOMNAMBULIST. 2458.Hope wanes with her, while lustre fillsWhatever path he chooses ;As if his orb, that owns no curb,Received the light hers loses.He comes not back ; an ampler spaceRequires for nobler deeds ;He ranges on from place to place,Till of his doings is no traceBut what her fancy breeds.His fame may spread, but in the pastHer spirit finds its centre ;Clear sight she has of what he was.And that would now content her.'^ Still is he my devoted knight?"The tear in answer flows ;Month falls on month with heavier weight ;Day sickens round her, and the nightIs empty of repose.M 3246 THE SOMNAMBULIST.10.In sleep she sometimes walked abroad,Deep sighs with quick words blending,Like that pale Queen whose hands are seenWith fancied spots contending ;But she is innocent of blood, —The moon is not more pureThat shines aloft, while through the woodShe thrice her way, the sounding FloodHer melancholy lure !11.While 'mid the fern-brake sleeps the doe,And owls alone are waking,In white arrayed, glides on the MaidThe downward pathway taking.That leads her to the torrent's sideAnd to a holly bower ;By whom on this still night descried ?By whom in that lone place espied ?By thee. Sir Eglamore !THE SOMNAMBULIST. 24712.A wandering Ghost, so thinks the Knight,His coming step has thwarted,Beneath the boughs that heard their vows,Within whose shade they parted.Hush, hush, the busy Sleeper see !Perplexed her fingers seem.As if they from the holly treeGreen twigs would pluck, as rapidlyFlung from her to the stream.13.What means the Spectre ? Why intentTo violate the Tree,Thought Eglamore, by which I sworeUnfading constancy ?Here am I, and tomorrow's sun,To her I left, shall proveThat bliss is ne'er so surely wonAs when a circuit has been runOf valour, truth, and love.M 4248 THE SOMNAMBULIST.14.So from the spot whereon he stood,He moved with stealthy pace ;And, drawing nigh, with his living eye,He recognised the face ;And whispers caught, and speeches small,Some to the green-leaved tree.Some muttered to the torrent-fall, —Roar on, and bring him with thy call ;I heard, and so may he ! "15.Soul-shattered was the Knight, nor knewIf Emma's Ghost it were.Or boding Shade, or if the MaidHer very self stood there.He touched, what followed who shall tell ?The soft touch snapped the threadOf slumber — shrieking back she fell,And the Stream whirled her down the dellAlong its foaming bed.THE SOMNAMBULIST. 24916.In plunged the Knight ! when on firm groundThe rescued Maiden lap,Her eyes grew bright with blissful light,Confusion passed away ;She heard, ere to the throne of graceHer faithful Spirit flew.His voice ; beheld his speaking face,And, dying, from his own embrace,She felt that he was true.17.So was he reconciled to life :Brief words may speak the rest ;Within the dell he built a cell.And there was Sorrow's guest ;In hermits' weeds repose he found.From vain temptations free ;Beside the torrent dwelling — boundBy one deep heart-controlling soundsAnd awed to piety.M 5250 THE SOMNAMBULIST.18.Wild stream of Air, hold thy course,Nor fear memorial lays,Where clouds that spread in solemn shade,Are edged with golden rays !Dear art thou to the light of Heaven,Though minister of sorrow ;Sweet is thy voice at pensive Even ;And thou, in Lovers' hearts forgiven,Shall take thy place with Yarrow !TO ,UPON THE BIRTH OF HER FIRST-BORN CHILD, MARCH, 1833.Turn porro puer, ut ssevis projects ab undidNavita ; nidus hume janet," &c. — Lucretius.Like a shipwreck'd Sailor tostBy rough waves on a perilous coast,Lies the Babe, in helplessnessAnd in tenderest nakedness,Flung by labouring nature forthUpon the mercies of the earth.Can its eyes beseech ? no moreThan the hands are free to implore :Voice but serves for one brief cry,Plaint was it ? or prophecyOf sorrow that will surely come ?Omen of man's grievous doom !But, O Mother ! by the closeDuly granted to thy throes ;M 6252 TO , ETC.By the silent thanks now tendingIncense-like to Heaven, descendingNow to mingle and to moveWith the gush of earthly love,As a debt to that frail Creature,Instrument of struggling NatureFor the blissful calm, the peaceKnown but to this one release ;Can the pitying spirit doubtThat for human-kind springs outFrom the penalty a senseOf more than mortal recompence ?As a floating summer cloud,Though of gorgeous drapery proud,To the sun-burnt traveller.Or the stooping labourer,Ofttimes makes its bounty knownBy its shadow round him thrown ;So, by conquering of sad cheer.Heavenly guardians, brooding near,Of their presence tell — too brightHaply for corporeal sight !TO , ETC. administersof grace divineFeelingly their brows inclineO'er this seeming CastawayBreathing, in the light of day,Something like the faintest breathThat has power to baffle death —Beautiful, while very weaknessCaptivates like passive meekness !And, sweet Mother ! under warrantOf the universal Parent,Who repays in season dueThem who have, like thee, been trueTo the filial chain let downFrom his everlasting throne.Angels hovering round thy couch,With their softest whispers vouch,That, whatever griefs may fret,Cares entangle, sins besetThis thy first-born, and with tearsStain her cheek in future years,Heavenly succour, not deniedTo the Babe, whate'er betide.Will to the Woman be supplied !254 TO , ETC.Mother ! blest be thy calm ease ;Blest the starry promises,And the firmament benignHallowed be it, where they shine !Yes, for them whose souls have scopeAmple for a winged hope,And can earthward bend an earFor needful listening, pledge is here,That, if thy new-born Charge shall treadIn thy footsteps, and be ledBy that other Guide, whose lightOf manly virtues, mildly bright,Gave him first the wished-for partIn thy gentle virgin heart,Then, amid the storms of lifePresignified by that dread strifeWhence ye have escaped together.She may look for serene weather ;In all trials sure to findComfort for a faithful mind ;Kindlier issues, holier rest.Than even now await her prest,Conscious Nursling, to thy breast !THE WARNING,A SEQUEL TO THE FOREGOING.MARCH, 18S3.List, the winds of March are blowing;Her ground-flowers shrink, afraid of showingTheir meek heads to the nipping air,Which ye feel not happy pair !Sunk into a kindly sleep.We, meanwhile, our hope will keep ;And if Time leagued with adverse Change(Too busy fear !) shall cross its range,Whatsoever check they bring.Anxious duty hindering.To like hope our prayers will cling.Thus, while the ruminating spirit feedsUpon each home-event as life proceeds,Affections pure and holy in their sourceGain a fresh impulse, run a livelier course;Hopes that within the Father's heart prevail.Are in the experienced Grandsire's slow to fail ;956 THE WARNING.And if the harp pleased his gay youth, it ringsTo his grave touch with no unready strings,While thoughts press on, and feelings overflow,And quick words round him fall like flakes of snow.Thanks to the Powers that yet maintain theirsway,And have renewed the tributary Lay.Truths of the heart flock in with eager pace,And Fancy greets them with a fond embrace ;Swift as the rising sun his beams extendsShe shoots the tidings forth to distant friends ;Their gifts she hails (deemed precious, as they proveFor the unconscious Babe an unbeaten love ! )But from this peaceful centre of delightVague sympathies have urged her to take flight.She rivals the fleet Swallow, making ringsIn the smooth lake where'er he dips his wings :Rapt into upper regions, like the BeeThat sucks from mountain heath her honey fee ;Or, like the warbling Lark intent to shroudHis head in sunbeams or a bowery cloud,She soars — and here and there her pinions restOn proud towers, like this humble cottage, blestWith a new visitant, an infant guest —THE WARNING. 257Towers where red streamers flout the breezy skyIn pomp foreseen by her creative eye.When feasts shall crowd the Hall, and steeple bellsGlad proclamation make, and heights and dellsCatch the blithe music as it sinks or swells ;And harboured ships, whose pride is on the sea,Shall hoist their topmast flags in sign of glee.Honouring the hope of noble ancestry.But who (though neither reckoning ills assignedBy Nature, nor reviewing in the mindThe track that was, and is, and must be, wornWith weary feet by all of woman born) —Shall now by such a gift with joy be moved,Nor feel the fulness of that joy reproved?Not He, whose last faint memory will commandThe truth that Britain was his native land ;Whose infant soul was tutored to confideIn the cleansed faith for which her martyrs died ;Whose boyish ear the voice of her renownWith rapture thrilled; whose Youth revered thecrownOf Saxon liberty that Alfred wore,Alfred, dear Babe, thy great Progenitor !^58 THE WARNING.Not He, who from her mellowed practice drewHis social sense of just, and fair, and true ;And saw, thereafter, on the soil of FranceRash Polity begin her maniac dance.Foundations broken up, the deeps run wild,Nor grieved to see, (himself not beguiled) —Woke from the dream, the dreamer to upbraid,And learn how sanguine expectations fadeWhen novel trusts by folly are betrayed, —To see presumption, turning pale, refrainFrom further havoc, but repent in vain —Good aims lie down, and perish in the roadWhere guilt had urged them on, with ceaselessgoad,Till undiscriminating Ruin sweptThe Land, and Wrong perpetual vigils kept ;With proof before her that on public endsDomestic virtue vitally depends.Can such a one, dear Babe ! though glad and'proudTo welcome Thee, repel the fears that crowdInto his English breast, and spare to quakeNot for his own, but for thy innocent sake ?THE WARNING. 259Too late — or, should the providence of GodLead, through blind ways by sin and sorrow trod,Justice and peace to a secure abode,Too soon — thou com'st into this breathing world;Ensigns of mimic outrage are unfurled.Who shall preserve or prop the tottering Realm ?What hand suffice to govern the state-helm ?If, in the aims of men, the surest testOf good or bad (whatever be sought for or profest)Lie in the means required, or ways ordained,For compassing the end, else never gained ;Yet governors and govern'd both are blindTo this plain truth, or fling it to the wind ;If to expedience principle must bow ;Past, future, shrinking up beneath the incumbentNow;If cowardly concession still must feedThe thirst for power in men who never concede ;If generous Loyalty must stand in aweOf subtle Treason, with his mask of law;Or with bravado insolent and hard,Provoking punishment, to win reward ;If office help the factious to conspire.And they who should extinguish, fan the fire —260 THE WARNING.Then, will the sceptre be a straw, the crownSit loosely, like the thistle's crest of down ;To be blown off at will, by Power that spares itIn cunning patience, from the head that wears it.Lost people, trained to theoretic feud ;Lost above all, ye labouring multitude !Bewildered whether ye, by slanderous tonguesDeceived, mistake calamities for wrongs ;And over fancied usurpations brood.Oft snapping at revenge in sullen mood ;Or, from long stress of real ins cries flyTo desperation for a remedy ;In bursts of outrage spread your judgments wide.And to your wrath cry out, " Be thou our guide ; "Or, bound by oaths, come forth to tread earth'sfloorIn marshalled thousands, darkening street and moorWith the worst shape mock-patience ever wore ;Or, to the giddy top of self-esteemBy Flatterers carried, mount into a dreamOf boundless suffrage, at whose sage behestJustice shall rule, disorder be supprest,And every man sit down as Plenty's Guest !THE WARNING. 261O for a bridle bitted with remorseTo stop your Leaders in their headstrong course !Oh may the Almighty scatter with his graceThese mists, and lead you to a safer place,By paths no human wisdom can retrace !May He pour round you, from worlds far aboveMan's feverish passions, his pure light of love,That quietly restores the natural mienTo hope, and makes truth willing to be seen !Else shall your blood-stained hands in frenzy reapFields gaily sown when promises were cheap.Why is the Past belied with wicked art,The Future made to play so false a part.Among a people famed for strength of mind.Foremost in freedom, noblest of mankind?We act as if we toyed in the sad tuneStorms make in rising, valued in the moonNought but her changes. Thus, ungrateful Nation!If thou persist, and, scorning moderation,Spread for thyself the snares of tribulation.Whom, then, shall meekness guard? What savingskillLie in forbearance, strength in standing still ?262 THE WARNING.Soon shall the Widow (for the speed of TimeNought equals when the hours are winged withcrime)Widow, or Wife, implore on tremulous knee,From him who judged her Lord, a like decree ;The skies will weep o'er old men desolate :Ye Little-ones ! Earth shudders at your fate,Outcasts and homeless orphansBut turn, my Soul, and from the sleeping PairLearn thou the beauty of omniscient care !Be strong in faith, bid anxious thoughts lie still ;Seek for the good and cherish it — the illOppose, or bear with a submissive will.If this great world of joy and painRevolve in one sure track ;If Freedom, set, will rise again,And Virtue, flown, come back ;Woe to the purblind crew who fillThe heart with each day's care ;Nor gain, from past or future, skillTo bear, and to forbear !SONNET*,COMPOSED AFTER READING A NEWSPAPER OF THE DAY.People ! your chains are severing link by link ;Soon shall the Rich be levelled down — the PoorMeet them halfway." Vain boast ! for These, the moreThey thus would rise, must low and lower sinkTill, by repentance stung, they fear to think ;While all lie prostrate, save the tyrant fewBent in quick turns each other to undo,And mix the poison, they themselves must drink.Mistrust thyself, vain Country ! cease to cry,Knowledge will save me from the threatened woe."For, if than other rash ones more thou know,Yet on presumptuous wing as far would flyAbove thy knowledge as they dared to go.Thou wilt provoke a heavier penalty.This Sonnet ought to have followed No. VII. in theseries of 1831, but was omitted by mistake.LOVING AND LIKING:IRREGULAR VERSES,ADDRESSED TO A CHILD.[In the former editions of the author's Miscellaneous Poemsare three pieces addressed to Children: — the following, afew lines excepted, is by the same Writer ; and, as it belongsto the same unassuming class of compositions, she hasbeen prevailed upon to consent to its publication.]There's more in words than I can teach :Yet listen, Child I — I would not preach ;But only give some plain directionsTo guide your speech and your affections.Say not you love a roasted Fowl,.But you may love a screaming Owl,And, if you can, the unwieldy ToadThat crawls from his secure abodeWithin the mossy garden wallWhen evening dews begin to fall.Oh mark the beauty of his eye :What wonders in that circle lie !266 LOVING AND LIKING.So clear, so bright, our fathers saidHe wears a jewel in his head IAnd when, upon some showery day,Into a path or public wayA Frog leaps out from bordering grass,Startling the timid as they pass,Do you observe him, and endeavourTo take the intruder into favour ;Learning from him to find a reasonFor a light heart in a dull season.And you may love him in the pool.That is for him a happy school,In which he swims, as taught by nature,A pattern for a human creature.Glancing amid the water bright,And sending upward sparkling light.Nor blush if o'er your heart be stealingA love for things that have no feeling ;The spring's first Rose, by you espied,May fill your breast with joyful pride ;And you may love the Strawberry Flower,And love the Strawberry in its bower ;But when the fruit, so often praisedFor beauty, to your lip is raised.LOVING AND LIKING. 267Say not you love the delicate treat,But like it, enjoy it, and thankfully eat.Long may you love your pensioner Mouse,Though one of a tribe that torment the house :Nor dislike for her cruel sport the Cat,That deadly foe of both mouse and rat ;Remember she follows the law of her kind,And Instinct is neither wayward nor blind.Then think of her beautiful gliding form,Her tread that would not crush a worm,And her soothing song by the winter fire.Soft as the dying throb of the lyre.I would not circumscribe your love :It may soar with the Eagle and brood with the Dove,P May pierce the earth with the patient Mole,Or track the Hedgehog to his hole.Loving and liking are the solace of life.They foster all joy, and extinguish all strife.You love your father and your mother.Your grown-up and your baby brother ;You love your sister, and your friends,And countless blessings which God sends :And while these right affections play,You live each moment of your day;N 2268 LOVING AND LIKING.They lead you on to full content,And likings fresh and innocent,That store the mind, the memory feed.And prompt to many a gentle deed :But likings come, and pass away ;'Tis love that remains till our latest day:Our heavenward guide is holy love,And it will be our bliss with saints above.STANZASSUGGESTEDIN A Steam-boat OFF ST. BEES HEADS,ON THE COAST OF CUMBERLAND.N i5[St. Bees' Heads, anciently called the ClifF of Barth, are aconspicuous sea-mark for all vessels sailing in the Nee. partsof the Irish Sea. In a bay, one side of which is formed bythe southern headland, stands the village of St. Bees ; a placedistinguished, from very early times, for its religious andscholastic foundations.St. Bees," say Nicholson and Burns, " had its namefrom Began, an holy woman from Ireland, who is said to havefounded here, about the year of our Lord 650, a smallmonastery, where afterwards a church was built in memoryof her.The aforesaid religious house, being destroyed by theDanes, was restored by William de Mischiefs, son ofRalph, and brother of Ralph de Mischiefs, first Earlof Cumberland after the Conquest ; and made a cell of aprior and six Benedictine monks to the Abbey of St. Maryat York."Several traditions of miracles, connected with the foundationof the first of these religious houses, survive amongthe people of the neighbourhood ; one of which is alludedto in the following Stanzas ; and another, of a somewhatbolder and more peculiar character, has furnished the subjectof a spirited poem by the Rev. R. Parkinson, Mea., lateDivinity Lecturer of St. Bees' College, and now Fellow ofthe Collegiate Church of Manchester.After the dissolution of the monasteries, ArchbishopGrinder founded a free school at St. Bees, from which thecounties of Cumberland and Westmoreland have derivedgreat benefit ; and recently, under the patronage of theEarl of Lonsdale, a college has been established there forthe education of ministers for the English Church. Theold Conventual Church has been repaired under the superintendenceof the Rev. Dr. Anger, the Head of the College; and is well worthy of being visited by any strangerswho might be led to the neighbourhood of this celebratedspot.The form of stanza in the following Piece, and somethingin the style of versification, are adopted from the " St. Monica,"a poem of much beauty upon a monastic subject, byCharlotte Smith : a lady to whom English verse is undergreater obligations, than are likely to be either acknowledgedor remembered. She wrote little, and that little unambitious,but with true feeling for nature.]ST. BEES,SUGGESTEDIN A Steam-boat OFF ST. BEES HEADS.1.If Life were slumber on a bed of down,Toil imposed, vicissitude unknown,Sad were our lot : no Hunter of the HareExults like him whose javelin from the lairHas roused the Lion ; no one plucks the Rose,Whose proffered beauty in safe shelter blowsMid a trim garden's summer luxuries,With joy like his who climbs on hands and knees,For some rare Plant, yon Headland of St. Bees.N 4this in dependence upon oar and sail,This new indifference to breeze or gale,This straight-lined progress, furrowing a flat lea,And regular as if locked in certainty,Depress the hours. Up, Spirit of the Storm !That Courage may find something to perform ;That Fortitude, whose blood disdains to frcQ^eAt Danger's bidding, may confront the seas,Firm as the towering Headlands of St. Bees.3.Dread Cliff of Barth ! that wild wish may sleep.Bold as if Men and Creatures of the DeepBreathed the same Element : too many wrecksHave struck thy sides, too many ghastly decksHast thou looked down upon, that such a thoughtShould here be welcome, and in verse inwrought :With thy stern aspect better far agreesUtterance of thanks that we have past with ease,As Millions thus shall do, the Headlands of St. Bees.ST. BEES. 2734.Yet, while each useful Art augments her store,What boots the gain if Nature should lose more ?And Wisdom, that once held a Christian placeIn Man's intelligence sublimed by grace ?When Began sought of yore the Cumbrian coast,Tempestuous winds her holy errand cross'd ;As high and higher heaved the billows, faithGrew with them, mightier than the powers of death.She knelt in prayer — the waves their wrath appease ;And, from her vow well weighed in Heaven's decrees,Rose, where she touched the strand, the Chantryof St. Bees.5.Cruel of heart were they, bloody of hand,"Who in these Wilds then struggled for commandThe strong were merciless, without hope the weak ;Till this bright Stranger came, fair as Day-break,And as a Cresset true that darts its lengthOf beamy lustre from a tower of strength ;Guiding the Mariner through troubled seas.And cheering oft his peaceful reveries, ,.Like the fixed Light that crowns yon headland ofSt. Bees.N 5274 ST. BEES.6.To aid the Votaress, miracles believedWrought in men's minds, like miracles achieved;So piety took root ; and Song might tellWhat humanizing Virtues round her CellSprang up, and spread their fragrance wide around ;How savage bosoms melted at the soundOf gospel-truth enchained in harmoniesWafted o'er waves, or creeping through close trees,From her religious Mansion of St. Bees.7.When her sweet Voice, that instrument of love,Was glorified, and took its place, aboveThe silent stars, among the angelic Quire,Her Chantry blazed with sacrilegious lire,And perished utterly ; but her good deedsHad sown the spot that witnessed them with seedsWhich lay in earth expectant, till a breezeWith quickening impulse answered their mute pleas.And lo ! a statelier Pile, the Abbey of St. Bees.ST. BEES. 2758.There were the naked clothed, the hungry fed ;And Charity extended to the DeadHer intercessions made for the soul's restOf tardy Penitents ; or for the bestAmong the good (when love might else have slept,Sickened, or died) in pious memory kept.Thanks to the austere and simple Devotees,Who, to that service bound by venial fees.Kept watch before the Altars of St. Bees.9.Were not, in sooth, their Requiems sacred tiesWoven out of passion's sharpest agonies,Subdued, composed, and formalized by art,To fix a wiser sorrow hi the heart?The prayer for them whose hour was past awaySaid to the Living, profit while ye may !A little part, and that the worst, he seesWho thinks that priestly cunning holds the keysThat best unlock the secrets of St. Bees.N 6276 ST. BEES.10.Conscience, the timid being's inmost light,Hope of the dawn and solace of the night,Cheers these Recluses with a steady rayIn many an hour when judgement goes astray.Ah ! scorn not hastily their rule who tryEarth to despise, and flesh to mortify ;Consume with zeal, in winged extaciesOf prayer and praise forget their rosaries.Nor hear the loudest surges of St. Bees.11.Yet none so prompt to succour and protectThe forlorn Traveller, or Sailor wreckedOn the bare coast ; nor do they grudge the boonWhich staff and cockle hat and sandal shoonClaim for the Pilgrim : and, though chiding sharpMay sometimes greet the strolling Minstrel's harp,It is not then when, swept with sportive ease,It charms a feast-day throng of all degrees,Brightening the archway of revered St. Bees.ST. BEES. 27712.How did the Cliffs and echoing Hills rejoiceWhat time the Benedictine Brethren's voice,Imploring, or commanding with meet pride,Summoned the Chiefs to lay their feuds aside,And under one blest ensign serve the LordIn Palestine. Advance, indignant Sword !Flaming till thou from Panym hands releaseThat Tomb, dread centre of all sanctitiesNursed in the quiet Abbey of St. Bees.13.On, Champions, on ! — But mark I the passing DaySubmits her intercourse to milder sway ,With high and low whose busy thoughts from farFollow the fortunes which they may not share.While in Judea Fancy loves to roam.She helps to make a Holy-land at home :The Star of Bethlehem from its sphere invitesTo sound the crystal depth of maiden rights ;And wedded life, through scriptural mysteries.Heavenward ascends with all her charities,Taught by the hooded Celibates of St. Bees.278 ST. BEES.14.Who with the ploughshare clove the barren moors,And to green meadows changed the swampy shores?Thinned the rank woods ; and for the cheerful GrangeMade room whereof and Boar were used to range?Who taught, and showed by deeds, that gentler chainsShould bind the Vassal to his Lord's domains ?The thoughtful Monks, intent their God to please.For Christ's dear sake, by human sympathiesPoured from the bosom of thy Church, St. Bees !15.But all availed not ; by a mandate givenThrough lawless will the Brotherhood was drivenForth from their cells ; — their ancient House laid lowIn Reformation's sweeping overthrow.But now once more the local Heart revives.The inextinguishable Spirit strives.Oh may that Power who hushed the stormy seas,And cleared a way for the first Votaries,Prosper the new-born College of St. Bees !ST. BEES. 27916.Alas ! the Genius of our age from SchoolsLess humble draws her lessons, aims, and rules.To Prowess guided by her insight keenMatter and Spirit are as one Machine ;Boastful Idol-stress of formal skillShe in her own would merge the eternal will :Expert to move in paths that Newton trod,From Newton's Universe would banish God.Better, if Reason's triumphs match with these,Her flight before the bold credulityThat furthered the first teaching of St. Bees.NOTE.St. Bees. Page 275.Were not, in sooth, their Requiems sacred ties."The author is aware that he is here treading upon tenderground ; but to the intelligent reader he feels that no apologyis due. The prayers of survivors, during passionate grief forthe recent loss of relatives and friends, as the object of thoseprayers could no longer be the suffering body of the dying,would naturally be ejaculated for the souls of the departed ;the barriers between the two worlds dissolving before the powerof love and faith. The ministers of religion, from theirhabitual attendance upon sick-beds, would be daily witnessesof these benign results ; and hence would be strongly temptedto aim at giving to them permanence, by embodying them inrites and ceremonies, recurring at stated periods. All this, asit was in course of nature, so was it blameless, and even praiseworthy;but no reflecting person can view without sorrowthe abuses which rose out of thus formalizing sublime instincts,and disinterested movements of passion, and pervertingthem into means of gratifying the ambition and rapacity ofthe priesthood. But, while we deplore and are indignant atthese abuses, it would be a great mistake if we imputed theorigin of the offices to prospective selfishness on the part of themonks and clergy : thes were at first sincere in their sympathy,and in their degree dupes rather of their own creed, than artfuland designing men. Charity is, upon the whole, the safestguide that we can take in judging our fellow-men, whether ofpast ages, or of the present time.SONNETS. 281[The three following Sonnets are an intended addition to theEcclesiastical Sketches," the first to stand second ; andthe two that succeed, seventh and eighth, in the second partof the Series. — See the Author's Poems. — They are placedhere as having some connection with the foregoing Poem.]Deplorable his lot who tills the ground,His whole life long tills it, with heartless toilOf villain-service, passing with the soilTo each new Master, like a steer or hound,Or like a rooted tree, or stone earth-bound ;But, mark how gladly, through their own domains,The Monks relax or break these iron chains ;While Mercy, uttering, through their voice, a soundEchoed in Heaven, cries out, " Ye Chiefs, abateThese legalized oppressions ! Man whose nameAnd nature God disdained not ; Man, whose soulChrist died for, cannot forfeit his high claimTo live and move exempt from all controulWhich fellow-feeling doth not mitigate ! "282 SONNETSTHE VAUDOIS.But whence came they who for the Saviour LordHave long borne witness as the Scriptures teach ?Ages ere Waldo raised his voice to preachIn Gallic ears the unadulterate Word,Their fugitive Progenitors exploredSubalpine vales, in quest of safe retreats [heatsWhere that pure Church survives, though summerOpen a passage to the Romish sword,Far as it dares to follow. Herbs self-sown.And fruitage gathered from the chestnut wood,Nourish the Sufferers then ; and mists, that broodO'er chasms with new-fallen obstacles bestrewn,Protect them ; and the eternal snow that dauntsAliens, is God's good winter for their haunts.SONNETS. 283Praised be the Rivers, from their mountain-springsShouting to Freedom, " Plant thy Banners here ! "To harassed Piety, " Dismiss thy fear.And in our Caverns smooth thy ruffled wings ! "Nor be unthanked their tardiest hungering'Mid reedy fens wide-spread and marshes drear.Their own creation, till their long careerEnd in the sea engulphed. Such welcomingAs came from mighty Po when Venice rose,Greeted those simple Heirs of truth divineWho near his fountains sought obscure repose.Yet were prepared as glorious lights to shine,Should that be needed for their sacred Charge ;Blest Prisoners They, whose spirits are at large !THE REDBREAST.(suggested in a WESTMORELAND COTTAGE.)Driven in by Autumn's sharpening air,From half-stripped woods and pastures bare,Brisk Robin seeks a kindlier home :Not like a beggar is he come,But enters as a looked-for guest,Confiding in his ruddy breast.As if it were a natural shieldCharged with a blazon on the field.Due to that good and pious deedOf which we in the Ballad read.But pensive fancies putting by.And wild-wood sorrows, speedilyHe plays the expert ventriloquist ;And, caught by glimpses now — now missed.Puzzles the listener with a doubtIf the soft voice he throws aboutComes from within doors or without !THE REDBREAST. 285Was ever such a sweet confusion,Sustained by delicate illusion ?He 's at your elbow — to your feelingThe notes are from the floor or ceiling ;And there's a riddle to be guessed,'Till you have marked his heaving breast,Where tiny sinking, and faint swell.Betray the Elf that loves to dwellIn Robin's bosom, as a chosen cell.Heart-pleased we smile upon the BirdIf seen, and with like pleasure stirredCommend him, when he's only heard.But small and fugitive our gainCompared with Ms who long hath lain,With languid limbs and patient head,Reposing on a lone sick-bed ;Where now he daily hears a strainThat cheats him of too busy cares,Eases his pain, and helps his prayers.And who but this dear Bird beguiledThe fever of that pale-faced Child ?Now cooling, with his passing wing,Her forehead, like a breeze of Spring :286 THE REDBREAST.Recalling now, with descant softShed round her pillow from aloft,Sweet thoughts of angels hovering nigh,And the invisible sympathyOf" Matthew, Mark and Luke, and John,Blessing the bed she lies upon :" *And sometimes, just as listening endsIn slumber, with the cadence blendsA dream of that low-warbled hymnWhich Old-folk, fondly pleased to trimLamps of faith now burning dim,Say that the Cherubs carved in stone.When clouds gave way at dead of night.And the moon filled the church with light.Used to sing in heavenly tone,Above and round the sacred placesThey guard, with winged baby-faces.Thrice-happy Creature ! in all landsNurtured by hospitable hands :The words —Matthew, Mark, and Luke, and John,Bless the bed that I lie on,"are part of a child's prayer, still in general use through thenorthern counties.THE Redbreast 287Free entrance to this cot has he.Entrance and exit both yet free ;And, when the keen unruffled weatherThat thus brings man and bird together,Shall with its pleasantness be past.And casement closed and door made fast,To keep at bay the howling blast,He needs not fear the season's rage,For the whole house is Robin's cage.Whether the bird flit here or there,O'er table 11% or perch on chair,Though some may frown, and make a stirTo scare him as a trespasser.And he belike will flinch or start.Good friends he has to take his part ;One chiefly, who with voice and lookPleads for him from the chimney nook,Where sits the Dame, and wears awayHer long and vacant holiday ;With images about her heart.Reflected, from the years gone by.On human nature's second infancy.TO[Miss not the occasion ; by the forelock takeThat subtile Power, the never-halting Time,Lest a mere moment's putting-ofF should makeMischance almost as heavy as a crime.]Wait, prithee, wait I " this answer Lesbia threwForth to her Dove, and took no further heed ;Her eye was busy, while her fingers flewAcross the harp, with soul-engrossing speed ;But from that bondage when her thoughts were freedShe rose, and toward the close-shut casement drew,Whence the poor unrewarded Favorite, trueTo old affections, had been heard to pleadWith flapping wing for entrance. What a shriekForced from that voice so lately tuned to a strainOf harmony ! — a shriek of terror, pain,And self-reproach ! — for, from aloft, a KitePounced, and the Dove, which from its ruthless beakShe could not rescue, perished in her sight !RURAL ILLUSIONS.1.Sylph was it ? or a Bird more brightThan those of fabulous stock ?A second darted by; — and lo IAnother of the flock,Through sunshine flitting from the boughTo nestle in the rock.Transient deception I a gay freakOf April's mimicries IThose brilliant Strangers, hailed with joyAmong the budding trees.Proved last year's leaves, pushed from the sprayTo frolic on the breezeo290 RURAL ILLUSIONS.2.Maternal Flora ! show thy face,And let thy hand be seenWhich sprinkles here these tiny flowers,That, as they touch the green,Take root (so seems it) and look upIn honour of their Queen.Yet, sooth, those little starry specks,That not in vain aspiredTo be confounded with live growths.Most dainty, most admired,Were only blossoms dropped from twigsOf their own offspring tired.3.Not such the World's illusive shows ;Her wingless fluttering.Her blossoms which, though shed, outbraveThe Floweret as it springs.For the Undeceived, smile as they may.Are melancholy things :But gentle Nature plays her partWith ever varying wiles.And transient feigning with plain truthSo well she reconciles,That those fond Idlers most are pleasedWhom oftener she beguiles.THIS LAWN, &c.This Lawn, a carpet all aliveWith shadows flung from leaves — to striveIn dance, amid a pressOf sunshine — an apt emblem yieldsOf Worldlings revelling in the fieldsOf strenuous idleness ;Less quick the stir when tide and breezeEncounter, and to narrow seasForbid a moment's rest ;The medley less when boreal LightsGlance to and fro like aery SpritesTo feats of arms addrest !Yet, spite of all this eager strife,This ceaseless play, the genuine lifeThat serves the steadfast hours,Js in the grass beneath, that growsUnheeded, and the mute reposeOf sweetly-breathing flowers,o 2THOUGHT ON THE SEASONS.Flattered with promise of escapeFrom every hurtful blast,Spring takes, O sprightly May ! thy shape,Her loveliest and her last.Less fair is summer riding highIn fierce solstitial power,Less fair than when a lenient skyBrings on her parting hour.When earth repays with golden sheavesThe labours of the plough,And ripening fruits and forest leavesAll brighten on the bough,What pensive beauty autumn shows,Before she hears the soundOf winter rushing in, to closeThe emblematic round !THOUGHT ON THE SEASONS. 293Such be our Spring, our Summer such ;So may our Autumn blendWith hoary Winter, and Life touch,Through heaven-born hope, her end !o SHUMANITY.(written in the year 1829.)Not from his fellows only man may learnRights to compare and duties to discern :All creatures and all objects in degree.Are friends and patrons of humanity. — MS.[The Rocking-stones, alluded to in the beginning of the followingverses, are supposed to have been used, by our Britishancestors, both for judicial and religious purposes. Suchstones are not uncommonly found, at this day, both in GreatBritain and in Ireland.]What though the Accused, upon his own appealTo righteous Gods when Man has ceased to feel,Or at a doubting Judge's stern command.Before the Stone of Power no longer stand —To take his sentence from the balanced Block,As, at his touch, it rocks or seems to rock ;Though, in the depths of sunless groves, no moreThe Druid-priest the hallowed Oak adore ;o 4?296 HUMANITY.Yet, for the Initiate, rocks and whispering treesDo still perform mysterious offices !And still in beast and bird a function dwells,That, while we look and listen, sometimes tellsUpon the heart, in more authentic guiseThan Oracles, or winged Auguries,Spake to the Science of the ancient wise.Not uninspired appear their simplest ways ;Their voices mount symbolical of praise —To mix with hymns that Spirits make and hear ;And to fallen Man their innocence is dear.Enraptured Art draws from those sacred springsStreams that reflect the poetry of things !Where Christian Martyrs stand in hues portrayed.That, might a wish avail, would never fade,Borne in their hands the Lily and the PalmShed round the Altar a celestial calm ;There, too, behold the Lamb and guileless DovePrest in the tenderness of virgin loveTo saintly bosoms I — Glorious is the blendingOf right Affections, climbing or descendingAlong a scale of light and life, with caresAlternate ; carrying holy thoughts and prayersHUMANITY. 297Up to the sovereign seat of the Most High ;Descending to the worm in charity ; *Like those good Angels whom a dream of nightGave, in the Field of Lus, to Jacob's sight ;All, while he slept, treading the pendent stairsEarthward or heavenward, radiant Messengers,That, with a perfect will in one accordOf strict obedience, served the Almighty Lord ;And with untired humility forboreThe ready service of the wings they wore.What a fair World were ours for Verse to paint.If Power could live at ease with self-restraint !Opinion bow before the naked senseOf the great Vision, — faith in Providence;Merciful over all existence, justTo the least particle of sentient dust ;And, fixing by immutable decrees,Seedtime and harvest for his purposes !Then would be closed the restless oblique eyeThat looks for evil like a treacherous spy ;Disputes would then relax, like stormy windsThat into breezes sink ; impetuous MindsThe author is indebted, here, to a passage in one ofiMr. Digby's valuable works.O 5298 HUMANITY.By discipline endeavour to grow meekAs Truth herself, whom they profess to seek.Then Genius, shunning fellowship with Pride,Would braid his golden locks at Wisdom's side ;Love ebb and flow untroubled by caprice ;And not alone harsh tyranny would cease,But unoffending creatures find releaseFrom qualified oppression, whose defenceRests on a hollow plea of recompence ;Thought-tempered wrongs, for each humane respectOft worse to bear, or deadlier in effect.Witness those glances of indignant scornFrom some high-minded Slave, impelled to spurnThe kindness that would make him less forlorn ;Or, if the soul to bondage be subdued.His look of pitiable gratitude !Alas for thee, bright Galaxy of Isles,Where day departs in pomp, returns with smiles —To greet the flowers and fruitage of a land,As the sun mounts, by sea-born breezes fanned ;A land whose azure mountain-tops are seatsFor Gods in council, whose green vales. RetreatsFit for the Shades of Heroes, mingling thereTo breathe Elysian peace in upper air.HUMANITY. 299Though cold as winter, gloomy as the grave,Stone-walls a Prisoner make, but not a Slave.Shall Man assume a property in Man ?Lay on the moral Will a withering ban ?Shame that our laws at distance should protectEnormities, which they at home reject!Slaves cannot breathe in England " — a proud boast !And yet a mockery ! if, from coast to coast,Though fettered slave be none, her floors and soilGroan underneath a weight of slavish toil,For the poor Many, measured out by rulesFetched with cupidity from heartless schools,That to an Idol, falsely called " the WealthOf Nations" sacrifice a People's health.Body and mind and soul ; a thirst so keenIs ever urging on the vast machineOf sleepless Labour, 'mid whose dizzy wheelsThe Power least prized is that which thinks andfeels.Then, for the pastimes of this delicate age,And all the heavy or light vassalageWhich for their sakes we fasten, as may suitOur varying moods, on human kind or brute,o 6300 HUMANITY.*T were well in little, as in great, to pause,Lest Fancy trifle with eternal laws.There are to whom even garden, grove, and field.Perpetual lessons of forbearance yield;Who would not lightly violate the graceThe lowliest flower possesses in its place ;Nor shorten the sweet life, too fugitive,Which nothing less than Infinite Power could give.LINESSUGGESTED BY A PORTRAIT FROM THE PENCIL OF F. STONE.Beguiled into forgetfulness of careDue to the day's unfinished task, of penOr book regardless, and of that fair sceneIn Nature's prodigality displayedBefore my window, oftentimes and longI gaze upon a Portrait whose mild gleamOf beauty never ceases to enrichThe common light ; whose stillness charms the air,Or seems to charm it, into like repose ;Whose silence, for the pleasure of the ear,Surpasses sweetest music. There she sitsWith emblematic purity attiredIn a white vest, white as her marble neckIs, and the pillar of the throat would beBut for the shadow by the drooping chinCast into that recess — the tender shadeThe shade and light, both there and every where,And through the very atmosphere she breathes,302 LINES ON A PORTRAIT.Broad, clear, and toned harmoniously, with skillThat might from nature have been learnt in the hourWhen the lone Shepherd sees the morning spreadUpon the mountains. Look at her, whoe'erThou be, that kindling with a poet's soulHast loved the painter's true Promethean craftIntensely — from Imagination takeThe treasure, what mine eyes behold see thou,Even though the Atlantic Ocean roll between.A silver line, that runs from brow to crown,And in the middle parts the braided hair.Just serves to show how delicate a soilThe golden harvest grows in ; and those eyes.Soft and capacious as a cloudless skyWhose azure depth their colour emulates,Must needs be conversant with upward looks.Prayer's voiceless service; but now, seeking noughtAnd shunning nought, their own peculiar lifeOf motion they renounce, and with the headPartake its inclination towards earthIn humble grace, and quiet pensivenessCaught at the point where it stops short of sadness.Offspring of soul-bewitching Art, make meThy confidant ! say, whence derived that airLINES ON A PORTRAIT. 303Of calm abstraction ? Can the ruling thoughtBe with some lover far away, or oneCrossed by misfortune, or of doubted faith ?Inapt conjecture ! Childhood here, a moonCrescent in simple loveliness serene,Has but approached the gates of womanhood,Not entered them ; her heart is yet piercedBy the blind Archer-god, her fancy free :The fount of feeling, if unsought elsewhere.Will not be found.Her right hand, as it liesAcross the slender wrist of the left armUpon her lap reposing, holds — but markHow slackly, for the absent mind permitsNo firmer grasp — a little wild-flower, joinedAs in a posy, with a few pale earsOf yellowing corn, the same that overtoppedAnd in their common birthplace sheltered it'Till they were plucked together ; a blue flowerCalled by the thrifty husbandman a weed ;But Ceres, in her garland, might have wornThat ornament, unblamed. The floweret, heldIn scarcely conscious fingers, was, she knows,(Her Father told her so) in Youth's gay dawn304 LINES ON A PORTRAIT.Her Mother's favourite ; and the orphan Girl,In her own dawn — a dawn less gay and bright,Loves it while there in solitary peaceShe sits, for that departed Mother's sake.Not from a source less sacred is derived(Surely I do not err) that pensive airOf calm abstraction through the face diffusedAnd the whole person.Words have something toldMore than the pencil can, and verilyMore than is needed, but the precious ArtForgives their interference — Art divine,That both creates and fixes, in despiteOf Death and Time, the marvels it hath wrought.Strange contrasts have we in this world of ours !That posture, and the look of filial loveThinking of past and gone, with what is leftDearly united, might be swept awayFrom this fair Portrait's fleshly Archetype,Even by an innocent fancy's slightest freakBanished, nor ever, haply, be restoredTo their lost place, or meet in harmonySo exquisite ; but here do they abide,LINES ON A PORTRAIT. 305Enshrined for ages. Is not then the ArtGodlike, a humble branch of the divine,In visible quest of immortality,Stretched forthwith trembling hope? In every realm,From high Gibraltar to Siberian plains.Thousands, in each variety of tongueThat Europe knows, would echo this appeal ;One above all, a Monk who waits on GodIn the magnific Convent built of yoreTo sanctify the Escurial palace. He,Guiding, from cell to cell and room to room,A British Painter (eminent for truthIn character, and depth of feeling, shownBy labours that have touched the hearts of kings,And are endeared to simple cottagers)Left not unvisited a glorious work,Our Lord's Last Supper, beautiful as when firstThe appropriate Picture, fresh from Titian's hand.Graced the Refectory : and there, while bothStood with eyes fixed upon that Masterpiece,The hoary Father in the Stranger's earBreathed out these words : — " Here daily do we sit,Thanks given to God for daily bread, and herePondering the mischiefs of these restless Times,And thinking of my Brethren, dead, dispersed,306 LINES ON A PORTRAIT.Or changed and changing, I not seldom gazeUpon this solemn Company unmovedBy shock of circumstance, or lapse of years,Until I cannot but believe that they —They are in truth the Substance, we the Shadows."So spake the mild Jeronymite, his griefsMelting away within him like a dreamEre he had ceased to gaze, perhaps to speak :And I, grown old, but in a happier land,Domestic Portrait ! have to verse consignedIn thy calm presence those heart-moving words :Words that can soothe, more than they agitate ;Whose spirit, like the angel that went downInto Bethesda's pool, with healing virtueInforms the fountain in the human breastThat by the visitation was disturbed.But why this stealing tear ? Companion mute,On thee I look, not sorrowing ; fare thee well.My Song's Inspirer, once again farewell !The pile of buildings, composing the palace and convent ofSan Lorenzo, has, in common usage, lost its proper name inthat of the Escurial, a village at the foot of the hill uponwhich the splendid edifice, built by Philip the Second, stands.It need scarcely be added, that Wilkie is the painter alludedTHE FOREGOING SUBJECT RESUMED.Among a grave fraternity of Monks,For One, but surely not for One alone,Triumphs, in that great work, the Painter's skill,Humbling the body, to exalt the soul ;Yet representing, amid wreck and wrongAnd dissolution and decay, the warmAnd breathing life of flesh, as if alreadyClothed with impassive majesty, and gracedWith no mean earnest of a heritageAssigned to it in future worlds. Thou, too,With thy memorial flower, meek Portraiture !From whose serene companionship I passed.Pursued by thoughts that haunt me still; thou also —Though but a simple object, into lightCalled forth by those affections that* endearThe private hearth ; though keeping thy sole seatIn singleness, and little tried by time.Creation, as it were, of yesterday —With a congenial function art enduedFor each and all of us, together joined.308 LINES ON A PORTRAIT.In course of nature, under a low roofBy charities and duties that proceedOut of the bosom of a wiser vow.To a like salutary sense of awe,Or sacred wonder, growing with the powerOf meditation that attempts to weigh,In faithful scales, things and their opposites,Can thy enduring quiet gently raiseA household small and sensitive, — whose love,Dependent as in part its blessings areUpon frail ties dissolving or dissolvedOn earth, will be revived, we trust, in heaven.In the class entitled " Musings," in Mr. Southey's MinorPoems, is one upon his own miniature Picture, taken in childhood,and another upon a landscape painted by Gaspar Poussin.It is possible that every word of the above verses, thoughsimilar in subject, might have been written had the authorbeen unacquainted with those beautiful effusions of poeticsentiment. But, for his own satisfaction, he must be allowedthus publicly to acknowledge the pleasure those two poemsof his Friend have given him, and the grateful influence theyhave upon his mind as often as he reads them, or thinks ofthem.STANZASTHE POWER OF SOUND.ARGUMENT.The Ear addressed, as occupied by a spiritual functionary, incommunion with sounds, individual, or combined in studiedharmony. — Sources and effects of those sounds (to the closeof 6th Stanza). — The power of music, whence proceeding,exemplified in the idiot. — Origin of music, and its effect inearly ages — how produced (to the middle of 10th Stanza).The mind recalled to sounds acting casually and severally.Wish uttered (11th Stanza) that these could be unitedinto a scheme or system for moral interests and intellectualcontemplation. — (Stanza 12th.) The Pythagorean theory ofnumbers and music, with their supposed power over themotions of the universe — imaginations consonant with sucha theory. — Wish expressed (in 11th Stanza) realised, insome degree, by the representation of all sounds under theform of thanksgiving to the Creator. — (Last Stanza) thedestruction of earth and the planetary system — the survivalof audible harmony, and its support in the Divine Nature,as revealed in Holy Writ.ON THE POWER OF SOUND.1.Thy functions are etherial,As if within thee dwelt a glancing Mind,Organ of Vision ! And a Spirit aerialInforms the cell of hearing, dark and blind ;Intricate labyrinth, more dread for thoughtTo enter than oracular cave ;Strict passage, through which sighs are brought,And whispers, for the heart, their slave ;And shrieks, that revel in abuseOf shivering flesh ; and warbled air,Whose piercing sweetness can unlooseThe chains of frenzy, or entice a smileInto the ambush of despair ;Hosannas pealing down the long-drawn aisle,And requiems answered by the pulse that beatsDevoutly, in life's last retreats !312 THE POWER OF SOUND.2.The headlong Streams and FountainsServe Thee, Invisible Spirit, with untired powers;Cheering the wakeful Tent on Syrian mountains,They lull perchance ten thousand thousand flowers.That roar, the prowling Lion's Here I am.How fearful to the desert wide !That bleat, how tender I of the DamCalling a straggler to her side.Shout, Cuckoo ! let the vernal soulGo with thee to the frozen zone ;Toll from thy loftiest perch, lone Bell-bird, toll IAt the still hour to Mercy dear,Mercy from her twilight throneListening to Nun's faint sob of holy fear,To Sailor's prayer breathed from a darkening sea.Or Widow's cottage lullaby.3.Ye Voices, and ye Shadows,And Images of voice — to hound and hornFrom rocky steep and rock-studded meadowsFlung back, and, in the sky's blue caves, reborn.THE POWER OF SOUND. 313On with your pastime ! till the church-tower bellsA greeting give of measured glee ;And milder echoes from their cellsRepeat the bridal symphony.Then, or far earlier, let us roveWhere mists are breaking up or gone,And from aloft look down into a coveBesprinkled with a careless quire,Happy Milk-maids, one by oneScattering a ditty each to her desire,A liquid concert matchless by nice Art,A stream as if from one full heart.4.Blest be the song that brightensThe blind Man's gloom, exalts the Veteran's mirth;Scorned the Peasant's whistling breath, thatlightensHis duteous toil of furrowing the green earth.For the tired Slave, Song lifts the languid oar.And bids it aptly fall, with chimeThat beautifies the fairest shore,And mitigates the harshest clime.314 THE POWER OF SOUND.Yon Pilgrims see — in lagging fileThey move ; but soon the appointed wayA choral Ave Marie shall beguile,And to their hope the distant shrineGlisten with a livelier ray :Nor friendless He, the Prisoner of the Mine,Who from the well-spring of his own clear breastCan draw, and sing his griefs to rest.5.When civic renovationDawns on a kingdom, and for needful hasteBest eloquence avails not, InspirationMounts with a tune, that travels like a blastPiping through cave and battlemented tower ;Then starts the Sluggard, pleased to meetThat voice of Freedom, in its powerOf promises, shrill, wild, and sweet !Who, from a martial pageant, spreadsIncitements of a battle-day,Thrilling the unwearied crowd with blamelessheads ;Even She whose Lydian airs inspirePeaceful striving, gentle playOf timid hope and innocent desireTHE POWER OF SOUND. 315Shot from the dancing Graces, as they moveFanned by the plausive wings of Love.6.How oft along thy mazes,Regent of Sound, have dangerous Passions trod !O Thou, through whom the Temple rings withpraises.And blackening clouds in thunder speak of God,Betray not by the cozenage of senseThy Votaries, wooingly resignedTo a voluptuous influenceThat taints the purer, better mind ;But lead sick Fancy to a harpThat hath in noble tasks been tried ;And, if the Virtuous feel a pang too sharp,Soothe it into patience, — stayThe uplifted arm of Suicide ;And let some mood of thine in firm arrayKnit every thought the impending issue needs,Ere Martyr burns, or Patriot bleeds |p 2316 THE POWER OF SOUND.7.As Conscience, to the centreOf Being, smites with irresistible pain,So shall a solemn cadence, if it enterThe mouldy vaults of the dull Idiot's brain,Transmute him to a wretch from quiet hurled —Convulsed as by a jarring din ;And then aghast, as at the worldOf reason partially let inBy concords winding with a swayTerrible for sense and soul !Or, awed he weeps, struggling to quell dismay.Point not these mysteries to an ArtLodged above the starry pole ;Pure modulations flowing from the heartOf divine Love, where Wisdom, Beauty, TruthWith Order dwell, in endless youth ?8.Oblivion may not coverAll treasures hoarded by the Miser, Time.Orphean Insight I Truth's undaunted Lover,To the first leagues of tutored passion climb,THE POWER OP SOUND. 317When Music deigned within this grosser sphereHer subtle essence to enfold,And Voice and Shell drew forth a tearSofter than Nature's self could mould.Yet strenuous was the infant Age :Art, daring because souls could feel,Stirred nowhere but an urgent equipageOf rapt imagination sped her marchThrough the realms of woe and weal :Hell to the lyre bowed low ; the upper archRejoiced that clamorous spell and magic verseHer wan disasters could disperse.9.The Gift to King AmphionThat walled a city with its melodyWas for belief no dream ; thy skill, Arian !Could humanise the creatures of the sea,Where men were monsters. A last grace he craves,Leave for one chant; — the dulcet soundSteals from the deck o'er willing waves.And listening Dolphins gather round.p 3318 THE POWER OF SOUND.Self-cast, as with a desperate course,'Mid that strange audience, he bestridesA proud One docile as a managed horse ;And singing, while the accordant handSweeps his harp, the Master rides ;So shall he touch at length a friendly strand,And he, with his Preserver, shine star-brightIn memory, through silent night.10.The pipe of Pan, to ShepherdsCouched in the shadow of Malian Pines,Was passing sweet; the eyeballs of the Leopards,That in high triumph drew the Lord of vines,How did they sparkle to the cymbal's clang !While Fauns and Satyrs beat the groundIn cadences and Silenus swangThis way and that, with wild-flowers crowned.To life, to life give back thine Ear :Ye who are longing to be ridOf Fable, though to truth subservient, hearThe little sprinkling of cold earth that fellEchoed from the coffin lid ;The Convict's summons in the steeple knell.THE POWER OF SOUND. 319^* The vain distress-gun," from a leeward shore,Repeated —-heard, and heard no more I11.For terror, joy, or pity,Vast is the compass, and the swell of notes :From the Babe's first cry to voice of regal City,Rolling a solemn sea-like bass, that floatsFar as the woodlands — with the trill to blendOf that shy Songstress, whose love-taleMight tempt an Angel to descend,While hovering o'er the moonlight vale.O for some soul-affecting schemeOf moral music, to uniteWanderers whose portion is the faintest dreamOf memory ! — O that they might stoop to bearChains, such precious chains of sightAs laboured mistresses through ages wear !O for a balance fit the truth to tellOf the Unsubstantial, pondered well !p 4?320 THE POWER OF SOUND.12.By one pervading SpiritOf tones and numbers all things are controlled,As Sages taught, where faith was found to meritInitiation in that mystery old.The Heavens, whose aspect makes our minds as stillAs they themselves appear to be,Innumerable voices fillWith everlasting harmony ;The towering Headlands, crowned with mist.Their feet among the billows, knowThat Ocean is a mighty harmonist ;Thy pinions, universal Air,Ever waving to and fro,Are delegates of harmony, and bearStrains that support the Seasons in their round ;Stern Winter loves a dirge-like sound.13.Break forth into thanksgiving.Ye banded Instruments of wind and chords;Unite, to magnify the Ever-living,Your inarticulate notes with the voice of words !THE POWER OF SOUND. 321Nor hushed be service from the lowing mead,Nor mute the forest hum of noon ;Thou too be heard, lone Eagle ! freedFrom snowy peak and cloud, attuneThy hungry barking to the hymnOf joy, that from her utmost wallsThe six-days' Work, by flaming Seraphim,Transmits to Heaven I As Deep to DeepShouting through one valley calls.All worlds, all natures, mood and measure keepFor praise and ceaseless graduation, pouredInto the ear of God, their Lord !14.A Voice to Light gave Being ;To Time, and Man his earth-born Chronicler ;A Voice shall finish doubt and dim foreseeing,And sweep away life's visionary stir ;The Trumpet (we, intoxicate with pride.Arm at its blast for deadly wars)To archangel ic lips applied,The grave shall open, quench the stars.p 5322 THE POWER OF SOUND.O Silence I are Man's noisy yearsNo more than moments of thy life ?Is Harmony, blest Queen of smiles and tears,With her smooth tones and discords just.Tempered into rapturous strife,Thy destined Bond-slave ? No ! though Earth bedustAnd vanish, though the Heavens dissolve, her stayIs in the Word, that shall not pass away.POSTSCRIPT.In the present volume as in the author's previouspoems, the reader will have found occasionally opinionsexpressed upon the course of public affairs and feelingsgiven vent to as national interests excited them. Sincenothing, he trusts, has been uttered but in the spirit ofreflective patriotism, those notices are left to producetheir own effect ; but, among the many objects ofgeneral concern, and the changes going forward, whichhe has glanced at in verse, are some especially affectingthe lower orders of society : in reference to these, hewishes here to add a few words in plain prose.Were he conscious of being able to do justice tothose important topics, he might avail himself of theperiodical press for offering anonymously his thoughts,such as they are, to the world ; but he feels that, inprocuring attention, they may derive some advantage,however small, from his name, in addition to that ofbeing presented in a less fugitive shape. It is also notimpossible that the state of mind which some of theforegoing poems may have produced in the reader willdispose him to receive more readily the impression theauthor desires to make, and to admit the conclusions hewould establish.I. The first thing that presses upon his attention is thePoor-law Amendment Act. He is aware of the magnitudeand complexity of the subject, and the unweariedP 6321' POSTSCRIPT.attention which it has received from men of far widerexperience than his own ; yet he cannot forbear touchingupon one point of it, and to this he will confine himself,though not insensible to the objection which may reasonablybe brought against treating a portion of this, orany other, great scheme of civil polity separately fromthe whole. The point to which he wishes to drawthe reader's attention is, that all persons who cannotfind employment, or procure wages sufficient to supportthe body in health and strength are entitled to maintenanceby law.This principle is acknowledged in the Report of theCommissioners : but is there not room for apprehensionthat some of the regulations of the new act have a tendencyto render the principle nugatory by difficultiesthrown in the way of applying it.^^ If this be so,persons will not be wanting to show it, by examiningthe provisions of the act in detail, — an attempt whichwould be quite out of place here ; but it will not, therefore,be deemed unbecoming in one who fears that theprudence of the head may, in framing some of thoseprovisions, have supplanted the wisdom of the heart,to enforce a principle which cannot be violated withoutinfringing upon one of the most precious rights of theEnglish people, and opposing one of the most sacredclaims of civilised humanity.There can be no greater error, in this department oflegislation, than the belief that this principle does bynecessity operate for the degradation of those who claim,or are so circumstanced as to make it likely they mayclaim, through laws founded upon it, relief or assistance.The direct contrary is the truth : it may be unanswerablymaintained that its tendency is to raise, not to depress ;by stamping a value upon life, which can belong to itonly where the laws have placed men who are willingto work, and yet cannot find employment, above thePOSTSCRIPT. 325necessity of looking for protection against hunger andother natural evils either to individual and casual charityto despair and death, or to the breach of law by theftor violence.And here, as the fundamental principle has beenrecognised in the Report of the Commissioners, theauthor is not at issue with them any farther than he iscompelled to believe that their ^^ remedial measures"obstruct the application of that principle more than theinterests of society require.And, calling to mind the doctrines of political economywhich are now prevalent, he cannot forbear to enforcethe justice of the principle, and to insist upon itssalutary operation.And first for its justice : If self-preservation be thefirst law of our nature, would not every one in a stateof nature be morally justified in taking to himself thatwhich is indispensable to such preservation, where, byso doing, he would not rob another of that which mightbe equally indispensable to his preservation ? And if thevalue of life be regarded in a right point of view, mayit not be questioned whether this right of preservinglife, at any expense short of endangering the life ofanother, does not survive man's entering into the socialstate ; whether this right can be surrendered or forfeited,except when it opposes the divine law, upon anysupposition of a social compact, or of any convention forthe protection of mere rights of property ?But, if it be not safe to touch the abstract question ofman's right in a social state to help himself even in thelast extremity, may we not still contend for the duty ofa Christian government, standing in loco parentis towardsall its subjects, to make such effectual provision, thatno one shall be in danger of perishing either throughthe neglect or harshness of its legislation ? Or, wavingthis, is it not indisputable that the claim of the state to326 POSTSCRIPT.the allegiance involves the protection, of the subject ?And , as all rights in one party impose a correlative dutyupon another it follows that the right of the state torequire the services of its members , even to the departingof their lives in the common defence,, establishes a rightin the people (not to be gainsaid by utilitarians andeconomists) to public support when from any causethey may be unable to support themselves.Let us now consider the salutary and benign operationof this principle. Here we must have recourse tomomentary feelings of human nature and to truthswhich from their very obviousness are apt to be slightedtill they are forced upon our notice by our own sufferingsor those of others. In the Paradise Lost Miltonrepresents Adam, after the Fall, as exclaiming, in theanguish of his soul, —Did I request Thee, Maker, from my clayTo mould me man, did I solicit TheeFrom darkness to promote me ?My willConcurred not to my being."Under how many various pressures of misery havemen been driven thus, in a strain touching upon impiety,to expostulate with the Creator ; and under fewso afflictive as when the source and origin of earthlyexistence have been brought back to the mind by itsimpending close in the pangs of destitution. But aslong as in our legislation, due weight shall be given tothis principle, no man will be forced to bewail the giftof life in hopeless want of the necessaries of life.Englishmen have, therefore, by the progress of civilisationamong them, been placed in circumstances morefavourable to piety, and resignation to the divine will,than the inhabitants of other countries, where a likeprovision has not been established. And as Providence,POSTSCRIPT. 327in this care of our countrymen acts through a humanmedium the objects of that care must in like mannerbe more inclined towards a grateful love of their fellowmen.Thus, also do stronger ties attach the people totheir country , whether while they tread its soil, or, ata distance think of their native land as an indulgentparent, to whose arms, even they who have been imprudentand undeserving may, like the prodigal son,betake themselves, without fear of being rejected.Such is the view of the case that would first presentitself to a reflective mind ; and it is in vain to show,by appeals to experience in contrast with this view,that provisions founded upon the principle have promotedprofaneness of life, and dispositions the reverseof philanthropic, by spreading idleness, selfishness, andrapacity : for these evils have arisen, not as an inevitableconsequence of the principle, but for want of judgmentin framing laws based upon it; and, above all,from faults in the mode of administering the law. Themischief that has grown to such a height from grantingrelief in cases where proper vigilance would have shownthat it was not required, or in bestowing it in unduemeasure, will be urged by no truly enlightened statesman,as a sufficient reason for banishing the principleitself from legislation.Let us recur to the miserable states of consciousnessthat it precludes.There is a story told, by a traveller in Spain, of afemale who, by a sudden shock of domestic calamity,was driven out of her senses, and ever after looked upincessantly to the sky, feeling that her fellow creaturescould do nothing for her relief. Can there be Englishmenwho, with a good end in view, would, upon system,expose their brother Englishmen to a like necessity oflooking upwards only ; or downwards to the earth,after it shall contain no spot where the destitute can328 POSTSCRIPT.demand, by civil right, what by right of nature theyare entitled to ?Suppose the objects of our sympathy not sunk intothis blank despair, but wandering about as strangers instreets and ways, with the hope of succour from casualcharity ; what have we gained by such a change ofscene? Woful is the condition of the famished NorthernIndian, dependent, among winter snows, upon the chance -passage of a herd of deer, from which one, if broughtdown by his rifle-gun, may be made the means ofkeeping him and hia companions alive. As miserableis that of some savage Islander, who, when the landhas ceased to afford him sustenance, watches for foodwhich the waves may cast up, or in vain endeavours toextract it from the inexplicable deep. But neither ofthese is in a state of wretchedness comparable to that,which is so often endured in civilised society: multitudes,in all ages, have known it, of whom may besaid : —Homeless, near a thousand homes they stood,And near a thousand tables pined, and wanted food."The author may justly be accused of wasting time inan uncalled-for attempt to excite the feelings of hisreader, if systems of political economy, widely spread,did not impugn the principle, and if the safeguardsagainst such extremities were left unimpaired. It isbroadly asserted by many, that every man who endeavoursto find work, may find it : were this assertioncapable of being verified, there still would remain aquestion, what kind of work, and how far may thelabourer be fit for it ? For if sedentary work is to beexchanged for standing; and some light and nice exerciseof the fingers, to which an artisan has been accustomedall his life, for severe labour of the arms ; thebest efforts would turn to little account, and occasionPOSTSCRIPT. 329would be given for the unthinking and the unfeelingunwarrantably to reproach those who are put upon suchemployment, as idle, fro ward, and unworthy of relief,either by law or in any other way ! Were this statementcorrect, there would indeed be an end of theargument, the principle here maintained would be superseded.But, alas, it is far otherwise. That principle,applicable to the benefit of all countries, is indispensablefor England, upon whose coast families are perpetuallydeprived of their support by shipwreck , and where largemasses of men are so liable to be thrown out of theirordinary means of gaining bread, by changes in commercialintercourse, subject mainly or solely to thewill of foreign powers ; by new discoveries in artsand manufactures ; and by reckless laws, in conformitywith theories of political economy, which, whetherright or wrong in the abstract, have proved a scourgeto ten of thousands, by the abruptness with which theyhave been carried into practice.But it is urged, — refuse altogether compulsory reliefto the able-bodied, and the number of those who standin need of relief will steadily diminish, through a convictionof an absolute necessity for greater forethought,and more prudent care of a man's earnings. Undoubtedlyit would, but so also would it, and in a muchgreater degree, if the legislative provisions were retained,and parochial relief administered under thecare of the upper classes, as it ought to be. For it hasbeen invariably found, that wherever the funds havebeen raised and applied under the superintendence ofgentlemen and substantial proprietors, acting in vestries,and as overseers, pauperism has diminished accordingly.Proper care in that quarter would effectually checkwhat is felt in some districts to be one of the worstevils in the poor law system, viz. the readiness of smalland needy proprietors to join in imposing rates that3S0 POSTSCRIPT.seemingly subject them to great hardships , while, infact, this is done with an understanding, which preparesthe way for the relief that each is ready to bestowupon his still poorer neighbours being granted to himself,or his relatives, when it shall be applied for.But let us look to inner sentiments of a nobler quality,in order to know what we have to build upon.Affecting proofs occur in every one's experience, who isacquainted with the unfortunate and the indigent, oftheir unwillingness to derive their subsistence fromaught but their own funds or labour, or to be indebtedto parochial assistance for the attainment of any object,however dear to them. A case was reported, the otherday, from a coroner's inquest, of a pair who, throughthe space of four years, had carried about their deadinfant from house to house, and from lodging to lodging,as their necessities drove them, rather than askthe parish to bear the expense of its interment : thepoor creatures lived in the hope of one day being ableto bury their child at their own cost. It must havebeen heart-rending to see and hear the mother, whohad been called upon to account for the state in whichthe body was found, make this deposition. She andher husband had, it is true, been once in prosperity.But examples, where the spirit of independence workswith equal strength, though not with like miserable accompaniments,are frequently to be found even yetamong the humblest peasantry and mechanics. Thereis not, then, sufficient cause for doubting that a likesense of honour may be revived among the people, andtheir ancient habits of independence restored, withoutresorting to those severities which the new Poor LawAct has introduced.But even, if the surfaces of things only are to beexamined, we have a right to expect that lawgiversshould take into account the various tempers and dis-postscript.Suppositionsof mankind: while some are led, by theexistence of a legislative provision , into idleness andextravagance, the economical virtues might be cherishedin others by the knowledge, that if all their efforts fail,they have in the Poor Laws a '' refuge from the stormand a shadow from the heat." Despondency and distractionare no friends to prudence : the springs of industrywill relax, if cheerfulness be destroyed by anxiety ;without hope men become reckless, and have a sullenpride in adding to the heap of their own wretchedness.He who feels that he is abandoned by his fellow menwill be almost irresistibly driven to care little for himself;will lose his self-respect accordingly, and withthat loss what remains to him of virtue.With all due deference to the particular experience,and general intelligence of the individuals who framedthe Act, and of those who in and out of parliament haveapproved of and supported it ; it may be said, that itproceeds too much upon the presumption that it is alabouring man's own fault if he be not, as the phraseis, beforehand with the world. But the most prudentare liable to be thrown back by sickness, cutting themoff from labour, and causing to them expense ; and whobut has observed how distress creeps upon multitudeswithout misconduct of their own ; and merely from agradual fall in the price of labour, without a correspondentone in the price of provisions ; so that men whomay have ventured upon the marriage state with a fairprospect of maintaining their families in comfort andhappiness, see them reduced to a pittance which noeffort of theirs can increase ? Let it be remembered,,also, that there are thousands with whom vicious habitsof expense are not the cause why they do not store uptheir gains ; but they are generous and kind-hearted,and ready to help their kindred and friends ; moreover,they have a faith in Providence that those who have332 POSTSCRIPT.been prompt to assist others will not be left destitute,should they themselves come to need. By acting fromthese blended feelings, numbers have rendered themselvesincapable of standing up against a sudden reverse.Nevertheless, these men, in common with all who havethe misfortune to be in want, if many theorists hadtheir wish, would be thrown upon one or other of thosethree sharp points of condition before adverted to, fromwhich the intervention of law has hitherto saved them.All that has been said tends to show how the principlecontended for makes the gift of life more valuable,and has, the writer hopes, led to the conclusion that itslegitimate operation is to make men worthier of thatgift : in other words, not to degrade but to exalt humannature. But the subject must not be dismissed withoutadverting to the indirect influence of the same principleupon the moral sentiments of a people among whom itis embodied in law. In our criminal jurisprudencethere is a maxim, deservedly eulogised, that it is betterthat ten guilty persons should escape, than that oneinnocent man should suffer ; so, also, might it be maintained,with regard to the Poor Laws, that it is better forthe interests of humanity among the people at large,that ten undeserving should partake of the funds provided,than that one morally good man, through wantof relief, should either have his principles corrupted, orhis energies destroyed ; than that such a one shouldeither be driven to do wrong, or be cast to the earth inutter hopelessness. In France, the English maxim ofcriminal jurisprudence is reversed ; there it is deemedbetter that ten innocent men should suffer, than oneguilty escape : in France, there is no universal provisionfor the poor ; and we may judge of the small value setupon human life in the metropolis of that country, bymerely noticing the disrespect with which, after death,the body is treated, not by the thoughtless vulgar, butPOSTSCRIPT. 333in schools of anatomy, presided over by men allowedto be, in their own art and in physical science, amongthe most enlightened in the world. In the East, wherecountries are overrun with population as with a weed,infinitely more respect is shown to the remains of thedeceased ; and what a bitter mockery is it, that this insensibilityshould be found where civil polity is so busyin minor regulations, and ostentatiously careful to gratifythe luxurious propensities, whether social or intellectual,of the multitude ! Irreligion is, no doubt, muchconcerned with this offensive disrespect, shown to thebodies of the dead in France ; but it is mainly attributableto the state in which so many of the livingare left by the absence of compulsory provision forthe indigent, so humanely established by the law ofEngland.Sights of abject misery, perpetually recurring, hardenthe heart of the community. In the perusal of history,and of works of fiction, we are not, indeed, unwillingto have our commiseration excited by such objects ofdistress as they present to us ; but in the concerns ofreal life, men know that such emotions are not given tobe indulged for their own sakes : there, the consciencedeclares to them that sympathy must be followed byaction; and if there exist a previous conviction thatthe power to relieve is utterly inadequate to the demand,the eye shrinks from communication with wretchedness,and pity and compassion languish, like any otherqualities that are deprived of their natural aliment.Let these considerations be duly weighed by those whotrust to the hope that an increase of private charity,with all its advantages of superior discrimination, wouldmore than compensate for the abandonment of thoseprinciples, the wisdom of which has been here insistedupon. How discouraging, also, would be the sense ofinjustice, which could not fail to arise in the minds of334 POSTSCRIPT.the well-disposed , if the burden of supporting thepoor a burden of which the selfish have hitherto bycompulsion borne a share,, should now or hereafter, bethrown exclusively upon the benevolent.By having put an end to the Slave Trade and Slavery,the British people are exalted in the scale of humanity ;and they cannot but feel so, if they look into themselves,and duly consider their relation to God and theirfellow-creatures. That was a noble advance ; but a retrogrademovement will assuredly be made, if ever theprinciple, which has been here defended, should beeither avowedly abandoned, or but ostensibly retained.II. In a poem of the foregoing collection, the stateof the workmen congregated in manufactories is alludedto. May the author here be permitted to say, that,after much reflection upon this subject, he has notbeen able to discover a more effectual mode of alleviatingthe evils to which that class are liable, andestablishing a better harmony between them and theiremployers, than by a repeal of such laws as preventthe formation of joint-stock companies? The combinationsof masters to keep down, unjustly, the priceof labour, would be fairly checked by these associations ;they would encourage economy, inasmuch as they wouldenable a man to draw profit from his savings, by vestingthem in buildings or machinery for processes of manufacturewith which he was habitually connected. Hislittle capital would then be working for him whilehe was at rest or asleep ; he would more clearly perceivethe necessity of capital for carrying on greatworks ; he would better learn to respect the larger portionsof it in the hands of others ; he would be lesstempted to join in unjust combinations ; and, for thesake of his own property, if not for higher reasons, hewould be slow to promote local disturbance, or endangerpublic tranquillity ; he would, at least, be lothPOSTSCRIPT. 335to act in that way knowingly : for it is not to be deniedthat such societies might be nurseries of opinionsunfavourable to a mixed constitution of governmentlike that of Great Britain. The democratic and republicanspirit which they might be apt to fosterwould not however , be dangerous in itself but only asit might act without being sufficiently counterbalanced,either by landed proprietorship, or by a Church extendingitself so as to embrace an ever-growing andever-shifting population of mechanics and artisans.But if the tendencies of such societies would be tomake the men prosper who might belong to them, rulersand legislators should rejoice in the result, and do theirduty to the state by upholding and extending theinfluence of that Church to which it owes, in so great ameasure, its safety, its prosperity, and its glory.This, in the temper of the present times, may bedifficult, but it is become indispensable, since laissetowns in great numbers have sprung up, and othershave increased tenfold, with little or no dependenceupon the gentry and the landed proprietors ; and apartfrom those mitigated feudal institutions, which, till oflate, have acted so powerfully upon the composition ofthe House of Commons. Now it may be affirmed that,in quarters where there is not an attachment to theChurch, or the landed aristocracy, and a pride in supportingthem, there the people will dislike both , and beready, upon such incitements as are perpetually recurring,to join in attempts to overthrow them. Thereis no neutral ground here : from want of due attentionto the state of society in large towns and manufacturingdistricts, and ignorance or disregard of these obvioustruths, innumerable well-meaning persons became zealoussupporters of a Reform Bill, the qualities and powersof which, whether destructive or constructive, theywould otherwise have been afraid of; and even the336 POSTSCRIPT.framers of that bill swayed as they might be by partyresentments and personal ambition, could not havegone so far, had not they too been lamentably ignorantor neglectful of the same truths both of fact and philosophy.But let that pass ; and let no opponent of the bill betempted to compliment his own foresight, by exaggeratingthe mischiefs and dangers that have sprung fromit : let not time be wasted in profitless regrets ; and letthose party distinctions vanish to their very names thathave separated men who, whatever course they may havepursued, have ever had a bond of union in the wish tosave the limited monarchy, and those other institutionsthat have, under Providence, rendered for so long aperiod of time this country the happiest and worthiestof which there is any record since the foundation ofcivil society.III. A philosophic mind is best pleased when lookingat^^religion in its spiritual bearing ; as a guide of conduct,a solace under affliction, and a support amid the instabilityof mortal life : but the Church having beenforced by political considerations upon the notice of theauthor, while treating of the labouring classes, he cannotforbear saying a few words upon that momentous topic.There is a loud clamour for extensive change in thatdepartment. The clamour would be entitled to morerespect if they who are the most eager to swell it withtheir voices were not generally the most ignorant of thereal state of the Church, and the service it renders tothe community. Reform is the word employed. Letus pause and consider what sense it is apt to carry, andhow things are confounded by a lax use of it. Thegreat religious Reformation, in the sixteenth century,did not profess to be a new construction, but a restorationof something fallen into decay, or put out ofsight. That familiar and justifiable use of the wordPOSTSCRIPT. 337seems to have paved the way for fallacies with respectto the term reform which it is difficult to escape from.Were we to speak of improvement and the correctionof abuses we should run less risk of being deceivedourselves or of misleading others. We should be lesslikely to fall blindly into the belief, that the changedemanded is a renewal of something that has existedbefore , and that, therefore, we have experience on ourside ; nor should we be equally tempted to beg thequestion, that the change for which we are eager mustbe advantageous. From generation to generation, menare the dupes of words ; and it is painful to observe,that so many of our species are most tenacious of thoseopinions which they have formed with the least consideration.They who are the readiest to meddle withpublic affairs, whether in church or state, fly to generalities,that they may be eased from the trouble ofthinking about particulars ; and thus is deputed tomechanical instrumentality the work which vital knowledgeonly can do well.^' Abolish pluralities, have a resident incumbent inevery parish"' is a favourite cry ; but, without advertingto other obstacles in the way of this specious scheme, itmay be asked what benefit would accrue from itsindiscriminate adoption to counterbalance the harm itwould introduce, by nearly extinguishing the order ofcurates, unless the revenues of the church should growwith the population, and be greatly increased in manythinly-peopled districts, especially among the parishesof the North.The order of curates is so beneficial, that some particularnotice of it seems to be required in this place.For a church poor as, relatively to the numbers of thepeople, that of England is, and probably will continueto be, it is no small advantage to have youthful servants,who will work upon the wages of hope and expectation.338 POSTSCRIPT.Still more advantageous is it to have,, by means of thisorder young men scattered over the country, who beingmore detached from the temporal concerns of the benefice,have more leisure for improvement and study, andare less subject to be brought into secular collision withthose who are under their spiritual guardianship. Thecurate, if he reside at a distance from the incumbent,undertakes the requisite responsibilities of a temporalkind, in that modified way which prevents him, as anew-comer, from being charged with selfishness : whileit prepares him for entering upon a benefice of hisown, with something of a suitable experience. If heshould act under and in co-operation with a residentincumbent, the gain is mutual. His studies will probablybe assisted ; and his training, managed by a superior,will not be Table to relapse in matters of prudence,seemliness, or in any of the highest cares of his functions; and by way of return for these benefits to thepupil, it will often happen that the zeal of a middle-agedor declining incumbent will be revived, by beingin near communion with the ardour of youth, whenhis own efforts may have languished through a melancholyconsciousness that they have not produced asmuch good among his flock as, when he first enteredupon the charge, he fondly hoped.Let one remark, and that not the least important, beadded. A curate, entering for the first time upon hisoffice, comes from college after a course of expense, andwith such inexperience in the use of money, that, inhis new situation, he is apt to fall unawares into pecuniarydifficulties. If this happens to him, muchmore likely is it to happen to the youthful incumbent ;whose relations, to his parishioners and to society, aremore complicated; and, his income being larger andindependent of another, a costlier style of living isrequired of him by public opinion. If embarrassmentPOSTSCRIPT. 339should ensue, and with that unavoidably some loss ofrespectability his future usefulness will be proportionablyimpaired : not so with the curate for he can easilyremove and start afresh with a stock of experience andan unblemished reputation, whereas the early indiscretionsof an incumbent being rarely forgotten, maybeimpediments to the efficacy of his ministry for theremainder of his life. The same observations wouldapply with equal force to doctrine. A young ministeris liable to errors, from his notions being either too laxor overstrained. In both cases it would prove injuriousthat the error should be remembered after study andreflection, with advancing years, shall have brought himto a clearer discernment of the truth, and better judgmentin the application of it.It must be acknowledged that, among the regulationsof ecclesiastical polity, none at first view are moreattractive than that which prescribes for every parish aresident incumbent. How agreeable to picture to oneself,as has been done by poets and romance writers,from Chaucer down to Goldsmith, a man devoted to hisministerial office, with not a wish or a thought rangingbeyond the circuit of its cares ! Nor is it in poetry andfiction only that such characters are found ; they arescattered, it is hoped not sparingly, over real life,especially in sequestered and rural districts, where thereis but small influx of new inhabitants, and Httle changeof occupation. The spirit of the Gospel, unaided byacquisitions of profane learning and experience in theworld, that spirit, and the obligations of the sacredoffice may, in such situations, suffice to effect mostof what is needful. But for the complex state ofsociety that prevails in England, much more is required,both in large towns, and in many extensive districts ofthe country. A minister there should not only beirreproachable in manners and morals, but accomplishedQ 2Sto POSTSCRIPT.in learnings as far as is possible without sacrifice of theleast of his pastoral duties. As necessary, perhapsmore so, is it that he should he a citizen as well as ascholar; thoroughly acquainted with the structure ofsociety, and the constitution of civil government, andable to reason upon both with the most expert ; allultimately in order to support the truths of Christianity,and to diffuse its blessings.A young man coming fresh from the place of hiseducation, cannot have brought with him these accomplishments; and if the scheme of equalising churchincomes, which many advisers are much bent upon, berealised, so that there should be little or no secularinducement for a clergyman to desire a removal fromthe spot where he may chance to have been first setdown ; surely not only opportunities for obtaining therequisite qualifications would be diminished, but themotives for desiring to obtain them would be proportionably weakened. And yet these qualifications areindispensable for the diffusion of that knowledge, bywhich alone the political philosophy of the New Testamentcan be rightly expounded, and its preceptsadequately enforced. In these times, when the press isdaily exercising so great a power over the minds of thepeople, for wrong or for right as may happen, thatpreacher ranks among the first of benefactors who,without stooping to the direct treatment of currentpolitics and passing events, can furnish infallible guidancethrough the delusions that surround them ; andwho, appealing to the sanctions of Scripture, may placethe grounds of its injunctions in so clear a light, thatdisaffection shall cease to be cultivated as a laudablepropensity, and loyalty cleansed from the dishonour of ablind and prostrate obedience.It is not, however, in regard to civic duties alone,that this knowledge in a minister of the Gospel isPOSTSCRIPT. 341important ; it is still more so for softening and subduingprivate and personal discontents. In all places and atall times men have gratuitously troubled themselvesbecause their survey of the dispensations of Providencehas been partial and narrow ; but now that readers areso greatly multiplied, men judge as they are taught, andrepining are engendered every where , by imputationsbeing cast upon the government, and are prolonged oraggravated by being ascribed to misconduct or injusticein rulers, when the individual himself only is in fault.If a Christian pastor be competent to deal with thesehumours, as they may be dealt with and by no membersof society so successfully, both from more frequentand more favourable opportunities of intercourse, and byaid of the authority with which he speaks ; he will beateacher of moderation, a dispenser of the wisdomthat blunts approaching distress by submission to God'swill, and lightens, by patience, grievances which cannotbe removed.We live in times when nothing, of public good atleast, is generally acceptable, but what we believe can betraced to preconceived intention, and specific acts andformal contrivances of human understanding. A Christianinstructor thoroughly accomplished would be astanding restraint upon such presumptuousness of judgment,by impressing the truth that —In the unreasoning progress of the worldA wiser spirit is at work for us,A better eye than ours. MS.Revelation points to the purity and peace of a futureworld ; but our sphere of duty is upon earth ; and therelations of impure and conflicting things to each otheriLUst be understood, or we shall be perpetually goingwrong in all but goodness of intention ; and goodnessoi intention will itself relax through frequent disappoint3342 POSTSCRIPT.ment. How desirable then is it, that a minister ofthe Gospel should be versed in the knowledge of existingfacts and be accustomed to a wide range of socialexperience ! Nor is it less desirable for the purpose ofcounterbalancing and tempering in his own mind thatambition with which spiritual power is as apt to betainted as any other species of power which men covetor possess.It must be obvious that the scope of the argument is .to discourage an attempt which would introduce into theChurch of England an equality of income and station,upon the model of that of Scotland. The sounder partof the Scottish nation know what good their ancestorsderived from their church, and feel how deeply the livinggeneration is indebted to it. They respect and love it,as accommodated in so great a measure to a comparativelypoor country, through the far greater portion of whichprevails a uniformity af employment ; but the acknowledgeddeficiency of theological learning among the clergyof that church is easily accounted for by this veryequality. What else may be wanting there, it would beunpleasant to inquire, and might prove invidious to determine:one thing, however, is clear; that in all countriesthe temporalities of the Church Establishment shouldbear an analogy to the state of society, otherwise it cannotdiffuse its influence through the whole community.In a country so rich and luxurious as England, thecharacter of its clergy must unavoidably sink, and theirinfluence be every where impaired, if individuals fromthe upper ranks, and men of leading talents, are to haveno inducements to enter into that body but such as arepurely spiritual. And this ^' tinge of secularity*' is noreproach to the clergy, nor does it imply a deficiency ofspiritual endowments. Parents and guardians, lookingforward to sources of honourable maintenance for theirchildren and wards, often direct their thoughts earlyPOSTSCRIPT. Stewardsthe church, being determined partly by outwardcircumstances, and partly by indications of seriousness;,or intellectual fitness. It is natural that a boy or youth ,with such a prospect before him, should turn his attentionto those studies, and be led into those habits of reflection,which will in some degree dispose and tend toprepare him for the duties he is hereafter to undertake.As he draws nearer to the time when he will be calledto these duties, he is both led and compelled to examinethe Scriptures. He becomes more and more sensible oftheir truth. Devotion grows in him ; and what mightbegin in temporal consideration, will end (as in a majorityof instances we trust it does) in a spiritual-mindednessnot unworthy of that Gospel, the lessons of whichhe is to teach, and the faith of which he is to inculcate.Not inappositely may be here repeated an observation,which, from its obviousness and importance, must havebeen frequently made, viz. that the impoverishing of theclergy, and bringing their incomes much nearer to alevel, would not cause them to become less worldly-minded: the emoluments, howsoever reduced, would beas eagerly sought for, but by men from lower classes insociety ; men who, by their manners, habits, abilities,and the scanty measure of their attainments, would unavoidablybe less fitted for their station, and less competentto discharge its duties.Visionary notions have in all ages been afloat uponthe subject of best providing for the clergy ; notionswhich have been sincerely entertained by good men,with a view to the improvement of that order, andeagerly caught at and dwelt upon, by the designing, forits degradation and disparagement. Some are beguiledby what they call the voluntary system not seeing (whatstares one in the face at the very threshold) that theywho stand in most need of religious instruction areunconscious of the want, and therefore cannot reasonablyQ 4344 POSTSCRIPT.be expected to make any sacrifices in order to supply it.Will the licentious, the sensual, and the depraved, takefrom the means of their gratifications and pursuits, tosupport a discipline that cannot advance without uprootingthe trees that bear the fruit v^^hich they devour sogreedily ? Will they pay the price of that seed whoseharvest is to be reaped in an invisible world ? A voluntarysystem for the religious exigences of a peoplenumerous and circumstanced as we are ! Not moreabsurd would it be to expect that a knot of boys shoulddraw upon the pittance of their pocket-money to buildschools, or out of the abundance of their discretion beable to select fit masters to teach and keep them in order !Some, who clearly perceive the incompetence and follyof such a scheme for the agricultural part of the people,nevertheless think it feasible in large towns, where therich might subscribe for the religious instruction of thepoor. Alas ! they know little of the thick darkness thatspreads over the streets and alleys of our large towns.The parish of Lambeth, a few years since, contained notmore than one church and three or four small proprietarychapels, while dissenting chapels of every denominationwere still more scantily found there ; yet theinhabitants of the parish amounted at that time toupwards of 50,000. Were the parish church and thechapels of the Establishment existing there, an impedimentto the spread of the Gospel among that mass ofpeople ? Who shall dare to say so ?For the preservation of the Church Establishment, allmen, whether they belong to it or not, could theyperceive their true interest, would be strenuous : buthow inadequate are its provisions for the needs of thecountry ! and how much is it to be regretted that, whileits zealous friends yield to alarms on account of thehostility of dissent, they should so much over-rate thedanger to be apprehended from that quarter, and almostPOSTSCRIPT. 345overlook the fact that hundreds of thousands of ourfellow-countrymen, though formally and nominally ofthe Church of England, never enter her places ofworship, neither have they communication with herministers ! This deplorable state of things seemspartly owing to a decay of zeal among the rich andinfluential, and partly to a want of due expansive powerin the constitution of the Establishment as regulatedby law. Private benefactors, in their efforts to buildand endow churches, have been frustrated, or too muchimpeded, by legal obstacles : these, where they areunreasonable or unfitted for the times, ought to beremoved ; and, keeping clear of intolerance and injustice,means should be used to render the presenceand powers of the church commensurate with the wantsof a shifting and still in creasing population.This cannot be effected, unless the English Governmentvindicate the truth, that, as her church exists forthe benefit of all (though not in an equal degree), whetherof her communion or not, all should be made to contributeto its support. If this ground be abandoned,the not remote consequence will be, the infliction of awound upon the moral heart of the English people,from which, till ages shall have gone by, it will notrecover.But let the friends of the church be of good courage.Powers are at work, by which, under Divine Providence,she may be strengthened and the sphere of her usefulnessextended ; not by alterations in her Liturgy, accommodatedto this or that demand of finical taste, norby cutting off this or that from her Articles or Canons,to which the scrupulous or the overweening may object.Covert schism, and open nonconformity, would surviveafter alterations, however promising in the eyes ofthose whose subtilty had been exercised in making them.Latitudinarianism is the perihelion of liberty of cone5346 POSTSCRIPT.science, and will ever successfully lay claim to a dividedworship. Among Presbyterians, Socinian, Baptistsand Independents, there will always be found numberswho will tire of their several creeds, and some willcome over to the Church. Conventicles may disappear,congregations in each denomination may fall into decayor be broken up, but the conquests which the NationalChurch ought chiefly to aim at, lie among the thousandsand tens of thousands of the unhappy outcasts who growup with no religion at all. The wants of these cannotbut be feelingly remembered. Whatever may be thedispositions of the new constituencies under the reformedparliament and the course which the men of theirchoice may be inclined or compelled to follow, it maybeconfidently hoped that individuals, acting in theirprivate capacities, will endeavour to make up for thedeficiencies of the legislature. Is it too much to expectthat proprietors of large estates, where the inhabitantsare without religious instruction, or where it is sparinglysupplied, will deem it their duty to take part in thisgood work ; and that thriving manufacturers and merchantswill, in their several neighbourhoods, be sensibleof the like obligation, and act upon it with generousrivalry ?Moreover, the force of public opinion is rapidlyincreasing : and some may bend to it, who are not sohappy as to be swayed by a higher motive ; especiallythey who derive large incomes from lay-impropriations,in tracts of country where ministers are few and meagrelyprovided for. A claim still stronger may beacknowledged by those who, round their superb habitationsor elsewhere, walk over vast estates which werelavished upon their ancestors by royal favouritism, orpurchased at insignificant prices after church-spoliation ;such proprietors, though not conscience stricken (thereis no call for that) may be prompted to make a returnPOSTSCRIPT. 347for which their tenantry and dependents will learn tobless their names. An impulse has been given ; an accessionof means from these several sources co-operatingwith a we/Z-considered change in the distribution ofsome parts of the property at present possessed by thechurch , a change scrupulously founded upon due respectto law and justice, will we trusty bring about somuch of what her friends desire that the rest may becalmly waited for with thankfulness for what shallhave been obtained.Let it not be thought unbecoming in a layman tohave treated at length a subject with which the clergyare more intimately conversant. All may , without improprietyspeak of what deeply concerns all ; nor need anapology be offered for going over ground which hasbeen trod before so ably and so often : without pretending,however , to any thing of novelty, either inmatter or manner, something may have been offered toview, which will save the writer from the imputation ofhaving little to recommend his labour, but goodness ofintention.It was with reference to thoughts expressed in verse,that the Author entered upon the above notices, andwith verse he will conclude. The passage is extractedfrom his MSS. written above thirty years ago : it turnsupon the individual dignity which humbleness ofsocial condition does not preclude but frequently promotes.It has no direct bearing upon clubs for thediscussion of public affairs, nor upon political or traditions; but if a single workman — who, being amember of one of those clubs, runs the risk of becomingan agitator, or who, being enrolled in a union,must be left without a will of his own, and therefore aslave — should read these lines, and be touched bythem, the Author would indeed rejoice, and littlewould he care for losing credit as a poet with intendsPOSTSCRIPT.operate critics , who think differently from him uponpolitical philosophy or public measures if the sober-mindedadmit that in general views, his affections havebeen moved, and his imagination exercised , under andfor the guidance of reason.'^ Here might I pause, and bend in reverenceTo Nature, and the power of human minds ;To men as they are men within themselves.How oft high service is performed within.When all the external man is rude in show ;Not like a temple rich with pomp and gold.But a mere mountain chapel that protectsIts simple worshippers from sun and shower !Of these, said I, shall be my song ; of these.If future years mature me for the task.Will I record the praises, making verseDeal boldly with substantial things — in truthAnd sanctity of passion, speak of these.That justice may be done, obeisance paidWhere it is due. Thus haply shall I teach.Inspire, through unadulterated earsPour rapture, tenderness, and hope ; my themeNo other than the very heart of man.As found among the best of those who live.Not exalted by religious faith.Nor uninformed by books, good books, though few,In Nature's presence : thence may I selectSorrow that is not sorrow, but delight.And miserable love that is not painTo hear of, for the glory that redoundsTherefrom to human kind, and what we are.Be mine to follow with no timid stepWhere knowledge leads me ; it shall be my prideThat I have dared to tread this holy ground.Speaking no dream, but things oracular.POSTSCRIPT. 349Matter not lightly to be heard by thoseWho to the letter of the outward promiseDo read the invisible soul ; by men adroitIn speech and for communion with the worldAccomplished , minds whose faculties are thenMost active when they are most eloquentAnd elevated most when most admired.Men may be found of other mould than these ;Who are their own upholders, to themselvesEncouragement, and energy, and will ;Expressing liveliest thoughts in lively wordsAs native passion dictates. Others, too,There are, among the walks of homely life.Still higher, men for contemplation framed ;Shy, and unpractised in the strife of phrase ;Meek men, whose very souls perhaps would sinkBeneath them, summoned to such intercourse.Their's is the language of the heavens, the power.The thought, the image, and the silent joy :Words are but under agents in their souls ;When they are grasping with their greatest strengthThey do not breathe among them ; this I speakIn gratitude to God, who feeds our heartsFor his own service, knoweth, loveth us,When we are unrewarded by the world''THE END.London :Printed by A. Spottiswoode,New-Street-Square.